
                              1 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Security Is a Human Right, Too

BYLINE: By William F. Schulz.

William F. Schulz is executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A. and the
author of ''Tainted Legacy: 9/11 and the Ruin of Human Rights.''

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 20; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW:
4-18-04: ESSAY

LENGTH: 1287 words


When I was a sophomore in high school, I became acquainted with a religious
group that called itself Moral Rearmament. Its adherents were required to
practice four virtues without compromise: absolute honesty, absolute purity,
absolute unselfishness and absolute love. To a 14-year-old, this formula seemed
eminently sensible, and I decided that I would become a disciple. And for a few
days I was.

For those few days, I tried never to lie. I tried to vanquish every impure
thought from my head. I tried to be generous to a fault and to bestow upon all
of God's creatures my beatific love. But in short order I saw that these
imperatives might conflict. When, for example, a much-cherished relative who was
notorious for her bad breath asked me to give her a big kiss on the lips, which
standard was I to follow -- that of absolute honesty or absolute love?

At a relatively early age, I learned that if you try to pursue two or more
virtues at the same time, you may need to compromise one of them or the other.

As the executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A., I often think of this
experience when I listen to government officials and some human rights advocates
debate how to balance security and liberty. Too often, both sides talk as if
only one of these virtues really matters.

Since Sept. 11, 2001, my own organization and many other human rights and civil
liberties groups have been outspoken -- and rightly so -- in our condemnation of
human rights violations committed in the war on terror. We have chastised one
government after another for using terrorism as an excuse to muzzle peaceful
dissent. We have criticized the United States for its arbitrary roundup of Arab
and Muslim residents, for the incommunicado detention of prisoners at Guantanamo
Bay in defiance of the Geneva Convention and for many other activities.

The human rights community has repeatedly pointed out that it is difficult to
conduct a war in defense of the rule of law when you are shredding that rule
yourself, and it is impossible to convince Muslims around the world that the war
on terror is not a war on Islam if Muslims are the pre-eminent targets of
discrimination.

But what about the protection of personal security? How well have we done in
holding the feet of terrorists and their supporters to the fire for their human
rights violations? In this respect, the record of human rights organizations is
far more mixed. For while we were quick to condemn the 9/11 attacks, very few of
us have taken concrete steps since then to help bring Al Qaeda and its minions
to account.

This lacuna is surprising inasmuch as being free from the threat of terrorism is
not just a nice idea; it is our right as human beings. Indeed, Article 3 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that ''everyone has the right to
life, liberty and security of person'' -- rights that terrorists surely vitiate
when they injure or kill civilians. It is not enough, therefore, to champion
Article 9's guarantee that ''no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest [or]
detention'' without wrestling with the question of how such rights square with
those articulated in Article 3. But this is a struggle we in the human rights
world have generally shied away from joining.

Part of the reason for our reticence to take on Al Qaeda is practical. Unlike
the Tamil Tigers of Sri Lanka or the Shining Path of Peru or the Palestinian
suicide bombers, all of which major human rights organizations have reported on
frequently and censured repeatedly, Al Qaeda is hard to find. It operates in the
shadows. It is not associated with just one country or region. And if the
premier intelligence agencies in the world cannot unravel all its mysteries,
human rights groups can hardly be expected to do a better job.

Moreover, the traditional techniques of the human rights movement are unlikely
to work with Al Qaeda. One can hardly imagine Osama bin Laden opening thousands
of letters entreating him to desist from violence or scanning a Congressional
resolution calling for his capture and proclaiming, ''By Jove, they're right!''

But there is more to it than that. The international community has not been able
to reach agreement on a common definition of ''terrorism.'' (One survey
discovered 109 different ones.) Among other reasons, it's said that ''one
person's freedom fighter is another person's terrorist'' or that governments
have illicitly killed far more people over the years than terrorists ever will.

Neither observation is without merit. At one time or another, the abolitionist
hero John Brown and the Nobel Peace Prize winners Menachem Begin and Nelson
Mandela were all considered ''terrorists.'' In some countries, the word has
become almost synonymous with ''political opponent.'' The Chinese, for example,
consider peaceful Tibetan Buddhists vicious terrorists; Robert Mugabe regards
the democratic opposition in Zimbabwe in a similar vein.

But the fact that history has rehabilitated reputations is no excuse for evading
moral judgment today. And the fact that governments have been responsible for
massive death and destruction offers no excuse for others' atrocities. The human
rights movement should be in the forefront of calling for an international
treaty that defines terrorism, outlines appropriate ways to combat it and
thereby provides security for all.

The crux of the problem, however, is that treaties are only as good as the
states that enforce them. Already we have seen the United States government cite
''human rights'' as the fallback rationale for a war against Iraq that, no
matter how welcome the departure of Saddam Hussein, was undertaken in a fashion
that did enormous damage to the unity of the international community -- a unity
upon which human rights depend for whatever degree of credibility and power they
may claim. All presidents have on occasion treated human rights the way a bad
cook uses a spice -- to cover up an otherwise unpalatable policy. What greater
mischief might George W. Bush do if given access to ever more pungent seasoning?

To succumb to such trepidation, however, is to allow President Bush to set not
only his agenda but also our own. If we in the human rights community abhor the
targeting of civilians in any context, as we surely do, then we need to act as
if we believe it. We need to report as best we can on the funding sources and
recruitment tactics of Al Qaeda's network; call to account those governments
that allow themselves to become entangled with terrorist cells; name the
suppliers of arms to terrorist groups -- suppliers who include established
states, not just ''rogue'' ones; mobilize grass-roots opposition to terrorism by
addressing root causes like economic deprivation or social discrimination; and
offer a clear articulation of the ways in which respect for human rights helps
offset the terrorists' appeal.

Human rights emerge out of the fact that all people know misery. During the
Spanish Civil War, Stephen Spender was a fierce opponent of General Franco and
the Fascists. Reflecting on the war some years later, Spender, while retaining
his horror at Fascism, looked squarely into the corruption of his own heart:
''When I saw photographs of children murdered by the Fascists,'' he wrote in
''The God That Failed,'' ''I felt furious pity. When the supporters of Franco
talked of Red atrocities, I merely felt indignant that people should tell such
lies. In the first case I saw corpses; in the second only words. . . . I
gradually acquired a certain horror of the way in which my own mind worked. It
was clear to me that unless I cared about every murdered child impartially, I
did not really care about children being murdered at all.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Alvaro Hernandez/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); RELIGION (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(87%); WAR ON TERROR (86%); AL-QAEDA (86%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); LAW OF WAR
(74%); RULE OF LAW (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (68%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (73%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%) Amnesty International;
Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: William F Schulz

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Rights Chief Says Prison Abuse May Be War Crime

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: REPORT FROM
GENEVA; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 969 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 4


The top human rights official for the United Nations said Friday that the
mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners by American soldiers could constitute a war
crime, and he called for the immediate naming of an international figure to
oversee the situation.

The official, Bertrand Ramcharan, the acting high commissioner for human rights,
acknowledged that the removal of Saddam Hussein represented ''a major
contribution to human rights in Iraq'' and noted that the United States had
condemned abusive conduct by its troops and pledged to bring violators to
justice.

''Everyone accepts the good intentions of the coalition governments as regards
the behavior of their forces in Iraq,'' he said in a 45-page report issued at
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva.

But Mr. Ramcharan said that after the occupation of Iraq, ''there have sadly
been some violations of human rights committed by some coalition soldiers.''
Apparently in a reference to the incidents of abuse at Abu Ghraib prison and to
cases where Iraqi prisoners have died in detention, he said ''willful killing,
torture and inhuman treatment'' represented a ''grave breach'' of international
law and ''might be designated as war crimes by a competent tribunal.''

He said it was a ''stark reality'' that there was no international oversight or
accountability for the thousands of detainees, the conditions in which they were
held and the manner in which they were treated. To correct this situation, he
said, the occupation authorities should immediately appoint ''an international
ombudsman or commissioner.'' That person would be charged with monitoring human
rights in Iraq and producing periodic reports on ''compliance by coalition
forces with international norms of human rights and humanitarian law.''

A spokesman for the State Department, Adam Ereli, said Friday that the United
States had cooperated with the high commissioner and shared his concern with
protecting human rights. He said he thought a war crimes charge was unlikely to
arise because the United States was already taking action on its own.

''I think the Uniform Code of Military Justice is competent to act on the abuses
that occurred,'' Mr. Ereli said. ''The question of investigation, prosecution
and judgment is something that we're already doing ourselves.''

Reed Brody, the political director of Human Rights Watch, expressed
disappointment with the report, saying that while it put forward some good
recommendations, it failed to criticize ''the systematic nature of the policy.''

''I have never seen a U.N. report bend so far over backwards saying that no one
questions the intentions of a government,'' he said.

''It is not sufficient for the U.S. to monitor itself,'' he added. ''Usually the
United Nations seeks to have an independent person. Imagine if this were Russia
or the Sudan, would the U.N. be asking them to monitor themselves?''

In its passages about Mr. Hussein's ouster, the report said the invasion of Iraq
''removed a government that preyed on the Iraqi people and committed shocking,
systematic and criminal violations of human rights.''

As gains for human rights since the invasion, it listed freer speech, open
political debate and greater participation by women in public life. ''One should
take into account in weighing what has happened in Iraq the prospects that, as a
result of the actions of the coalition governments, Iraq could well be launched
on the road to democracy, the rule of law and governance that is respectful of
human rights,'' the report said.

Mr. Ramcharan, a British-educated trial lawyer from Guyana and an adjunct
professor of international human rights law at Columbia University, has been a
United Nations official for 30 years. He has served as acting commissioner since
Sergio Vieira de Mello, the high commissioner, went to Baghdad as chief of the
United Nations mission there in May 2003 on what was supposed to be a four-month
assignment.

The report on Friday disclosed that Mr. Vieira de Mello, who was killed in the
bombing of United Nations Baghdad headquarters last August, had raised concern
about the Americans' treatment of detainees in a meeting with the head of the
Coalition Provisional Authority, L. Paul Bremer III, on July 15, 2003.

The White House's top lawyer warned two years ago that American officials could
face prosecution for war crimes because of the unorthodox tactics employed to
detain suspected members of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in Afghanistan.

A confidential memo by the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, which was
dated Jan. 25, 2002, and was uncovered last month by Newsweek magazine, urged
Bush administration officials to declare captives exempt from the Geneva
Conventions. Otherwise, it said, Americans might be subject to ''unwarranted
charges'' of committing or fostering war crimes.

Critics have argued that the Bush administration's decision not to grant
suspected Qaeda and Taliban fighters prisoner-of-war status under the Geneva
Conventions created the climate under which the interrogation abuses at Abu
Ghraib prison occurred.

The report comes at a moment when the United States has been hoping to obtain a
Security Council resolution shielding American troops serving in United
Nations-approved operations from prosecution before the International Criminal
Court. The multinational force remaining in Iraq after the transfer of power to
Iraq at the end of this month will be such a United Nations-approved force.

Last month, the United States postponed its submission of the resolution when
China indicated it might veto it. In announcing the stance, China's United
Nations ambassador, Wang Guangya, said he did not want to support a resolution
that might grant impunity to people committing abuses like those uncovered at
Abu Ghraib.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
TERRORISM (67%) Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) United Nations; Human
Rights Commission (Un)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Warren Hoge; Bertrand Ramcharan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (97%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Venezuela Abused Protesters, Human Rights Groups Charge

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, April 9


Once seen as deferential to civil liberties despite his increasing hold on
power, President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela is now coming under sharp criticism
from human rights groups that say that torture and excessive force were used to
tame recent anti-Chavez protests.

In the latest report, released on Friday in a six-page letter to Mr. Chavez,
Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, accused National Guard troops of
using tear gas and electric batons to torture protesters after their arrests.

The letter comes after Venezuela's government lashed out at the Inter-American
Human Rights Commission for issuing a voluminous report on what it calls the
worsening human rights situation in Venezuela. The commission is an arm of the
Organization of American States.

Last week, Jorge Valero, the Venezuelan ambassador to the organization, accused
the commission of distorting facts and accused the Bush administration of
financing human rights groups as part of a plan to weaken Mr. Chavez. The
American representative to the organization, John F. Maisto, fired back in a
rare, heated exchange in the organization's headquarters in Washington, accusing
Venezuela of undermining the commission.

Mr. Chavez, who is facing opposition efforts to mount a referendum to remove him
from office, has denied that his government violated the rights of demonstrators
during a week of protests that began on Feb. 27. He has claimed that some of the
protesters were armed and violent.

Testimonies collected by Human Rights Watch ''suggest a disturbing pattern of
conduct that clearly violates international law enforcement standards,'' Jose
Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas division for the organization, wrote to
Mr. Chavez. Human Rights Watch said the testimonies and documentation that the
organization collected were consistent with reports gathered by Venezuelan human
rights groups.

Human Rights Watch said 13 people were killed in the protests. It was unclear
how many died at the hands of the National Guard and how many were killed by
armed protesters. About 400 were arrested.

Human Rights Watch said at least two dozen demonstrators taken into custody were
beaten, threatened or tortured by National Guard troops, who tossed tear gas
bombs into the police trucks in which they were being held.

''They made us inhale tear gas after closing the canvas sides of the truck and
putting on their gas masks,'' Carlos Eduardo Izcaray, a cellist in the Venezuela
Symphony Orchestra who was detained, told Human Rights Watch.

Some of Human Rights Watch's claims are supported by the investigations of two
government agencies whose directors are close to Mr. Chavez. The government's
human rights ombudsman, German Mundarain, reported 7 cases of torture and 17
cases of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees. On Wednesday, the
attorney general's office said it was investigating allegations of torture
against 19 people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (96%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); EMERGENCY
VEHICLES (69%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (68%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (60%);
SINGERS & MUSICIANS (60%); STRINGED INSTRUMENTS (60%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%);
REFERENDUMS (51%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (56%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (91%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (59%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); COLOMBIA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2004 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says Sudan's Government Aided Militias' Raids

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, April 23


Human Rights Watch on Friday issued a stinging report accusing the Arab-led
Sudanese government of joining Arab militias in attacks on black Africans in the
Darfur region of western Sudan, clearing villages, destroying their food
supplies and executing men deemed enemies. It came on a day that the United
Nations' top human rights body passed a resolution on human rights abuses in
Darfur that the United States rejected as too soft on Sudan.

In an unusually strong report, based on interviews with Sudanese refugees across
the border in Chad, a four-member team of investigators described the raids by
the Arab militias, or ''janjaweed,'' as ''a reign of terror.'' The report,
released to the news media earlier this week, documents rapes and killings of
civilians, forced displacement of black Africans from their villages and aerial
bombings by Sudanese military planes.

''Attacks carried out by the armed forces of Sudan and the janjaweed reflect a
disturbing pattern of disregard for basic principles of human rights and
humanitarian law,'' the report read. It went on to say that the human rights
violations reported in Darfur ''may constitute war crimes and/or crimes against
humanity.''

In some places, government planes bombed villages ahead of the militias' attacks
and circled overhead afterward to see if the area had been cleared, according to
Human Rights Watch. Elsewhere, the military and the militias set up a joint
presence, ''often in the local police station,'' before beginning an attack on a
village, the group said in a statement accompanying the report.

One of the researchers, Julie Flint, who spent 25 days inside Darfur, said in a
telephone interview from London on Friday that in a roughly 40-square-mile area
she saw 11 of 13 villages burned, with the other two deserted. Homes and food
storage areas were burned, she said. All that was left were bits of peanuts and
shards of glass -- remnants of tea glasses.

One villager, she said, brought her a list of 62 mosques that had been burned.
She said she collected reports of massacres during prayer time at mosques. In
two sweeps in March, she reported, Sudanese soldiers detained 136 African men
whom the militias massacred hours later. ''They are no longer working alone,''
Ms. Flint said of the militias.

According to United Nations estimates, the attacks have displaced 900,000 people
inside Darfur and roughly another 100,000 refugees who have fled across the
frontier, to Chad. Low-level clashes over land between Arabs, who are herders,
and black Africans, who are farmers, broke out in a full-scale war in February
2003, when a rebel movement emerged.

Meanwhile, aid workers, so far restricted in their movements inside Darfur, are
scrambling to ferry food, tarpaulins and other relief supplies to displaced
peasants camped out across the vast, largely arid territory. Seasonal rains are
likely to come in less than two months, making roads impassable. The government
in Khartoum said earlier this week that it would allow a United Nations
humanitarian assessment team to travel through the area.

Meanwhile, in Geneva, the United Nations' top human rights body stopped short of
condemning the Khartoum government for ''ethnic cleansing,'' choosing instead
milder language to express its concern about ''the scale of reported human
rights abuses and the humanitarian situation in Darfur,'' and appointing a
monitor to investigate the charges.

Fifty members of the United Nations Human Rights Commission backed the
resolution, drafted by European Union countries. Washington rejected it, calling
for stronger language, and there were two abstentions. The African Union also
said Friday that it would dispatch cease-fire monitors to Darfur, and peace
talks between the Sudanese government and two guerrilla groups resumed in Chad.

After the vote in Geneva, Richard S. Williamson, head of the United States
delegation, called for an emergency session to review their decision after
United Nations investigators return from a trip to Darfur. The team is in Sudan
now.

Sudan's allies on the United Nations commission this week lashed out at United
Nations officials, calling for an investigation into the leaks. Sudan has
consistently denied responsibility for the actions of the janjaweed.

The United Nations, which has so far received pledges of $30 million, is calling
on donor countries to provide another $130 million in emergency aid. United
Nations officials have lately stepped up their criticism of the government in
Darfur, as have those within the Bush administration.

In a report prepared for the United Nations commission meeting in Geneva, the
Bush administration lashed out at Khartoum for barring aid groups and human
rights investigators from the hardest-hit areas of Darfur. ''The government of
Sudan is denying assistance from reaching its own people,'' the report declared.
''It is time that the international community stand united and denounce the
violence and ethnic cleansing taking place in Sudan.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 27, 2004



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about evidence
of human rights abuses in western Sudan misstated the sponsorship of a
four-member investigating team that interviewed Sudanese refugees in Chad and
concluded that Arab militias and government forces in Sudan had carried out
attacks in the Darfur region that ''may constitute war crimes and/or crimes
against humanity.'' The report was issued by the United Nations. (Human Rights
Watch issued a similar report on Friday accusing Sudan government forces and
militias of clearing villages, destroying food supplies and executing men deemed
enemies.)



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REFUGEES (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS (89%); LAW OF WAR (79%); BOMBINGS (78%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); FOOD CHARITIES (77%);
WAR & CONFLICT (75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); RELIGION
(65%); POLICE FORCES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SENEGAL (79%); CHAD
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Abuses Worldwide Are Held to Fall Under U.S. Courts

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1261 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


A Supreme Court decision on Tuesday kept federal courts open to lawsuits by
foreigners who allege that they were victims of serious human rights violations
anywhere in the world.

The decision interpreting the Alien Tort Statute came as a relief to human
rights organizations that had feared the court would accept the Bush
administration's invitation to narrow the application of the 215-year-old law.

At the same time, the result was a sharp disappointment to international
business interests, which have been alarmed by increasing use of the law to sue
multinational corporations for human rights violations and had looked to the
Supreme Court to curb the trend.

The case before the court did not involve a corporate defendant, and the 6-to-3
decision did not conclusively resolve the status of such cases. That opportunity
may come soon, because lower courts with corporate cases on their dockets have
been deferring decisions while waiting to see how the Supreme Court would rule
in this case.

A case brought on behalf of residents of Myanmar charging the Unocal Corporation
with human rights violations in connection with a gas pipeline project has
already been argued before the federal appeals court in San Francisco and could
reach the Supreme Court quickly.

The case before the justices was an appeal of an earlier ruling by the same
appeals court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. That
court permitted a Mexican doctor, Humberto Alvarez-Machain, to use the Alien
Tort Statute to sue a Mexican who helped the federal Drug Enforcement
Administration to kidnap him from his office in Guadalajara and bring him to the
United States to stand trial for murder. A grand jury had indicted Dr.
Alvarez-Machain in the murder of a federal narcotics agent, Enrique
Camarena-Salazar. He was acquitted at his 1992 trial.

The Alien Tort Statute, which was among the laws enacted by the First Congress
in 1789, provides jurisdiction in federal district courts ''of any civil action
by an alien for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations or a
treaty of the United States.'' The meaning of this statutory language, including
the odd phrase ''for a tort only,'' is obscure and the law was scarcely used
until lower federal courts began applying it in international human rights cases
in the 1980's.

In Dr. Alvarez-Machain's case, the Ninth Circuit found that the cross-border
kidnapping violated international law and was thus the type of injury for which
a foreigner could sue in federal court. A jury awarded the doctor a $25,000
judgment against the Mexican defendant, Jose Francisco Sosa, who then appealed
to the Supreme Court.

In the decision on Tuesday, the last day of the Supreme Court's term, all nine
justices voted to overturn the Ninth Circuit's judgment. ''A single illegal
detention of less than a day, followed by the transfer of custody to lawful
authorities and a prompt arraignment, violates no norm of customary
international law'' and was not the type of egregious human rights violation
that the Alien Tort Statute was intended to cover, Justice David H. Souter wrote
for the court.

But the specific fate of Dr. Alvarez-Machain's lawsuit was not what made this
case, Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, No 03-339, one of the most closely watched on the
court's docket. What mattered for future cases was the court's broader
interpretation of the statute.

The Bush administration had urged the court to hear the case and to rule that
the Alien Tort Statute did nothing more than define an aspect of the federal
courts' original jurisdiction, without conferring an ability to bring private
lawsuits or to invoke modern notions of international law.

There was ''no basis,'' the administration's brief said, to view the law as
having established ''a roaming cause of action that permits aliens to come to
United States courts and recover money damages for violations of international
law anywhere around the globe.'' Congress had to specifically provide a basis
for suing under the law, the brief said.

Justice Souter's majority opinion rejected that argument. He said that while the
law should be applied with ''judicial caution,'' it should also be interpreted
as its authors intended it. He said the First Congress, ''which reflected the
understanding of the framing generation and included some of the framers,
assumed that federal courts could properly identify some international norms as
enforceable'' under the law it wrote. ''It would take some explaining to say now
that federal courts must avert their gaze entirely from any international norm
intended to protect individuals,'' he added.

Justice Souter said that in the 18th century, there were three offenses that
were seen as violating the contemporary concept of international law: violation
of a promise to give ''safe conduct,'' piracy and ''infringement of the rights
of ambassadors.'' Calling these offenses ''paradigms,'' he said that the Alien
Tort Statute should be interpreted today as applying to their modern
equivalents: international norms with ''definite content and acceptance among
civilized nations.''

Human rights lawyers said Tuesday that while this analysis did not extend to the
brief detention of Dr. Alvarez-Machain, it would cover universally recognized
violations like torture, genocide, slavery and prolonged arbitrary detention.

''These are core human rights claims,'' Paul L. Hoffman, who argued in the court
for Dr. Alvarez-Machain and who also represents the plaintiffs in the Unocal
lawsuit, said in an interview. ''The court has accepted that international law
evolves and that this law has contemporary meaning.''

Dissenting from this portion of the opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia said the
majority had adopted ''a 20th-century invention of internationalist law
professors and human-rights advocates'' and opened the door to an ''illegitimate
lawmaking endeavor'' by federal judges.

''American law -- the law made by the people's democratically elected
representatives -- does not recognize a category of activity that is so
universally disapproved by other nations that it is automatically unlawful here,
and automatically gives rise to a private action for money damages in federal
court,'' Justice Scalia said. Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice
Clarence Thomas signed his opinion.

Echoing that criticism, Robin Conrad, a lawyer with the United States Chamber of
Commerce, expressed the disappointment of international business interests with
the decision. In an interview, she said the ruling ''leaves far too much
discretion to courts'' and creates ''an ever-expanding universe of judge-made
law.'' Ms. Conrad added: ''We didn't succeed in cutting these cases off at the
pass. We're back to square one.''

Justice Souter's densely worded, 45-page opinion contained numerous words of
caution for lower courts in handling future cases. He said courts should be
sensitive to the foreign policy implications of cases under the Alien Tort
Statute, citing in particular cases now pending against corporations that
cooperated with the apartheid regime in South Africa.

The South African government has opposed these lawsuits on the ground that they
interfere with its own post-apartheid approach to reconciliation and
reconstruction, and the State Department has endorsed South Africa's view. ''In
such cases, there is a strong argument that federal courts should give serious
weight to the executive branch's view of the case's impact on foreign policy,''
Justice Souter said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Enrique Camarena-Salazar, a murdered American drug enforcement
agent. At right, his body was returned from Mexico.
 Dr. Humberto Alvarez-Machain (Photographs by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); SUPREME COURTS (92%); LITIGATION (92%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); ENTERPRISE
GLOBALIZATION (89%); MURDER (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); TORTS
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (78%); DAMAGES (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (75%); ACQUITTAL (73%); GRAND JURY (72%);
SUBSTANCE ABUSE (64%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (57%); PIPELINE
TRANSPORTATION (52%) Freedom and Human Rights; Law and Legislation; Suits and
Litigation; Drug Abuse and Traffic; Multinational Companies; Freedom and Human
Rights; Murders and Attempted Murders

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US); Drug Enforcement Administration

PERSON: Linda Greenhouse; Humberto (Dr) Alvarez-Machain; Enrique
Camarena-Salazar; George W (Pres) Bush; David H (Assoc Justice) Souter

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); MEXICO (94%)

REGION: United States; Mexico

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justices Hear Case About Foreigners' Use of Federal Courts

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


The Supreme Court was the forum on Tuesday for a wide-ranging debate on whether
a law passed by the first Congress in 1789 was meant to permit foreign citizens
to use the federal courts to sue for damages for human rights violations
committed overseas.

The growing use of the law, the Alien Tort Statute, has alarmed the
international business community, which has seen several lawsuits brought
against multinationals for their labor practices or collaboration with
repressive regimes. Human rights organizations have mounted a concerted defense
of the current broad interpretation of the law. The federal government once
embraced that interpretation, but the Bush administration has repudiated it.

Paul D. Clement, a deputy solicitor general, urged the justices to rule that the
law itself created no rights that could be invoked by private parties but simply
provided jurisdiction over a limited category of cases. He said that private
human rights suits -- some relying on treaties or international agreements that
the United States has not signed -- threatened the separation of powers by
injecting the federal courts into the business of articulating the country's
foreign policy.

''You have private litigants who may be very well intentioned bringing issues
into the courts and creating problems that the executive branch has to try to
ameliorate,'' Mr. Clement said.

The justices listened attentively but appeared to doubt whether this case was
the right vehicle for the broad ruling the administration and its corporate
allies were seeking. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor suggested that if the
administration had problems with how the law was being used, its remedy lay with
Congress.

''Has Congress been asked to take a look at the statute?'' she asked Mr.
Clement, adding: ''Let Congress have a look at this thing. I'm sure Congress
would be interested in the views of the attorney general.''

Other justices suggested that the administration's new position, that the law
applied only to jurisdiction and not to substance, appeared to come out of the
blue. ''I have yet to find any judge who takes that position,'' Justice John
Paul Stevens told Mr. Clement, adding, ''Your fundamental position is totally
unsupported by judicial opinions.''

The case is a joint appeal by the United States and a Mexican citizen, Jose
Francisco Sosa, who was recruited by federal drug enforcement agents to kidnap a
Mexican doctor in his Guadalajara office and bring him across the border. The
doctor, Humberto Alvarez-Machain, had been indicted on charges of participating
in the torture and murder of a federal agent, Enrique Camarena-Salazar, in
Guadalajara in 1990.

Dr. Alvarez-Machain was acquitted of the charges and returned to Mexico. In
1993, he sued both the United States government and Mr. Sosa, asserting that he
had been subjected to false arrest in violation of international law. The
Federal District Court in Los Angeles dismissed the suit against the United
States, which was brought under the Federal Tort Claim Act, but let the case
against Mr. Sosa go to trial under the Alien Tort Statute. A jury awarded the
doctor $25,000 in damages.

On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San
Francisco, upheld the judgment on the ground that the doctor had been subjected
to an arbitrary arrest in violation of the ''law of nations.'' That is the
central phrase in the Alien Tort Statute, which authorizes suits ''for a tort
only committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United
States.'' The Ninth Circuit also reinstated the doctor's case against the
federal government, a ruling the government also appealed.

If the Supreme Court finds that the doctor's cross-border arrest was not
arbitrary and did not violate international law, it can simply rule that the
Alien Tort Statute did not apply. Such a ruling would avoid an interpretation of
the statute itself and deprive this case, Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, No. 03-339,
of much meaning. Both Mr. Clement and Carter G. Phillips, representing Mr. Sosa,
urged the court to go further.

''There are significant reasons for the court to try to provide guidance,'' Mr.
Phillips said, noting that the large number of briefs filed in the case were
''extraordinary in their breadth and depth.''

Among the 22 briefs were those from business groups on one side, human rights
organizations on the other, scholars on both sides, and one from the European
Commission in support of neither side.

The commission, which is the executive body of the 15-nation European Union,
proposed a reading of the statute broader than that of the Bush administration
but narrower than that offered on the human rights side. While the statute could
properly permit suits under evolving principles of international law, the brief
said, federal courts should refrain if a case could be pursued within a
plaintiff's home country.

''What's wrong with that?'' Justice Stephen G. Breyer asked Mr. Phillips. He
said the approach, which he clearly found attractive, would rule out some cases
but leave ''a core of basic human rights violations that have been
internationalized.''

But he did not make a sale. ''I don't know what the limitation is,'' Mr.
Phillips objected, saying the law would be open-ended enough to raise ''core
separation-of-powers issues.''

Paul L. Hoffman, representing Dr. Alvarez-Machain, urged the justices simply to
rule that ''Congress meant what it said'' in 1789. ''Congress decided that we as
a nation would enforce the law of nations,'' he said.

Justice Antonin Scalia told him, ''My problem with that is that it leaves it up
to the courts to decide what the law of nations is.'' The result could be ''a
serious interference with the ability of the political branches to conduct
foreign affairs,'' Justice Scalia said, adding, ''There are a lot of things the
European Union could think are bad and we don't think are bad.''

''The problems are not as insurmountable as they are made out to be,'' Mr.
Hoffman said. He said that courts could and should be selective in the claims
they allow to proceed.

''All we're asking is that courts be allowed to perform the kind of function
courts have performed for hundreds of years, provide damage remedies for
violations of personal rights,'' Mr. Hoffman continued. Rather than undermine
national security, he said, that use of the law ''only affirms the values that
have made the country as strong as it is.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Humberto Alvarez-Machain, shown in 1993, sued the United
States. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
JURISDICTION (89%); TORTURE (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TORTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%); DAMAGES
(77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); MURDER (73%);
ACQUITTAL (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); FOREIGN
POLICY (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (63%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (63%);
SUBSTANCE ABUSE (60%); ARRESTS (60%) Freedom and Human Rights; Drug Abuse and
Traffic; Suits and Litigation; Citizenship; Torture; Labor; Freedom and Human
Rights; Murders and Attempted Murders; Kidnapping; Law and Legislation; Freedom
and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: JOHN PAUL STEVENS (58%) Linda Greenhouse; Jose Francisco Sosa; Humberto
(Dr) Alvarez-Machain; Enrique Camarena-Salazar

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MEXICO (94%)

REGION: Mexico; United States; Guadalajara (Mexico)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cameras as Weapons Against Injustice

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; PT1; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk;
CRITIC'S CHOICE/Film; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 853 words


Arriving right on the heels of the Abu Ghraib scandal, the Human Rights Watch
International Film Festival has a new, uncomfortable resonance for those who
habitually regard the United States as remaining above the moral fray.

''Persons of Interest,'' for example, is a spare, modest documentary in which
New York-area residents of South Asian and Middle Eastern descent describe their
arrests and detainment by the Justice Department in the weeks after 9/11. The
movie, which has the first of three screenings at the Walter Reade Theater
tonight at 6:15, offers disturbing first-hand testimony of how the safeguards of
civil liberty were relaxed in a time of panic.

In ''Persons of Interest,'' the suspects, released often after weeks of
incarceration and interrogation, insist on their complete innocence of any
terrorist connections. Taken one after another into an empty white room, they
are questioned by the unseen filmmakers, Alison Maclean and Tobias Perse, about
their arrests and confinement.

Because the film records only their versions of what happened, it is obviously
one-sided, but the cumulative impact of their stories creates the sickening
impression of people who are persecuted and humiliated on the flimsiest of
excuses in a witch-hunting atmosphere.

Like many films shown in the festival over the years, ''Persons of Interest''
doesn't pretend to any political objectivity. In scrutinizing the moral conduct
of governments and institutions around the world, the festival, as its name
declares, is a watch, or monitor, much like Amnesty International. But the
perspective of the festival, which continues at the Walter Reade through June
24, goes well beyond human-rights abuses to examine the devastations of war and
economic inequity.

One of the most fascinating entries this season, ''The Corporation,'' traces the
rise of the corporation as a phenomenon, to its present status as a fundamental
and essentially amoral modern institution. The movie, which is to open in two
weeks at Film Forum in Manhattan, analyzes the corporation's values as if it
were a person, and finds it psychologically dysfunctional on almost every level.

''Persons of Interest'' isn't the only film to explore American-style injustice.
Katy Chevigny and Kirsten Johnson's documentary, ''Deadline,'' examines capital
punishment and focuses on the surprising decision of George Ryan, the former
governor of Illinois and a longtime conservative Republican, to commute the
sentences of 167 prisoners on death row just before he left office.

The process began after a group of journalism students at Northwestern
University found evidence that many prisoners facing death in Illinois were
innocent. Their findings prompted Governor Ryan to order clemency hearings for
every prisoner on death row and to reverse his longstanding advocacy of capital
punishment.

Political imprisonment and its repercussions are also the subject of
''Repatriation,'' Dong-won Kim's long (149-minute) personal and searching study
of North Koreans who were convicted of spying by South Korea and incarcerated
for 30 years, during which they were tortured and pressured to ''convert.'' The
subjects, of whom Mr. Kim grew fond over the 12 years it took to make the film,
are the unconverted, who clung to Communism and who, despite their physical
frailty in prison, sang Communist Party work songs with undiminished fervor and
dreamed of repatriation to the North.

In ''Born into Brothels,'' the filmmakers Zana Briski and Ross Kauffman visited
Calcutta's squalid red-light district and befriended the often talented,
attractive children of prostitutes. Ms. Briski, a professional photographer,
gave the children cameras and photography instruction, took them on field trips
to the zoo and to the ocean, and arranged an international exhibition of their
work. Ultimately, she tried to arrange for as many as possible to attend private
boarding schools, their only hope of a better life. Some make it; others don't.

The festival isn't all straight documentary. Francisco J. Lombardi's film ''What
the Eye Doesn't See'' spins six fictional vignettes around an actual scandal to
create a complex social mosaic dramatizing the effects of political corruption
on ordinary people.

The real-life event is the broadcasting of the notorious ''Vladi videos'' of
Vladmiro Montesinos, an adviser to the former Peruvian president Alberto
Fujimori, which show Mr. Montesinos bribing government and business leaders. The
exposure brought down the Fujimori government. The characters range from a
corrupt army colonel to a news anchor to a teenage girl, whose lives are all
shaped by the scandal.

The exposure of those videos demonstrates the same principle that drives the
Human Rights Watch festival: knowledge is power that can sometimes be translated
into reform.

 The 2004 Human Rights Watch International Film Festival will run through June
24 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center. Tickets:
$10; students, $7; 65+ and ages 6 to 12, $5 at weekday matinees. Screening times
and other information: (212) 875-5600 or www.filmlinc.com.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from ''Born Into Brothels,'' part of the Human Rights
Watch Film Festival. (Photo by Human Rights Watch Film Festival)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MOVIE INDUSTRY (91%); FILM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
SCANDALS (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%); FESTIVALS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (88%); POLITICAL SCANDALS
(78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CONSERVATISM
(77%); GOVERNORS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); ARRESTS (76%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (76%); VISUAL ARTISTS (73%); TERRORISM (71%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(71%) Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Motion
Pictures  ; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures  ; Human Rights Watch International
Film Festival

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%) Human
Rights Watch (Orgn)

PERSON: Stephen Holden

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Names Canadian Judge and Ex-Prosecutor to Rights Post

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 20


Louise Arbour, a Canadian Supreme Court justice who as a war crimes prosecutor
indicted the former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic, was named Friday by
Secretary General Kofi Annan as United Nations high commissioner for human
rights.

Ms. Arbour, 57, a criminal lawyer from Montreal, will retire in late June after
five years on Canada's highest court to take up her new post in Geneva, said Mr.
Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard.

Her appointment requires approval by the General Assembly, but no opposition is
expected, and human rights groups immediately hailed the choice.

She succeeds Sergio Vieira de Mello of Brazil, who served as Mr. Annan's envoy
to Iraq and was one of the 22 people killed on Aug. 19 when the United Nations
office in Baghdad was bombed.

In the interim, the office has been run by Bertrand Ramcharan of Guyana, Mr.
Vieira de Mello's deputy, and he will continue to run it until Ms. Arbour takes
over, Mr. Eckhard said.

''The high commissioner for human rights plays a key role on the world scene,''
Ms. Arbour, currently attending a law conference in Australia, said in a
statement issued in Ottawa. ''I will devote all my energies to this
extraordinary challenge.''

She achieved prominence as the chief United Nations prosecutor trying crimes
committed during the Balkan wars of the 1990's and bringing cases against the
main perpetrators of the mass killings in Rwanda in 1994. Mr. Milosevic was one
of a number of leading Serbian and Yugoslav officials whom she indicted for
crimes against humanity.

''This is someone who has shown by indicting Milosevic that she can stand up to
bullies,'' said Reed Brody, special counsel to Human Rights Watch. ''But she has
also shown she has the diplomatic skills to make democratic governments do the
right thing, the way she did when she persuaded NATO to arrest war criminals in
the former Yugoslavia.''

Irene Kahn, secretary general of Amnesty International, said, ''Louise Arbour's
broad human rights background, distinguished legal career and service as U.N.
prosecutor give her the experience to be both bold and creative in promoting and
protecting human rights.''

Ms. Arbour becomes the second Canadian woman now in a high-profile United
Nations job. Louise Frechette, a former Canadian ambassador to the United
Nations, was named in 1998 to the new post of deputy secretary general.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Louise Arbour, named high commissioner for human rights. (Photo
by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); LAWYERS (75%); APPROVALS (73%); BULLYING (64%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%)

CITY: MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (73%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (58%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (56%)

STATE: QUEBEC, CANADA (73%); ONTARIO, CANADA (58%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); SERBIA (92%); IRAQ (79%); RWANDA
(79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Groups Won't Get Seats At Guantanamo Base Tribunals

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Pentagon officials say they do not expect to be able to provide space for
representatives of human rights advocacy groups to observe any military
tribunals at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, prompting complaints from
those groups that the military is trying to shut out potential critics.

In letters last week to Amnesty International, Human Rights First and Human
Rights Watch, a senior military official said it was unlikely that they would be
allowed to attend any military tribunals at Guantanamo. The official, Brig. Gen.
Thomas L. Hemingway, a chief legal adviser in the office of military
commissions, wrote that space would be limited if and when tribunals were held
at Guantanamo.

''It is expected that limited courtroom seating and other logistical issues will
preclude attendance by many who desire to observe military commission
proceedings,'' he wrote.

General Hemingway noted that there would be seats for the news media as well as
for representatives of the International Red Cross.

Last Friday, the groups wrote to the defense secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld,
asking him to reconsider the matter, saying, ''There can be no legitimate
governmental reason for denying our access to the proceedings.''

Wendy Patten, a Washington representative of Human Rights Watch, said Monday
that the reasons given were implausible and that the groups should be entitled
to at least one seat that they could rotate among themselves. She noted that the
Bush administration had defended itself from critics of the possible tribunals
by saying the proceedings were to be open to wide scrutiny.

A senior military official said the deliberations over whether to allow the
presence of human rights groups involved issues other than the availability of
seats in the courtroom and the overflow room where some reporters will be able
to view the proceedings on closed-circuit television. The official, who spoke
about the deliberations on the condition of anonymity, said planners considered
the problems of security as well as limited food and housing facilities at the
Guantanamo base, which is in an isolated place on the southeastern tip of Cuba.

The official acknowledged, however, that there would probably be arrangements
for some members of Congress to attend the trials and perhaps for officials of
organizations that represent victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

President Bush has designated six of the 650 prisoners at Guantanamo as eligible
for trial but there have, as yet, been no specific plans to conduct any
tribunals. More than 80 members of the news media, both from the United States
and abroad, are expected to attend any tribunals, officials said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); MILITARY COURTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY
BASES (90%); NAVIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (71%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (70%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(67%); TERRORISM (65%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (50%) Prisoners of War; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human
Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS
FIRST (58%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%); INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS
& RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES (56%)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis

COUNTRY: CUBA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

American Courts, Global Justice

BYLINE: By Dolly Filartiga.

Dolly Filartiga, along with her father, Joel, was the plaintiff in Filartiga v.
Pena-Irala.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 665 words


Today the Supreme Court will hear arguments in a case that may determine whether
victims of horrible violations of human rights abuses will continue to be able
to bring claims in American courts against their tormentors.

By coincidence, the arguments will come exactly 28 years to the day since my
17-year-old brother, Joelito, was tortured and killed by local police in
Asuncion, Paraguay. At 3 that morning I was awakened by policemen, who took me
to a neighbor's house and showed me my brother's beaten body. The chief
inspector, Americo Pena-Irala, told me to take the body home and never talk
about what had happened. I remember telling him, ''Tonight you have power over
me, but tomorrow I will tell the world.''

Little did I know that one day, I would not only be able to tell the world of
Mr. Pena-Irala's brutality, but also that I would do so in an American court.

My brother's ''crime'' was that my father was a vocal opponent of Paraguay's
dictator, Alfredo Stroessner. After Joelito's killing was publicized in the news
media, my mother and I were arrested on false charges. My family tried to bring
a case against Mr. Pena-Irala in Paraguay, but our lawyer was arrested,
threatened and shackled to a wall and had his law license taken away.

After Joelito's murder, Mr. Pena-Irala left Paraguay for New York. I came here
as well, determined to at least confront him. But lawyers at the Center for
Constitutional Rights told me about the Alien Tort Claims Act. Passed in 1789 by
the first Congress, the act allows noncitizens to bring civil suits in federal
court for crimes ''committed in violation of the law of nations.'' In 1979 we
brought a case based on the torture of my brother and in 1980 a federal appeals
court recognized our right to sue. In 1984 a trial judge found Mr. Pena-Irala
liable.

Although Mr. Pena-Irala was sent back to Paraguay and none of the $10 million
judgment has yet been paid, our case established a remarkable precedent: from
Ethiopia's Red Terror to Argentina's Dirty War to the Philippines' dictatorship
under Ferdinand Marcos, in 19 instances survivors or victims' relatives have
used this law to obtain a measure of justice.

For my family, the court decision put us at risk but also gave protection -- the
Paraguayan government threatened us but wouldn't risk retaliating once we had
the American legal system on our side. In Paraguay, the case remains a symbol of
the injustice of the Stroessner dictatorship, and my brother is considered a
martyr for human rights.

However, this remarkable legacy is now in jeopardy. Reversing almost three
decades of executive-branch policy, the Bush administration is asking the
Supreme Court to eviscerate the Alien Tort Claims Act. In a case involving the
kidnapping of a Mexican doctor suspected of involvement in the killing of an
American drug enforcement official, the Justice Department (supported by amicus
briefs from business lobbies) is claiming that the rulings in my case and in 18
others since were based on a mistaken interpretation of the law. Today the court
will hear its arguments for a new reading of the 215-year-old statute that would
make it virtually impossible for human rights victims to sue.

If the court accepts these arguments, then torturers like Americo Pena-Irala
would be able to travel freely in the United States. Deposed dictators like
Ferdinand Marcos and brutal generals like Carlos Vides Casanova, who presided
over human rights abuses in El Salvador in the 1980's, could come here and enjoy
safe haven.

I came to this country in 1978 hoping simply to look a killer in the eye. With
the help of American law, I got so much more. Eventually I received political
asylum, then became a citizen. I am proud to live in a country where human
rights are respected, where there is a way to bring to justice people who have
committed horrible atrocities. Now it is up to the Supreme Court to ensure that
truth will continue to triumph over terror.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); LITIGATION (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MURDER (78%); LAWYERS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (77%); ARRESTS (76%);
LEGISLATION (75%); JUDGES (73%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); POLICE FORCES (71%);
TORTS (70%) Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and Litigation; Law and Legislation;
Torture; Freedom and Human Rights

COMPANY: AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (50%)

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

INDUSTRY: SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (50%)

PERSON: Dolly Filartiga; Americo Pena-Irala; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: ASUNCION, PARAGUAY (92%)

COUNTRY: PARAGUAY (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); PHILIPPINES (79%); ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: United States; Paraguay

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 23, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuba Abandons Vote on Detainees Held by U.S. at Guantanamo

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 576 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 22


At the United Nations human rights forum, meeting here, Cuba decided Thursday
against forcing a vote on reports of rights abuses at the detention center at
the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

But in a stinging attack, the Cuban ambassador, Jorge Ivan Mora Godoy, accused
the American government of blackmailing members of the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights that have citizens in the detention camp into rejecting the
draft resolution.

The United States responded with equal vigor, saying that Washington was ready
to discuss concerns about Guantanamo because it had nothing to hide.

Cuba said it chose to withdraw what seemed to be the first proposal that
directly questioned the human rights record of the United States.

''With the complicity of the European Union and various Latin American
countries, the United States and their allies are preparing to present a motion
of no action as soon as Cuba has concluded this introduction,'' Mr. Godoy said,
a reference to a procedural vote that would have blocked Cuba's measure.

''But the Commission should not join in this exercise,'' the ambassador said.
''Therefore, Cuba will not force a vote on this subject.''

Mr. Godoy accused the United States of ''threatening and blackmailing''
countries with citizens detained at the naval base.

The Cuban ambassador said the United States had warned those countries that
casting a vote in favor of the Cuban resolution ''would prevent or hamper the
contacts with, the release or transfer of those people.''

But Richard Williamson, who leads the American delegation to the human rights
assembly, dismissed the accusation.

''You know when a Cuban lies,'' he said at a news conference. ''It is when they
move their mouth.''

Mr. Williamson dismissed the Cuban challenge as a misplaced political response
to a resolution backed by the United States that was narrowly passed by the
commission last week censuring Cuba's treatment of detained political
dissidents.

But he said that concerns contained in the draft resolution should be addressed.

''We think it is a serious issue that deserves serious discussion,'' he said,
while adding, ''We do not feel we have anything to hide on Guantanamo.''

Over the past three years, the United States has captured hundreds of fighters
and terrorism suspects in Afghanistan. About 600 are still detained at the
Guantanamo prison, where they are held in legal limbo, most with no charges
brought against them and with no access to legal counsel.

Washington has declined to give the detainees prisoner of war status under the
Geneva Convention and has reserved the right to bring the detainees before
military tribunals that could hand down death sentences.

Breaking a policy of avoiding direct confrontation over the matter, Cuba, in its
proposal, referred to ''reliable information'' that prisoners are held without
charges and denied the right to a fair trial.

The text called on the United States to end such abuses and clarify the living
conditions and legal status of the detainees.

Without addressing possible motives behind the resolution, Joanna Weschler, a
spokeswoman for Human Rights Watch, said she agreed with the points it raised.

''We are disappointed that this resolution was withdrawn,'' she said. ''There
has not been a tremendous amount of light on this situation to begin with
because the access is so difficult and now this situation is going to
continue.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); EXTORTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); NAVIES (90%); MILITARY BASES (89%); PRISONS (78%); LAW OF
WAR (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); TERRORISM (77%); POWS & MIAS (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (77%); MILITARY COURTS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%); SENTENCING
(63%); CORRECTIONS (63%); LAWYERS (60%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (60%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War;
Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%) United Nations;
United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: Jorge Ivan (Amb) Mora Godoy

COUNTRY: CUBA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Cuba; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Brutal Images Buttress Anger Of Ex-Prisoners

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: HUMAN
RIGHTS

LENGTH: 1447 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 9


There were photographs at the human rights center here Sunday: of fingers with
deep infected gouges; of an imprisoned husband; of the corpse of a former Iraqi
general who died late last year in American custody, the swollen pink zipper of
an autopsy cut running from his groin to his neck.

There was also much screaming.

''I don't want compensation -- I only want my husband!'' shouted Hadiya Taha,
45, who said she had not seen her husband, Badr Hassan Ali, since he was
detained by American soldiers in January. ''I don't know the accusations against
him! I don't know anything!''

There are likely to be more scenes like the one Sunday at a news conference
organized by the Organization for Human Rights in Iraq for former inmates and
the families of some of the thousands of prisoners in American-run jails --
their anger given new credibility after the release of pictures showing
mistreatment of prisoners at Abu Ghraib by their American guards.

For months, human rights groups and Iraqi leaders say, they have complained to
American officials about the treatment of prisoners. They say that their appeals
received little attention, and they concede that they heard little as serious as
the images the world has now seen of naked prisoners in hoods and a young female
soldier holding one by a leash.

But now the scandal has given these complaints a new platform. And Secretary of
Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld's promise in a Senate hearing last week to pay
compensation to victims has provided a new incentive for people to come forward
-- though it may be increasingly hard to separate victims from opportunists.

One reason for the anger is that the photographs from Abu Ghraib prison seemed
to confirm the worst of what many Iraqis believed and more than a few have
experienced: that American soldiers, under extreme danger here and thus usually
seen patrolling the streets with guns raised, often use excessive force against
Iraqis.

''It's been a policy of being incredibly rough,'' said Stewart Vriesinga, an
official with Christian Peacemaker Teams, an American-Canadian charity that has
collected complaints of abuse in prisons.

The Organization for Human Rights in Iraq, which predates Saddam Hussein's fall
and is the country's most prominent rights group, says it has received only two
formal complaints against American soldiers, both by former prisoners, though it
now expects that number to rise quickly.

Although many of the complaints voiced at the news conference Sunday concerned
rough-handed arrests and the inability to see loved ones in jail, several people
said they were the victims of more serious abuse. At least two said their
relatives were among those who died while in American custody.

Three sons of former Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush showed pictures of his body
-- taken, they said, after the corpse was dumped at a hospital in the town of
Qaim, near the Syrian border, and underwent an autopsy. The death certificate
issued by the hospital says he died of a heart attack during interrogation. The
photographs showed bruises on his face and legs.

The case of General Mowhoush, who died on Nov. 26, 2003, after complaining
during an interrogation that he felt unwell and collapsed, is one of 25 prisoner
deaths in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2002 that United States military officials
say they are investigating.

''These things are still happening to other people still in prison,'' said one
of General Mowhoush's sons, Hussam, 27.

American military officials have said they believe General Mowhoush was helping
finance anti-American insurgents. His sons deny this, saying that all four sons
and another relative were innocents swept up in arrests in Qaim in October, and
that their father turned himself in several days later.

The sons said they had been beaten and shocked with a cattle prod by
interrogators demanding to know where their father was and whether they were
involved in the insurgency.

One son, Qusay, said the interrogations became especially rough after what they
were told was an attack on American soldiers while they were at a military
installation called Tiger Base near Qaim. He said one soldier had told him, ''We
are going to execute all of you today.''

Then, he said, he was taken into an interrogation room with a soldier who called
himself the Devil.

''He was opposite me, holding the back of a chair, and he said, 'Tell me where
your father is.' I said, 'I don't know. He is supposed to be in prison too.' ''

Then, Qusay Mowhoush said, six other soldiers started beating him.

''The Devil didn't move from his chair,'' he said. ''He seemed bored. Then he
stood up and said in Arabic, 'Liar, mujahadeen, Mowhoush!' ''

He said the soldier had pulled out his pistol and held it to his temple.

''He pulled the trigger,'' he said. ''But it was just a click.''

After seven months of being moved around to other prisons -- one near Haditha,
Abu Ghraib near Baghdad and Camp Bucca in the town of Um Qasr near the border
with Kuwait -- the sons said they were finally freed.

Hussam Mowhoush said: ''After we were released and my father died, they said,
'We haven't found anything against you. We are sorry.' ''

Another man at the news conference Sunday, Abbas Farhan, 54, carried a pack of
documents that included the death certificate of his son, Mousa, 26. The
certificate said that he died in Abu Ghraib on April 14 of a gunshot wound. But
that is all he said he knew of his son's death.

''We don't know what happened,'' Mr. Farhan said. ''Nothing at all.''

He said Mousa, a security guard, was arrested two weeks earlier, on April 1,
charged not with attacking Americans but with helping transport the body of
someone his employer had killed. He said he did not know if American guards
caused his son's death, but he said he was not surprised at the brutality
evident in the pictures from Abu Ghraib.

''This is not unusual behavior for them,'' he said.

One of the two men who filed formal complaints with the human rights
organization, Abdul Rahman Muhammad Saleh, did not attend the news conference on
Sunday. The reason, Mr. Saleh, 38, said, is that he thought most of the people
there were only seeking compensation. For the abuse he said he suffered during
four months of imprisonment last year, he said he only wanted one thing: for the
Americans to leave Iraq.

''This is our compensation,'' he said in an interview in Baghdad on Sunday.

Mr. Saleh said the pattern of abuse was set on the night of his arrest, on June
18, 2003, at his home in the Shaab neighborhood in Baghdad. Accused of belonging
to an armed group, he said he was handcuffed and beaten that first night at a
small American base near his home.

''One of them kicked dust in my mouth,'' he said. ''Another put his fingers into
my mouth to keep it open so the soldier could kick dust in. I started vomiting,
and then I passed out.''

Two days later, he said, he was moved to the Baghdad airport, to an encampment
that held some 400 prisoners. He said he had sat alone in a cell about one yard
square, unable to stretch out fully, for eight days before the questions began.

Then, he said, five interrogators took him to a larger room.

''They asked, 'Where is Saddam? Where are Uday and Qusay?' '' Mr. Saleh said,
referring to Mr. Hussein's two sons, killed later in the summer in a standoff
with American troops. ''I told them, 'I am a civilian. I don't know anything.'

''They said, 'We are going to give you the mercy bullet. You are accused of
killing American soldiers,' '' he said.

One interrogator, he said, pulled out a kind of gun he did not recognize and
fired from several yards away. He said he felt shock waves through his body and
passed out.

After a few hours in a hospital, he said, he spent four days back in the small
cell.

''After a few days,'' he said, ''one of them brought me a cup of water and I
said, 'I think I am about to die. I have a family and they are very dear to me.
If I had any information, I would tell you.' ''

Over the next three months, he said, he was transferred twice between the
airport and the prison in Umm Qasr. He said he was not interrogated anymore, and
was beginning to lose hope of ever leaving. Finally, he said, an American
commander at Umm Qasr looked into his case, and he was released in Baghdad.

Mr. Saleh said that he got his old job back as a food inspector with the
Ministry of Trade, and that he was earning far more now than he ever did under
Mr. Hussein's rule. But that has not slaked his anger and bitterness at the
American occupation.

''I realized they came to obliterate a whole society, a whole civilization,'' he
said. ''And it's true. They managed to destroy that society.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Qusay Mowhoush, above, said he was beaten by American soldiers
during an interrogation last fall. His father, Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush,
died in American custody. Abdul Rahman Muhammad Saleh, below, also says he was
tortured by American guards after his arrest in June 2003. (Photo by Ian
Fisher/The New York Times)
 (Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
PRISONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); ARRESTS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); AUTOPSIES
(73%); TERRORISM (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and
Human Rights; Photography; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Organization for Human Rights in Iraq

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) Ian Fisher; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); CANADA (76%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A Nation Unto Himself

BYLINE: By Jennifer Senior.

Jennifer Senior is a contributing writer for the magazine. She last wrote about
Gov. George E. Pataki.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 7919 words



[Intruders in the House of Saud]
Part II
If, in the future, the war on terrorism is fought in the orderly confines of the
courtroom and not just in the caves of Tora Bora, then incriminating documents
could become the equivalent of smart bombs. Ronald L. Motley, who has made a
career of coaxing such documents from the shadows, made this clear in our very
first phone conversation, during which he could barely contain his delight.
''Have you heard of Mohammed Fakihi?'' he demanded, in a drawl rich enough to
fill a doughnut. ''Investigated by the German police?''

Well, no --.

''That fella had a computer,'' he continued. ''And do you know what I did with
that computer?''

He allowed a capacious pause.

''I'll tell you what I did,'' he said. ''I bought it.''

As a trial lawyer, Motley thinks of terrorism not just as a form of war, but as
a business -- a depraved, ruthlessly efficient business, whose financiers must
be exposed and held accountable for their role in sowing harm. In the case of
Sept. 11, Motley, like many in the American intelligence community, concluded
that the 19 hijackers would never have been able to carry out their plans
without generous Saudi assistance. Nineteen months ago, he filed a civil lawsuit
in federal court in Washington charging that a wide variety of parties from the
kingdom sponsored the attacks, either directly or indirectly, by making
donations to institutions that they knew fostered terrorism. Among the case's
205 defendants are seven Saudi charities, including the largest in the Muslim
world; three Saudi financial institutions, including one that is now state-run;
dozens of prominent Saudi individuals; and perhaps most audaciously, several
members of the royal family, for whom Motley has a rich assortment of epithets.
Though Motley is not the only tort lawyer in the United States to have filed an
international lawsuit in connection with Sept. 11, his case is by far the
largest and most lavishly financed of its kind: he has already spent more than
$12 million, most of it his own money or his firm's, investigating the case. The
families of 1,667 people who died that day, as well as 1,197 men and women who
sustained injuries, have signed on.

With all due respect, I asked Motley, how did he, rather than the F.B.I. or the
C.I.A, gain custody of Fakihi's computer?

''Well, think about it this way,'' he said. ''If you had information -- a
computer hard drive, a Mullah Omar document or whatever your currency might be
-- would you necessarily want to give it to the F.B.I.? Why, you might wind up
in Guantanamo Bay. Which is not a pleasant place to be, I understand.''

Nor does it hurt, one imagines, that when it comes to procuring the hard drives
of individuals with potentially valuable information, Motley is willing to pay a
handsome fee. (Though in this case, the seller, who Motley said was on the lam,
charged only $4,000, on the condition that Motley's people also take his car off
his hands.)

Motley built a successful legal career by winning quixotic lawsuits -- first
against asbestos companies, which made him an extravagantly wealthy man, and
then as a central player in the huge, 46-state case against Big Tobacco, at a
time when going after cigarette manufacturers was a demonstrable route to
bankruptcy. But whatever risks he took in suing multibillion-dollar corporations
pale in comparison to this terrorism case. In trying to use domestic courts to
redress the problem of global terror, Motley is potentially subverting, or at
least opening to redefinition, the very notion of diplomacy. He and his clients
are effectively acting as their own nation. This is naturally worrisome to
international-relations professionals, who wonder whether profit-seeking trial
lawyers have the legitimacy, expertise or proper motivations to be making
foreign policy. ''That's why we have a government,'' said Sean D. Murphy, who
served as a State Department lawyer from 1987 to 1998. ''It's elected to make
some of the hard calls about how to handle foreign countries.''

That may be so. The problem, as Motley sees it, is that sometimes governments
are not in the position to make those hard calls, whether it be for political or
for commercial reasons. So instead, they make easy ones. They resort to gentle
persuasion, and their pleas fall on deaf ears. ''Since 1999,'' Motley said
later, ''officials at the highest levels of our government have tried repeatedly
to warn the Saudis about terrorism funding. And what did they do? They ignored
them.''

He took another dramatic pause.

''Which is why our defendants,'' he concluded, ''ought to be held accountable in
an American court.''

Unlike most of the litigation filed in the aftermath of Sept. 11, which involves
a fairly traditional body of laws and assumes a predictable pattern (the
victims' families suing the airlines suing the insurers), the sweeping
antiterrorism case brought by Ron Motley relies on new and evolving legal
terrain, and its key defendants live in a Muslim monarchy halfway around the
world. The United States also happens to consider this monarchy an ally, no
matter how imperfect it may be. While Motley is aiming at other foreign parties,
too, and while he is not suing the kingdom of Saudi Arabia itself, he is making
a rather provocative statement by going after the kingdom's prominent citizens,
banks and even some of its leaders. The State Department, while not formally
weighing in against the suit, is watching it warily: the last thing it desires
is the transformation of the American legal system into a blunt instrument of
foreign policy. Bankrupting terrorism is certainly a national priority, even an
urgent one, but hardly the task the diplomatic corps wants to entrust to a man
who once, during closing arguments, wore a toy stethoscope in court.

Motley insists, frequently and not always convincingly, that he doesn't mean to
make a national nuisance of himself; he is simply trying to address a
fundamental injustice. Why, in the context of terrorism, should the needs of the
state be privileged above the rights of the victims? Or, put another way, why
should the flesh-and-blood targets of terrorist attacks -- the deceased and the
bereaved -- take a back seat to the less tangible target, the state?

''Going through the court system and trying to take their money is the only
recourse I have,'' explained Deena Burnett, the first client to sign on to
Motley's suit. Her husband, Thomas, was on United Airlines Flight 93, which
crashed into the empty field in Shanksville, Pa. ''I can't join the military. It
would be impractical for me to go abroad. But if I can put a stranglehold on
their finances,'' she said, ''it assists our president in the war on
terrorism.''

Whether George W. Bush is grateful for her assistance is another matter. As
Motley, a generous donor to the Democratic Party, is fond of pointing out, the
president's ties to the Saudi kingdom are personal as well as political: his
father, George H.W. Bush, was until recently a senior adviser to the Carlyle
Group, an investment firm that counted bin Laden family members among its
investors until October 2001. James Baker, whom Bush recently sent abroad
seeking help to reduce Iraq's debt, is still a senior counselor for the Carlyle
Group, and Baker's Houston-based law firm, Baker Botts, is representing the
Saudi defense minister in Motley's case.

Yet however committed a Democrat Motley might be, Burnett v. Al Baraka
Investment and Development Corporation, as the case is known, could hardly be
described as a partisan crusade. Allan Gerson, a Washington lawyer and Motley's
co-counsel, worked in the Reagan Justice Department. Private legal actions
against terrorist financiers also have the support of a number of prominent
Congressional Republicans, who have shown dwindling patience with the Bush
administration's gingerly approach to Saudi diplomacy. Senator Arlen Specter,
the Pennsylvania Republican, strongly supports Motley's investigation. Charles
Grassley, an Iowa Republican and chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, was
one of the original proponents of the legislation Motley is relying on for his
case. In December, Grassley sent a sternly worded letter to the Treasury
Department, demanding to know why the United States was slower than Europe to
freeze certain Saudi assets. Last July, Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican
and former chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, publicly chastened the
administration for classifying 28 pages reportedly about the Saudis from a
Congressional report on Sept. 11.

Recently, I asked Shelby if he was nervous that Burnett might complicate life
for the president. His answer was blunt. ''If Ron Motley can help unravel the
mystery of a lot of terrorist financing,'' he said, ''I don't care who the
president of the United States is. Or where the trail leads.''

Assuming the answer is Saudi Arabia, what does that make Motley's case, exactly?
A glorified, globalized tort suit? Or an example of a new wartime jurisprudence,
one that fights terrorism with lawyers as well as guns and statesmen? The
answer, in a sense, is both, and it could be the new way of the world. Those who
take a dim view of Motley's work, dismissing it as nothing more than worldwide
ambulance chasing, will be startled to learn that it is theoretically possible,
in today's borderless society, to follow a screaming siren all the way to
Riyadh. ''Telling U.S. courts not to evaluate international tort claims is like
King Canute telling the tide not to come in,'' said Harold Hongju Koh, the
international law expert and next dean of Yale Law School. ''I'm sorry, but the
sun is coming up tomorrow, and it's called globalization.''

Last fall Motley stood at a podium of a hotel conference room in suburban
Virginia, addressing a large gathering of families of airline-disaster victims.
''Let's pick on the Saudis for a moment,'' he said, grinning as the C-Span
cameras rolled. He's regulation height, with a face that reddens easily and hair
that's prone to feathering behind his ears. ''I loooove,'' he continued, ''to
pick on the Saudis.''

Motley, 59, is usually a dervish of energy and restless tics. His eyes dart and
his fingernails tip-tap; in conversation he regularly interrupts himself. But
not here. As soon as he stands before a crowd, armed with a PowerPoint
presentation and a linear legal argument, that energy field of mayhem
disappears.

''I think,'' he said, ''that we should be very angry with the Saudis.''

In order to justify his latest legal undertaking, Motley must establish that the
Arabian Peninsula is the fund-raising capital for merchants of terror. Though
the allegation has always drawn adamant denials from the Saudis -- their
Washington embassy refuses to comment on Motley's case -- it is not, from the
intelligence-community point of view, a particularly controversial point. In the
months after Sept. 11, Treasury and National Security officials appeared before
Congress, declaring Saudi Arabia the epicenter of terrorism financing. (This, in
fact, was the precise phrase used by David Aufhauser, a former general counsel
to the Bush Treasury Department who was also chairman of the National Security
Council's committee on terrorist financing.) Perhaps the most scathing
declaration on the subject appeared in a report from the Council on Foreign
Relations, issued 17 months ago: ''It is worth stating clearly and unambiguously
what official U.S. government spokespersons have not. For years, individuals and
charities based in Saudi Arabia have been the most important source of funds for
Al Qaeda, and for years the Saudi officials have turned a blind eye to this
problem.''

While Motley suggests that Saudi money occasionally takes a direct path into Al
Qaeda's coffers -- generally via wealthy individual donors -- it more frequently
takes a circuitous route, either through the clean-and-rinse cycle of
quasi-legitimate businesses or, more commonly, through a highly complex web of
Muslim charities, which receive a steady stream of alms from both individuals
and Saudi banks. Some of the charities named in Motley's suit are already the
subjects of federal criminal investigations. But others, like the Muslim World
League, are highly esteemed in the Arab world.

''Here's how I would explain to a jury all this legal mumbo jumbo,'' Motley told
the crowd in the hotel conference room. The graphic behind him changed to a
cartoon of heaving smokestacks and tangled pipes. ''This,'' he said, ''is a
terrorist factory. Let's call it Al Qaeda Inc. And those smokestacks are spewing
out terror, hatred, jihad, suicide bombers. So who's liable if you've lost a
loved one to Al Qaeda Inc.?'' He looked around. ''It's the bank that loaned the
money. It's the architect who designed the factory, knowing it was going to be
spewing out hatred. It's the suppliers who supplied the factory with ingredients
to manufacture terrorist acts. They're all responsible, each and every one.'' He
thumped the podium. ''That's the law of the United States.''

Congress has indeed passed several antiterrorism laws over the last dozen years.
In 1992, it enacted a law that said terror victims could sue for civil damages;
in 1994, it explicitly criminalized providing ''material support'' for terrorist
activities, making sure the definition included not just money but also lodging,
training, personnel, telecommunications equipment, false documents, safe houses,
transportation -- as broad a range of terrorism services as the authors of the
bill could identify. In 1996, Congress also made it possible to file civil suits
against foreign governments identified by the State Department as sponsors of
terrorism.

The problem with these statutes -- particularly those involving ''material
support'' -- is that they are vague, largely untested and now being challenged
partly on First Amendment grounds. For now, Motley is relying on just a handful
of precedents to make his case, hoping they aren't overturned along the way. The
most important emerged from the Seventh Circuit in the summer of 2002, when the
appeals court refused to dismiss a case against several American-based
institutions alleged to have contributed to the Palestinian militant group
Hamas; the court declared that the institutions could, under certain
circumstances, be held liable for the Hamas killing of an American student,
David Boim, in the West Bank, even if the charities had nothing to do with the
specific planning of the murder. ''Civil liability for funding a foreign
terrorist organization,'' the opinion stated, ''does not offend the First
Amendment so long as the plaintiffs are able to prove that the defendants knew
about the organization's illegal activity, desired to help that activity succeed
and engaged in some act of helping.'' The case, commonly known as Boim, is now
in federal court in Chicago.

Of course, with a case involving 205 defendants, many of them armed with the
finest legal representation that money can buy, Motley can expect a world's
worth of obstacles before Burnett ever gets that far. There will be motions to
dismiss, extensions, delays -- all manner of procedural jujitsu that will
probably keep the case going for years. Perhaps the biggest procedural obstacle
of all is the question of jurisdiction: unlike Boim, Motley's case goes mainly
after parties abroad. While collectively they have substantial American assets,
it's unclear whether American courts will feel comfortable asserting
jurisdiction over them. ''The courts,'' Gerson said, ''have to become involved
in dealing with the reality of foreign affairs.''

From behind the podium, Motley told the audience that he was about to run what
he said was a surveillance video made in 1997 by the Madrid Qaeda cell. He
warned it would be chilling. ''When we intervened with the Spanish prosecution
of this case,'' he explained, ''the judge gave it to us.''

For Motley, Burnett is a case not ultimately about foreign policy but about
facts, which means that proving his defendants knowingly provided material
support to terrorists is his other significant legal challenge. For the last two
years, he has bankrolled a worldwide intelligence-gathering operation that makes
the discovery process, ordinarily marked by subpoenas and dry depositions, read
like a Tom Clancy novel. One process server he hired, he told me, disappeared in
Saudi Arabia. Motley himself has received death threats, prompting him to hire a
350-pound former Army sergeant, the same bodyguard who accompanied him during
the tobacco years.

Around the globe, Motley has hired 10 foreign ''informants'' -- including a
former Taliban official -- whom he insists on referring to by code names
(Arnold, the Albanian, the Muslim, Top Source). He has also hired Jean-Charles
Brisard, a French intelligence expert, to persuade foreign governments to
cooperate with his suit. Brisard is the author of the European best seller
''Forbidden Truth,'' which posited that before Sept. 11 the Bush administration
tried to coerce the Taliban into surrendering Osama bin Laden in exchange for a
lucrative oil pipeline.

Motley asked his assistant to show the video. The footage at first looked like
any tourist video -- a busy Manhattan streetscape, food vendors and people
whizzing by, a seemingly reverential shot of the green sign that says Wall
Street. Then the camera slowly panned up and down the length of the World Trade
Center, while a voice spoke in Arabic. The subtitle translated: ''I'll knock
them all down.''

From the very earliest days of his career, Motley showed the kind of passion,
cocksureness and hallucinatory sense of possibility that have long made trial
lawyers a metabolically distinctive species. He lived on credit cards, spent
weeks on the road, drank hard in the evening and jogged long in the morning. He
took on projects that seemed like surefire losers, sometimes to the utter
disgust of his colleagues. To this day, said his partner, Joe Rice, ''Ron just
assumes there'll be money there to pay the bills.''

Yet few who know Motley, including his adversaries, would dispute his talents as
a lawyer. He thinks quickly, possesses a gift for making difficult concepts
accessible and can quote, almost verbatim, documents and testimony he read
months before. In the courtroom, he lurches between ruthlessness and shameless
vaudeville but still manages to endear himself to juries, probably because his
antics -- like bringing water guns to court -- provide relief from the
undertaker-sonorousness of most defense lawyers. Slowness he finds infuriating,
especially these days, as he waits for documents from his more leisurely and
bureaucracy-prone counterparts in Europe. (''They meet more often than the
elders of the Church of the Nazarene,'' Motley complained. ''And probably get
less done.'')

But underneath the comedy runs a hard streak of determination. ''With Ron,
there's this huge sense of wanting to beat the pants off Goliath,'' said Paul
Hanly, a New York lawyer also working on the Burnett case, who in previous years
opposed Motley as a defense attorney. ''And then there's this whole populist
thing -- that he's up against the Republican-funded, blue-chip, white-shoe Wall
Street law firms who wouldn't have hired him as a paralegal when he graduated
from law school.''

Motley grew up in North Charleston, S.C. From the time he was tall enough to
reach the nozzle, he pumped gas at his father's service station in a mostly
black, working-class section of town. He attended the University of South
Carolina, had a brief stint as a high-school history teacher, then returned to
the university for law school. His ascent after graduation was swift. He had his
own name on the law-firm door by 1975. He became the youngest president of the
South Carolina Trial Lawyers Association in 1977. During the early 1980's, he
formed an archipelago of agreements with law firms around the country, trying
asbestos cases by the dozen. Then, in 1993, the Mississippi attorney general,
Michael Moore, recruited Motley and a handful of other lawyers to lead an
improbable assault against Big Tobacco on behalf of his state. The case
ultimately swelled into a gargantuan project involving dozens of plaintiffs'
lawyers representing 46 states and five United States territories. Motley's firm
represented 25 government entities and, in a remarkable settlement in 1998,
secured $246 billion for them over the course of 25 years.

Motley's firm reaped an estimated $2 billion in fees from the tobacco
settlement, too, but the money seemed only to fuel an already festering tension
between Motley and his partners. As he was gambling on Big Tobacco, they were
toiling away on less risky, less glamorous cases, trying to keep the firm
solvent. Then Motley started talking about 9/11 litigation, even though he'd
never tried a single international case in his life. The partnership, Ness,
Motley, Loadholt, Richardson & Poole, dissolved in 2002. Motley and Rice went on
to form their own firm, based in Mount Pleasant, S.C.

Motley's fans concede that to know him is to appreciate his pandemonium, but he
also has a quieter side. ''He has this reputation for being a brash, successful
plaintiffs' lawyer,'' said Marc Kasowitz, who faced Motley in the tobacco years
as a lawyer for the Liggett Group. ''But in person, he's very straightforward,
actually, and sort of a sensitive guy.'' During the asbestos years, Rice
recalled, Motley took breaks from his depositions of witnesses with lung disease
to go outside and cry.

Opportunistic and compassionate, bombastic and fragile, undisciplined and
focused -- it's a binary personality code that applies to a lot of successful
people, and it applies rather vividly to Motley, who for all his bluster still
stands with the sloped posture of someone who's both heartsick and disappointed
in himself. He is three times divorced, admits he still drinks more than he
should and now regrets, in ways he could hardly have imagined, that he saw too
little of his two children as they were growing up. When Thomas Burnett's father
phoned in the winter of 2001, inquiring about a potential Sept. 11 lawsuit, what
drew Motley in were doubtless the same things that always did -- money,
publicity, outrage, intellectual sport. But there was something else, too, and
that was a terrible sense of identification: his own 28-year-old son, Mark, had
died just 10 months before, following experimental surgery for epilepsy. When he
met the Burnetts in person three months later, he told them so.

''Understand, it's not like I use it as a marketing tool,'' Motley told me.
''But people who haven't been through it, they don't know what it's like to be
in the fog of death.'' He was silent for a second. ''Like I'm told I did my
son's eulogy. I'm told I got up that morning, wrote it out and never read from a
script. I'm told that it was the most eloquent thing anybody's ever heard. And I
don't remember a word I said.''

Twitching his eyes and bouncing his knees, Motley sat in the pillowed corner of
a common room at the Pentagon City Ritz-Carlton last October, drowning in his
own adrenaline. He was preparing for a hearing in Washington the next day,
during which a judge was to entertain motions to dismiss the two highest-profile
defendants in his case: Prince Turki al-Faisal, the former head of Saudi
intelligence, and Prince Sultan bin Abdel Aziz, the Saudi minister of defense.

''Say,'' he shouted to a colleague. ''Have you gotten that memo on the Prince of
Baloney yet?'' Motley was referring to Prince Turki, whom he also once referred
to on television as ''Prince Cooked Goose.'' He turned and elaborated. ''Turki
gave a speech last night and labeled our charges baloney. So now we have a new
name for him.''

Gerson, rabbinical and elegant in a three-piece suit -- Motley was in sweats --
gently admonished him, suggesting that perhaps he ought not call the princes
names.

As a trial lawyer, Motley is a generalist. Though clearly important to him,
Burnett ultimately amounts to another chapter in a long and varied career. The
same cannot be said of Gerson. Thoughtful, arrogant and tangibly intense, he has
spent most of his adult life contemplating the relationship between individuals
and nations -- first as chief counsel to the American delegation to the United
Nations under Jeane Kirkpatrick, then as a lawyer in the Reagan Justice
Department working on international affairs. When Gerson discusses Burnett, he
talks in sweeping, conceptual terms, not tactical ones. His attitude toward the
case borders on the messianic.

Like many specialists in international law, Gerson said he believes that
domestic courts have a role to play in holding foreign parties accountable for
their misdeeds. He came of age as a doctoral student at Yale under the tutelage
of Myers McDougal, the eminence grise of international law, who preached that
lawyers had a legitimate role in advancing political objectives. As soon as he
entered the private sector, he began to put this philosophy into practice,
becoming the first lawyer to file a civil suit against Libya for the bombing of
Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Shortly after Sept. 11, he had an
idea for a similar suit aimed at Saudis. A colleague introduced him to Motley in
the spring of 2002, at the private-jet area of Dulles airport, where Motley had
diverted his plane in order to meet him. Having already agreed to represent the
Burnetts, Motley was digging a tunnel in the same direction. The two men -- a
Democratic trial lawyer and a neoconservative Reaganite -- made a verbal
agreement that afternoon.

What Gerson sees in Burnett is the perfect opportunity for the judiciary to play
a critical role in the war on terror, punishing those enemies of the United
States that the executive branch, hamstrung by diplomatic considerations,
cannot. ''If we left justice solely to the U.S. government, when it has so many
commercial and other interests with countries like Saudi Arabia, what action
would be taken?'' he asked. ''We've refused to join the international criminal
court. And trying to accuse a foreign country of criminal activity gets us into
a terrible diplomatic mess. So why shouldn't they be held responsible in our
courts?''

To those accustomed to the genteel rites of diplomacy, the adversarial American
court system may seem an unfortunate forum to engage questions of international
wrongdoing. In an affidavit in the Burnett case, Charles Freeman, a former
ambassador to Saudi Arabia, disparagingly referred to this solution as ''the
privatization of foreign policy.'' Gerson prefers to call it the privatization
of justice. Absent the judiciary, he argues, victims of terror have no other
means of redressing wrongs. ''Freeman's notion, which represents
institutionalized State Department dogma, is like the old idea that the Post
Office is only something that the U.S government can do -- it's so antiquated
it's absurd,'' he said. ''The idea is that the government is obligated only to
itself and responsible to no one. Well, that idea has been eroding with the
advent of contemporary human rights. This is the great human rights case. It's
the right to be free from terrorism.''

American civil courts are not unfamiliar with lawsuits involving international
human rights. Since 1980, lawyers have made shrewd use of an obscure 1789 law
called the Alien Tort Claims Act, originally intended to combat piracy, which
gives American courts ''original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien
for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the
United States.'' As a result, American judges have heard from Guatemalan victims
of torture, from Haitian dissidents and from survivors of the Bosnian genocide.
In the last decade, the same law has also been used in an attempt to hold
multinational corporations accountable for malfeasance -- like Unocal, for
example, for its alleged use of forced labor to provide security for oil
pipelines in Myanmar.

The difference between Alien Tort cases and Burnett, however, can be measured in
light years. Alien Tort cases are generally brought by human rights lawyers,
working for a pittance, hoping to turn a 215-year-old law into an instrument of
justice for citizens around the globe. Burnett is being brought by a plaintiffs'
lawyer, toiling for a cut of the proceeds, hoping to use laws recently enacted
by a law-and-order Congress to punish those who have brought harm to Americans.
One can see how tastelessly opportunistic it might seem from the point of view
of the human rights community: plaintiffs' lawyers, swooping in, turning a
handsome profit off history's ugliest moments. Yet some human rights experts see
real value in Burnett. ''It seems like a righteous case brought by an
experienced lawyer,'' said Paul Hoffman, the human rights attorney involved in
the Unocal suit. ''And who else has the kind of resources for it? Who else has
that kind of cash up front?''

Motley does, of course. Yet there aren't many precedents for spectacular payoffs
in cases like this one. Almost none of the plaintiffs who have sued successfully
using the Alien Tort Claims Act have been able to collect from the hostile
foreign parties they've targeted; generally, they are awarded default judgments
when the defense doesn't show up in court. And most of the successful cases
using antiterrorism statutes have been directed at countries on the State
Department list of terrorism sponsors, like Iran and Cuba, whose American
assets, if there are any, are generally frozen. The victories in all these cases
are mainly moral rather than financial. In going after wealthy Saudis and Saudi
financial institutions with considerable assets in the United States, Motley is
part of the first generation of lawyers trying these cases who might actually be
able to collect.

Unless, that is, the Bush administration tries to block the suit. As a rule the
administration favors a limited role for the judiciary in international cases.
Later this month, it will argue before the Supreme Court against the use of the
Alien Tort statute for human rights cases, absent a law from Congress explicitly
allowing as much. Even with an imprimatur from Congress, the president clearly
doesn't like Motley's use of the antiterrorism statutes; back in October 2002,
news articles reported ''administration officials'' saying that the government
was considering asking the courts to dismiss the suit. Victims' families reacted
with the outrage you'd expect. The administration never intervened.

But should the administration consider Motley's suit a threat? David Aufhauser,
the former general counsel to the Treasury Department, said he believes that
private and government action against terrorism are not mutually exclusive
pursuits. ''If brought soberly and with substance, private actions can be of
material assistance to the government,'' he said. ''Because I can tell you: the
bankers of terror are cowards. They have too much to lose by transparency. Name,
reputation, affluence, freedom, status. They're the weak link in the chain of
violence. They are not beyond deterrence.''

Jean Charles-Brisard, Motley's chief European investigator, was a bit late to
arrive at La Reserve Hotel in Geneva one afternoon last December, but it didn't
seem to matter. The witness he was meeting, Carmen bin Laden, wasn't ready to
speak with him anyway, because she was still talking to a pair of foreign
journalists about ''Inside the Opaque Kingdom,'' her chronicle of tribulations
within the bin Laden family. When she finally finished, she walked over to
Brisard, magisterially shook his hand and took a seat on a hard maroon couch.
She was trim, plump-lipped, imposing and, in her own way, spectacular. Her face
was stretched as taut as a volleyball net, and her coat collar was a vivid
species of fur. She pulled out a cigarette.

Carmen bin Laden is Osama's Swiss-born sister-in-law. She is currently embroiled
in a bitter divorce from his half-brother Yeslam, who is a defendant in Burnett.
This makes her, like many of the witnesses in Motley's case, fairly rich in
ulterior motives. Her discussion with Brisard did not last long. After just a
few minutes, she received a phone call and abruptly left. Brisard turned to me
and apologized for her ''bizarre'' behavior. ''She's not a key witness,'' he
said. ''She's a contextual witness.''

Over the course of their investigation, Motley's team has learned what the
professional intelligence community has long known: the information trade often
involves questionable types. Michael Elsner, an associate at Motley Rice who
often accompanies Brisard on these trips, told me of once receiving a phone call
from a Russian fellow named Igor who said just enough about Islamic banks and
charities operating in Chechnya to earn himself an invitation to chat. The man
who showed up was bald, rotund and almost permanently attached to a shining
silver briefcase. ''He was supposed to get us things,'' Elsner said. Yet he
never returned. It's probably just as well. A background check revealed that
Igor had a small problem with embezzling.

With his $12 million, Motley has begun an investigation that even most
nation-states could not afford. But money alone is not enough to form an ersatz
C.I.A. Motley sought out former intelligence agents, journalists and professors,
all of whom spent their lives obsessing about Al Qaeda. Some turned out to be
shady and unreliable. Yet Motley has had some success. Early on, one of his
sources in Afghanistan learned of a Taliban fighter who was selling a computer
file that he claimed had belonged to Muhammad Atef, military commander for Al
Qaeda until he was killed in November 2001 in Afghanistan. The seller wanted
$80,000. Motley wired it to Dubai. Motley's team also discovered a document
supposedly signed by Mullah Omar containing a directive to turn over $2 million
''in Saudi Arabia aids'' to a terrorist in central Asia. That got attention in
the press.

But Motley also concedes that his team had a hard time separating wheat from
chaff when it began its investigation two years ago. Fakihi's computer, which
Motley was so pleased to have obtained, for example, ended up adding little to
the information he'd already collected. The car that came with it is still
sitting somewhere in Europe.

Motley is now focusing on the documents culled by foreign governments, which
have already been vetted and, presumably, authenticated. This is where Brisard
comes in. Though his book was criticized in the United States, he is
nevertheless considered an expert on Al Qaeda's financing stream, particularly
its Saudi tributaries, and has written a well-respected report on the subject
for the United Nations Security Council. So far Brisard has gotten his hands on
two million pages of documents from 35 foreign governments, some of them quite
tantalizing: Swiss bank records of Osama bin Laden; Albanian intelligence
reports on bin Laden business dealings; information from 34 Bosnian hard drives
from the offices of Al Haramain Charitable Foundation, which Brisard said he
managed to get instead of the F.B.I. (Why? I asked. ''Because the U.S. promised
to give them the technology to recover the deleted files, but didn't,'' Brisard
answered. ''And we did.'') Recently, added Motley, an Oregon federal prosecutor
investigating Al Haramain called him, wondering whether he could have a look at
those files. Motley said he obliged.

One may wonder why these countries would bother cooperating with an American
civil lawsuit. Motley has a characteristically blunt explanation. ''Please --
these countries have their own parochial agendas,'' he said. ''Radical Islamic
fundamentalism is a huge problem in France. A huge problem in Spain. A terrible
problem in Germany. And look at Chechnya! Why do you need to look any further at
why Russia's gonna help us? Or look at Jordan. It's a secular kingdom! They're
certainly not rah-rah-rah on the Wahhabi movement.''

How this formidable pile of information will be interpreted by the courts -- if
Motley's case ever gets that far -- remains to be seen. For the lay person, any
foray into the intelligence world is surreal and initially intoxicating; who
wouldn't respond to the formation minutes of Al Qaeda, which the team obtained
from Bosnia? If genuine, this and many of Motley's documents are certainly of
historical relevance, but whether they're of legal relevance, demonstrating that
Motley's defendants knew they were providing material support to terrorists, is
another question entirely.

''The claim against my client is that it gave money to charities and the money
ended up in the hands of terrorists,'' said Christopher Curran, the lawyer for
Al Rajhi Bank, one of the banks being sued by Motley. ''But these were
government-regulated and government-approved charities that held themselves out
as bona fide charitable organizations. When we Americans donate our clothes to
Goodwill or our funds to the United Way, do we really know where it's all going?
Don't we also rely on government regulation and the representations of the
charities themselves?''

Even if Motley compiles enough evidence to prove his defendants knowingly
financed terrorism, it may not be enough: the judge must still agree that it is
appropriate for an American court to assert jurisdiction over them. In the cases
of the Saudi Princes Turki and Sultan, for example, the judge did not. In
November the United States District Court in Washington ruled that the
allegations against the princes, as Saudi officials, were not enough to surmount
sovereign immunity, a powerful privilege that protects states and their
officials not just from liability but also from lawsuits themselves.

The ruling didn't affect Motley's banking, charity and nonsovereign defendants,
but his team was devastated when it heard the news. ''The judge proceeded as if
it were a time of peace,'' Gerson said, ''and it's a time of war.''

For Gerson and Motley, war means interpreting the antiterrorism statutes as
aggressively as possible. But even people sympathetic with their efforts think
there are limits. Like suing sovereigns. ''Look,'' said Aufhauser, the former
Bush administration official, ''you have to be mindful that bringing them into
an American court is an invitation for enormous mischief abroad, potentially
against former and current U.S. officials . . . like me.''

The United States more or less had to cope with this problem last year, when
Iraqi families, using Belgium's ''universal jurisdiction'' law (now amended to
give immunity to world leaders), tried to call Colin Powell, former President
Bush and Dick Cheney into court for the bombing of a civilian shelter during the
gulf war in 1991. Youssef M. Ibrahim, a former New York Times reporter who is
now the managing director of Strategic Energy Investment Group, a consulting
firm based in Dubai, told me that two lawyers in Saudi Arabia are flirting with
the idea of recruiting Iraqi clients to sue Donald Rumsfeld for the use of
depleted uranium munitions in Iraq. What if their targets don't stop with
Rumsfeld? And what if they also sue Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman for
making those arms? Or their engineers for designing them?

For those who believe the executive branch should be wholly in charge of foreign
policy, Burnett feels like a mockery of international relations, a flagrant end
run around the institutions designed to engage the world community. ''If people
think we should be tougher on these countries, we have a democratic process to
try to bring that about,'' said Murphy, the former State Department official.
''They can vote, they can lobby, they can form networks and lobby even better.
But it shouldn't be dictated by the initiatives of just a few victims.''

Particularly, the argument goes, when Saudi Arabia has an incentive to finally
address the problem of terrorist financing itself. In May and November 2003,
terrorists blew up housing complexes in Riyadh, which reportedly spurred more
on-the-ground intelligence cooperation between the United States and Saudi
Arabia than ever before. The Treasury Department, charged with tracing terrorism
dollars, noted in an announcement in January that it worked jointly with Saudi
Arabia to close down four offices of the charity Al Haramain outside the
kingdom. Would now be the time to humiliate Saudi Arabia with a lawsuit, just as
our objectives are finally starting to align?

''Basically, this is U.S. diplomacy by contingency-fee lawyer,'' said Curran,
the defense lawyer. ''No one disputes that all of those responsible for 9/11
should be tracked down and held fully responsible. But in this case, allegations
have been made indiscriminately against some of the most prominent and reputable
Saudi organizations and citizens -- many of whom are Western-oriented and could
play a major role in fostering constructive relations between our two countries.
These lawsuits undermine that possibility.''

Meanwhile, the American budget and trade deficits continue to grow. Is now the
time to scare away the foreign investors who are pouring money into the American
economy and buying Treasury bonds? Less than a year after Sept. 11, The
Financial Times reported, Saudi investors had already withdrawn as much as $200
billion from the United States. ''At the end of the day, I believe this
president will prevent this lawsuit,'' Ibrahim said. ''There's nothing more
cowardly, as you know, than capital.''

Some human rights lawyers, though reasonably convinced of the merits of Motley's
case, also balk at the ''material support'' clauses it relies so heavily upon,
believing they've been defined too broadly and could therefore unwittingly
penalize those who give money to groups they consider politically legitimate.
''When Nelson Mandela came to Yankee Stadium, should all the people who put $10
in the hat be treated as terrorists?'' asked David Cole, a human rights lawyer
who is leading an aggressive challenge to these statutes. Cole pointed out that
not long before, the United States government had labeled the African National
Congress a terrorist organization. ''Are we going to go down the road of guilt
by association in the name of fighting terrorism, just as we did in the name of
fighting Communism?'' Cole said. ''That's my principal concern.''

Motley would point out that he is not going after $10 donors in his lawsuit, but
the gulf states may not view it that way. ''I give to charity personally,'' said
Khaled Al-Maeena, editor in chief of The Arab News, an English-language
newspaper published in Jidda. ''You can quote me on this. A lot of people
supported the Afghan struggle against the Soviet Union. Some of that money may
have been siphoned. But that does not mean we are responsible for Sept. 11. Who
are these people who are accusing them? They are fat-cat lawyers -- fat-cat
lawyers who want to make money.''

Indeed, perhaps the most discomfiting aspect of the Burnett case is the message
it sends abroad. The United States already has an international reputation for
unquenchable litigiousness. And Motley, often prone to rhetorical excess -- like
referring to Prince Turki as Prince Cooked Goose -- hardly seems like the most
sensitive champion of private action against foreign defendants. The average
Saudi may read about Burnett and feel not deterred but further inflamed: the
United States walked away from the Kyoto treaty; it attacked Iraq with only
meager international support; it repeatedly flouted the desires of the United
Nations. And now, the United States, whose citizens are among the richest and
luckiest on Earth, has responded to its misfortune with a trillion-dollar
lawsuit aimed at, of all things, some of the most prominent relief organizations
in the Middle East.

''A judgment will cause great resentment on the part of the people here,''
Al-Maeena concluded, with a sigh so audible it temporarily muffled our
connection across the globe. ''And it will be fuel, I think, for our own
extremists.''

In mid-December, the Motley team got some disorienting though not entirely
unexpected news. A panel of federal judges ordered the consolidation of all
Sept. 11 cases involving foreign defendants into the Southern District of New
York. It's for the pretrial phase only, in order to spare the defendants the
hassle of showing up in multiple courts for multiple lawsuits, but it
nevertheless has its consequences. Motley, who had been following his own
rhythms, must now reach a power-sharing agreement with the lawyers representing
a dozen or so other cases, and their styles, defendants and theories of
liability are not necessarily the same. As it turns out, Motley's first attempt
at court-driven diplomacy may not involve his defendants but his new colleagues.
And lawyers, of course, get along only slightly better than warring nations. So
far, no agreement has been reached.

Because Motley has served the most defendants and is representing the most
wrongful death claims, he will doubtless have leverage in this deal. And some of
the other lawyers now involved in this case could prove a real asset to Motley's
team. Like James Kreindler, for example. Though Gerson was the first to sue
Libya in the case of Pan Am 103, it was Kreindler, an airline litigation expert,
who ultimately represented most of the families. His faint New York patois and
familiarity with the folkways of the Southern District also can't hurt; he seems
to have a genuine rapport with the new judge in this case, Richard C. Casey.

But Kreindler has spent only $2million so far on his suit. A good portion of it
went toward examining Al Qaeda's ties with Iraq, which now appears to be moot --
even if he could provide proof, the Bush administration has declared Iraq's
assets off-limits. Most important, though, Kreindler's approach to his lawsuit
is very different from Motley's. ''You have to handle this case in a delicate
way,'' he said, ''in a way that doesn't burn bridges with our government.'' He
stressed that he's a Democrat. ''But I believe in letting the government go
first in their criminal prosecutions, and it takes years for the government to
do its work. But when that's done, you have the weight of the government behind
you when you make allegations.''

This approach does not harmonize well with Motley's instincts. Patience is not
his strong suit. ''Jim is the Job of the trial bar for waiting so long on Pan Am
103,'' he said. ''But my clients don't want to wait. They want the trial last
week.''

And yet they may have no choice. The court system, their chosen means of
justice, is a fundamentally slow, lumbering thing, and with so many different
lawyers and philosophies now thrown in the mix, it seems now to be even slower.
Motley's clients, like Motley himself, may have to accept that legal solutions
to misfortune, as gratifying and empowering as they seem, still don't give their
victims full control.

Still, Motley is proceeding apace, serving defendants and collecting documents
from around the globe. And Bush has yet to interfere. Last year, at a Republican
fund-raiser in Little Rock, Deena Burnett said she asked the president what he
thought of the lawsuit she had initiated. The two were standing side by side,
waiting to have their picture taken together. She said that Bush turned and
looked at her, just before the flashbulb popped. ''You just keep doing what
you're doing,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 28, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on Page 36 of The Times Magazine today about Ron Motley,
an American lawyer filing a suit against prominent Saudis and Saudi
organizations over supposed connections to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,
misstates a phrase in some copies in a quotation from Richard Shelby, an Alabama
senator who has criticized the Bush administration for classifying information
that may be about the Saudis. He said: ''If we can help unravel the mystery of a
lot of terrorist financing, I don't care who the president of the United States
is. Or where the trail leads.'' He did not say ''If Ron Motley can help unravel.
. . .''

 In some copies the article also omits Mr. Motley's assertion about the
administration's response to his investigation. He said it had refused to help
him.

An article on March 14 about Ron Motley, an American lawyer filing a suit
against prominent Saudis and Saudi organizations over supposed connections to
the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, misspelled the given name of a Yale professor
who was an early influence on Allan Gerson, Motley's co-counsel in the case. He
was Myres McDougal, not Myers.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ron Motley
A drawer in Motley's office containing background material and what Motley says
is evidence in the 9/11 suit against 205 defendants.
Allan Gerson, Motley's co-counsel in the 9/11 suit and a former member of the
Reagan administration, was the first lawyer to file a civil suit against Libya
after the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
 Motley and his bodyguard outside Charleston, S.C. Motley says he has received
death threats in connection with the 9/11 suit. (Photographs by Jeff Riedel for
The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HIJACKING
(90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); LAWYERS (72%); TORTS (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%); SPONSORSHIP (69%); RELIGION (63%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (60%) Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Biographical Information;
Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism;
Finances; United States International Relations

PERSON: Jennifer Senior; Ron Motley

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (59%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); GERMANY (57%); CUBA (50%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 14, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fair-Housing Groups Say New York City Is Falling Behind

BYLINE: By DAVID W. CHEN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1630 words


For decades, New York City was considered a pioneer in the fight for fair
housing. It passed the country's first law forbidding discrimination in private
housing in 1958. It passed a tough, broader human rights law in 1991 that
exceeded federal criteria.

It even had one of the first federally financed watchdog groups, the Open
Housing Center, to pursue claims of bias, holding real estate brokers and
landlords to account if they gave preference to one race over another or
discriminated against the disabled.

In the last few years, however, many housing advocates say that this commitment
has flagged, and there is substantial evidence that the city remains one of the
most segregated places to live in the nation.

Andrew M. Cuomo, formerly the nation's top housing official, calls the city
backward when its record is compared with the fair housing efforts of other
cities, even smaller ones.

In late 2001, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York concluded that
neither the Commission on Human Rights nor the Law Department, the city's
primary agencies for fair housing and human rights enforcement, had ''adequately
performed its jobs of preventing and remedying discrimination.''

And in the spring of 2003, the Open Housing Center folded after 40 years in the
wake of internal management problems and the loss of hundreds of thousands of
dollars from the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. The
private nonprofit center had aggressively investigated claims of housing
discrimination and had recruited lawyers from white-shoe firms to sue brokers
and landlords.

New York, according to the 2000 census, is one of the most segregated cities in
the nation, with few neighborhoods having balanced mixtures of races and ethnic
groups. A HUD study in 2002 found that New York had the highest rate of
discrimination against prospective Hispanic home buyers among 20 cities, and the
fifth-highest rate against African-Americans.

But government officials say that the fair-housing picture in New York is not
nearly as bleak as some of their critics suggest.

The Commission on Human Rights says that the 2001 report reflects outdated
conditions from the Giuliani administration, and that under Mayor Michael R.
Bloomberg it has instituted major reforms and eliminated a backlog of 5,000
cases.

HUD officials said the department awarded five fair-housing grants totaling
$475,000 to community groups more than two months ago, and noted that two
private groups are establishing their own fair-housing initiatives, including
one spearheaded by Mr. Cuomo. And the agency said that it was unfair to blame
HUD for precipitating the Open Housing Center's collapse.

''How does an organization that has been in existence for 30 years, and during
much of that time was well respected, not have sufficient private resources to
remain open?'' said Adam Glantz, a HUD spokesman. ''While we regret that the
Open Housing Center closed, I think we can safely say that New York City
residents continue to be served very well.''

At its peak, the Open Housing Center employed a staff of about 30 in about half
a dozen offices. And it challenged not just individual brokers accused of
discrimination, but also real estate empires like LeFrak and Trump.

In a case that began in 1996 and ended only last year, for instance, the center,
assisted free by the law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, won a $20,000
settlement for a Brooklyn transit employee, Miguel Mora. Mr. Mora had accused
Kessler Realty, a real estate brokerage in the Brighton Beach area, of racial
discrimination against him and his wife, Cristel, when they were hunting for
apartments. Mr. Mora, who is light-skinned, said that the broker had initially
agreed to show him several apartments, but then suddenly claimed that the units
were all gone after the broker met Ms. Mora, who is dark-skinned.

''My wife and I, we still think about it, we still hurt, but we feel that we did
something,'' Mr. Mora said.

By the late 1990's, though, the Open Housing Center began to become embroiled in
management disputes, said Phyllis Spiro, its former deputy director, and others.
One former board member, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the
center had fired several longtime staff members and hired a relative of its
executive director, Karen Webber. In 2001, HUD awarded its last contract paying
the center to send testers to landlords and brokers to check for discrimination.
The department eventually audited the center because of concerns about its
management and performance.

When reached by e-mail, Ms. Webber did not respond directly to the criticisms.
But she said the office never recovered from being forced to close after the
terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The center's office, which was on John Street
in Lower Manhattan, suffered serious physical damage after the World Trade
Center collapsed a few blocks away.

''Despite staffing shortages and a small and unsteady stream of funding for the
organization over the years,'' Ms. Webber wrote, ''the Open Housing Center
addressed the fair housing and other housing complaints of thousands of New
Yorkers.''

Victor Goode, the center's chairman, who is a professor at the City University
of New York School of Law, said HUD had been too hard on the center, and should
have worked harder to get the office back on its feet.

Last year, the National Fair Housing Alliance, a coalition of about 80 groups,
proposed establishing a new group here to replace the center. But HUD rejected
the application because of a recent rule change that bars organizations from
securing fair-housing grants in consecutive years.

That decision angered Shanna Smith, president of the alliance, who accused HUD
of retreating from its commitment to fair housing. Nationwide, she said, the
number of charges of housing discrimination issued by HUD dropped from an
average of 86 in the late 1990's to only 23 in the 2003 fiscal year, and 18 in
the first six months of the 2004 fiscal year.

The alliance's criticisms of HUD were echoed by eight members of New York's
Congressional delegation, who wrote the department in April.

''This is like a Catch-22,'' said Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a Manhattan
Democrat. ''HUD is basically saying, 'We'd love to ensure fair housing and fight
discrimination in the nation's largest city, but our rules won't let us.'''

Mr. Glantz said that HUD did not yet have a formal response to the Congressional
letter. But he took strong exception to the contention that HUD had ignored New
York.

Of the nearly 1,000 cases in New York City that have been completed since Oct.
1, 1999, by HUD and its partners, chiefly the New York State Division on Human
Rights, about one-quarter ended with the complaining party's getting a
settlement or acceptable result. About 50 yielded charges of probable cause, Mr.
Glantz said.

In the last nine months, South Brooklyn Legal Services has received two grants
totaling $410,000 to help homeowners alleging discrimination in financing and
sales. Four other groups are receiving education grants of $80,000 to $100,000,
Mr. Glantz said.

And before its demise, the Open Housing Center received 13 federal grants from
1994 to 2001 totaling $3.6 million, far more than just about any other
comparable housing organization.

While HUD has absorbed its share of criticism of late, the city's Commission on
Human Rights has been a regular target for years.

First, there was the 2001 report by the bar association. Then, last September, a
report by the Anti-Discrimination Center of Metro New York, a new fair-housing
advocacy group, concluded that the commission rarely found probable cause to
proceed with civil rights cases, handled fewer new cases in 2002 than usual and
did not seek stiff enough penalties in cases that were settled.

The center also found that the commission had cut the number of city-financed
employees to 21 from 152 in 1991, said Craig Gurian, the center's executive
director, who is a former chief counsel of the Commission on Human Rights' law
enforcement bureau.

''It's a heartbreak,'' said Ms. Spiro, formerly of the Open Housing Center. ''I
talk to people at the city commission, and I know there's nothing going on.''

The commission strongly disagrees, saying that the cuts in city-financed
positions have been compensated by private grants and additional federal funds.
The commission also says that under the leadership of Commissioner Patricia L.
Gatling, a former Brooklyn prosecutor, it has expanded its public education role
and obtained settlements totaling about $2 million in the past two years,
compared with only $600,000 in the previous two.

It has even secured $500,000 in settlements on cases that had languished for
more than a decade, said Avery S. Mehlman, deputy commissioner in charge of the
law enforcement bureau.

''I think that our record and our numbers speak for themselves,'' he said. ''We
have a very, very active investigations unit in our agency, which not only
investigates complaints, but initiates investigations regarding all issues of
discrimination.''

In response to the concerns about enforcement, the National Fair Housing
Alliance said it would apply again to open a new private center, and Mr. Cuomo
has also announced plans to open a Fair Housing Justice Center that will stress
litigation through HELP USA, an organization of which he is a co-chairman.

''It's amazing how backwards we are here, even though we like to say that we are
the most progressive city in the nation, and we are a melting pot,'' Mr. Cuomo
said. ''Fair housing is a difficult topic, because it exposes the sensitive
issue of race, so politicians and government tread lightly. So that's why we're
pushing litigation, because that's when people know you're serious.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Miguel Mora in his Brooklyn apartment with his wife, Cristel,
and his daughters, from left, Marinique, Hope and Faith. (Photo by Vincent
Laforet/The New York Times)(pg. B6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); CITIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
ETHNICITY (78%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (76%); LAWYERS (74%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS
(71%); CENSUS (66%) Housing; Discrimination; Hispanic-Americans; Blacks; Brokers
and Brokerage Firms; Fines (Penalties); Housing

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (54%) Housing and
Urban Development Department; Human Rights Commission (NYC)

PERSON: ANDREW CUOMO (58%); MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%) David W Chen; Michael R
(Mayor) Bloomberg

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 16, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

When Politics Corrupts Money

BYLINE: By Shirin Ebadi and Amir Attaran.

Shirin Ebadi, a law professor at the University of Tehran, won the Nobel Peace
Prize for 2003. Amir Attaran is a professor of law and population health at the
University of Ottawa.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 886 words


The World Bank has a human rights problem: it doesn't respect them enough. The
bank also has a political problem: concern about global poverty, according to
its president, James D. Wolfensohn, is ''near a low point.'' Yet the bank,
concerned about the second problem, seems to lack awareness of the first -- to
the detriment of its mission to help the world's poor.

The World Bank, which provided $18.5 billion in aid in 2003, should withhold
money from governments that are antidemocratic, or that violate their people's
human rights. To lend money to tyrants is to strengthen them and to become
complicit when they stamp on their people's rights. To lend money to one-party
states is to lock in their hegemony, and to ridicule the dignity of people
outside the party. To lend money to well-kept dictators is to enslave their
citizenry, who even after the dictator is gone must repay principal and interest
-- to the bank.

It would undoubtedly shock most rights-loving Western taxpayers to know that the
bank does not consistently differentiate between democracies and dictatorships
when making decisions about loans and aid. In the last decade, the bank has
offered loans to dozens of countries that violate civil rights, according to
organizations like Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the United
Nations.

The bank's justification for lending to despots is contained in one word:
pragmatism. The belief is that oppressed people are better off if their
governments borrow money to provide socially useful services. By lending money
to oppressive governments, the bank says, it is helping to make society more
equal -- if only a little.

Maybe, maybe not. Either way, there is no need to argue the point, because
however much money the bank lends to oppressive governments (and that is
plenty), there are enough poverty-stricken democracies that would gladly have it
instead. Mr. Wolfensohn himself has said that if the world's total supply of
foreign aid were doubled -- to about $100 billion annually -- poor countries
could easily absorb the increase and use it to pay for projects to help reduce
poverty.

If he is right and the unfulfilled needs are that extensive, then why doesn't
the bank find other takers for the money it now lends to oppressive governments?
The bank could easily redirect more than half its lending (say, $10 billion out
of the $18.5 billion total) and still finance only a fraction of the poverty
programs Mr. Wolfensohn deems worthy. The bank can find more than enough needy
democracies willing to accept its aid.

Thus the bank's ''pragmatic'' justification to lend money to oppressive
governments is absurd. It amounts to giving secretive, frequently kleptocratic
dictatorships priority -- before the democracies have their fill. This handicaps
both the citizens and leaders who together shoulder the hard work of sustaining
democracies.

Instead, the bank should devise a kind of human rights scorecard. At a minimum,
it should include the civil freedoms (of expression, of the press, of women) and
the social and economic freedoms (access to health, education and property). The
bank should monitor these freedoms and refuse to aid any country that violates
them.

By using a scorecard like this, the bank would show that governments that
exclude civic participation in politics are not legitimate borrowers in their
people's interest, because the people have no say. Using the scorecard would
also harness the inspirational power of human rights to rekindle fading interest
in the bank's work. And, not incidentally, it would probably be the most benign
form of conditionality ever applied by the bank.

So why not do it? The bank's pragmatists point out that, under its charter,
''only economic considerations shall be relevant'' to lending decisions. But
this argument proves nothing. If the leadership and governance of a prospective
debtor are relevant considerations for a commercial bank, then surely they are
important to the World Bank. Even if democratic economies do not always
outperform oppressive ones, they are safer risks. As a report of the United
Nations Development Program noted last year, ''no democracy has ever performed
as badly as the worst dictatorships.''

Cutting loans to dictators would therefore avoid the worst economic outcomes
like default and endless debt rescheduling. Had the bank practiced rights-based
lending in the past, it never would have loaned money to corrupt despots like
Jean-Claude Duvalier of Haiti or Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire -- loans that
citizens there are still paying back. Rights-based lending would also save
taxpayer money while achieving equal or better results for the world's poor.

Mr. Wolfensohn appeared to admit as much last month, when asked about the World
Bank's practice of lending to dictatorships. ''The easiest thing for me, for the
bank,'' he said, ''would be to say, just wait until these countries are
democratic'' before lending to them.

Mr. Wolfensohn is right. The bank should either produce honest reasons for
giving aid to dictators and tyrants while democracies go begging, or it should
do ''the easiest thing'' -- and stop. To carry on, laden with excuses rather
than principles, is not only a waste of money. It is an insult to the human
rights of billions of people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); POOR POPULATION (89%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); TRENDS
(77%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%) Economic Conditions and
Trends; Freedom and Human Rights; Third World and Developing Countries; Credit;
Foreign Aid; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION & DEVELOPMENT (59%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

PERSON: Shirin Ebadi; Amir Attaran

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 8, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Rebuked On Afghans In Detention

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, March 7


A human rights group on Sunday accused American forces in Afghanistan of
detaining at least 1,000 Afghans and other people over the past two years in ''a
climate of almost total impunity'' that it contends violates international human
rights law. A spokesman for the American military in Afghanistan disputed the
findings.

In a 60-page report issued Sunday, the group, Human Rights Watch, also called on
the United States military to release the results of investigations into the
deaths of three Afghans in American custody in 2002 and 2003. Initial military
medical investigators declared two of the deaths homicides.

The report also said it had received ''numerous reports'' of American forces
relying on faulty intelligence or using ''excessive or indiscriminate force''
that resulted in avoidable civilian deaths and the detention of innocent people.
It contended that the United States was employing interrogation techniques, like
shackling prisoners, stripping them naked or depriving them of sleep, that the
State Department had condemned as torture in countries like Libya, North Korea
and Iran.

''There is little doubt that U.S. policies on the detention of terrorism
suspects both in Afghanistan and elsewhere have harmed public opinion of the
United States around the world,'' the report said. ''This course of action is
shortsighted and damaging to the rule of law, not only in Afghanistan but across
the world.''

Lt. Col. Bryan Hilferty, a spokesman for the American-led coalition in
Afghanistan, said American forces were acting properly. He said the procedures
used in the main American detention facility at Bagram Air Base just north of
Kabul had been changed.

''We are in complete compliance with the laws of combat,'' he said.

Much of the report focused on the treatment of detainees in Bagram and other
facilities across the country. The International Committee of the Red Cross is
the only outside group allowed to visit the facilities and to carry messages
between detainees and their families. For the past two years, the American
military has refused to release information about the number of detainees it is
holding, their nationalities or their names.

The report said detainees were in a legal limbo in which they could be held in
indefinite secret detention, not formally charged and barred from contact with
lawyers and journalists. It said the detainees in Afghanistan, no matter what
their rank or role, had been treated as ''unlawful combatants'' who had far
fewer legal rights than prisoners of war.

''They are held at the apparent whim of U.S. authorities, in some cases for more
than a year,'' the report said. ''The general lack of due process with the U.S.
detention system violates both international humanitarian law and basic standard
of human rights law.''

Colonel Hilferty said the report did not take into account the fact that combat
continues in Afghanistan and that using law enforcement methods was
inappropriate. ''We are engaged in combat operations,'' Colonel Hilferty said.
''It's a war.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
DUE PROCESS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); POWS
& MIAS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(76%); TERRORISM (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); LAWYERS (73%); FOREIGN POLICY (72%) United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: David Rohde; Bryan (Lt Col) Hilferty

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Castro's Prisoners

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 397 words


Adolfo Fernandez Sainz, 56, is a translator, journalist and democracy advocate
in Cuba. His current address is a cell in Holguin prison, nearly 500 miles from
his family, which is permitted a two-hour visit every three months. Mr.
Fernandez Sainz shares his cell with 47 common prisoners, one of whom beat him
into unconsciousness in December.

Mr. Fernandez Sainz, who is serving a 15-year sentence, is one of 75
journalists, economists, librarians, human rights workers and doctors arrested
in Cuba last March and later convicted. That crackdown jailed most of the
nation's dissidents, whose supposed crimes include writing for Web sites based
abroad, setting up independent libraries that offer books by the likes of Vaclav
Havel and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and collecting signatures, in
accordance with the Cuban Constitution, to petition for a referendum on
fundamental reforms.

Cuba is not content to deprive these men -- and one woman, the prominent
economist Martha Beatriz Roque -- of their liberty for what will be, in some
cases, the rest of their lives. They are being held in hellish conditions, in
many cases as far from their families as Cuba allows. They are in rat- and
insect-infected cells, get starvation rations and are forced to share space with
violent criminals or to suffer in solitary confinement. Their average sentence
is 19 years. Some of the prisoners' wives have been warned that they will lose
their children if they continue to protest their husbands' detentions.

Sadly, foreign criticism of the Cuban government's repression has been muted.
Last year at the United Nations Human Rights Commission, which meets annually in
March and April, the members voted 31-to-15 against a resolution criticizing the
crackdown. Instead, the commission approved a mild statement calling for a human
rights monitor to visit the island; Cuba has simply not let her in.

The near appeasement of Fidel Castro is in large part due to the outside world's
fury at Washington these days, which the Communist regime masterfully exploits.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva is again considering whether to
condemn the Castro regime. The continued imprisonment of Cuba's brave
independent thinkers is a totalitarian crackdown by a brutal dictatorship.
President Bush's unpopularity aside, the international community must recognize
this truth.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); SENTENCING (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); LIBRARIANS (76%);
ARRESTS (75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); REFERENDUMS (74%); PETITIONS (74%);
VOTERS & VOTING (73%); POLITICS (73%); APPROVALS (63%) Editorials; Political
Prisoners; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International Relations;
Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) United
Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (72%) Fidel (Pres) Castro; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: CUBA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (76%)

REGION: Cuba

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

19 Killed in Uzbekistan; Terrorism Blamed

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Tuesday, March 30


Nineteen people were killed and at least 26 wounded in a series of terrorist
incidents in the Central Asian nation of Uzbekistan, the Uzbek prosecutor
general said Monday.

The prosecutor, Rashid Kadyrov, told reporters in Tashkent, the capital, that
the deaths involved two bombings, two attacks on police officers and an
explosion that killed 10 people at a building where bombs were being assembled.

He blamed Islamic militants, who have been the target of harsh crackdowns in
Uzbekistan, where the United States has an important military base near the
Afghan border.

''These were terrorist acts,'' he said. ''There is reason to believe they were
prepared over a long period and coordinated from a center, possibly abroad. All
the terror acts are interconnected, according to our preliminary
investigation.''

On Tuesday morning, there was at least one more explosion outside Tashkent
followed by an exchange of gunfire involving the police, news agencies reported
from Uzbekistan.

The United States Embassy cautioned Americans in Uzbekistan to be on ''highest
alert'' and said, ''Other terrorists are believed still at large and may be
attempting additional attacks.''

The explosion at the bomb-making site occurred on Sunday night in the city of
Bukhara, Mr. Kadyrov said.

In Tashkent, three police officers were killed in attacks on Sunday night and
early Monday, he said. Three more police officers and a child were killed in
what he called two suicide bombings on Monday near the Chorsu Bazaar in
Tashkent's Old City.

Female suicide bombers carried out the attacks at the bazaar, near a large
children's store and at a nearby bus stop, he said. It is the first time that
suicide bombers have been blamed in an attack in Uzbekistan.

In a televised address, President Islam Karimov said the attacks had been
planned overseas as part of an international terrorist network.

''Once again it should be noted that to carry out such terrorist acts one needs
immense sums of money,'' he said, ''and it is understandable that in the world
there are forces that sponsor terrorism.''

Mr. Kadyrov concurred. ''The character and method of this act is not common to
our people,'' he said. ''It was probably exported from abroad.'' Both men said
some arrests had been made.

The attacks recalled a series of nearly simultaneous bombings in Tashkent in
1999 in which the authorities said 19 people had been killed and more than 100
injured.

Those attacks were blamed on the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, a fugitive
group now based in neighboring Afghanistan and believed by experts to be linked
to Al Qaeda. They followed a series of killings of officials in the Fergana
Valley in Uzbekistan in 1997 that were also blamed on Islamic extremists.

Since then Uzbekistan has carried out a campaign of repression against Muslim
dissidents, which is documented in a report by Human Rights Watch to be released
on Tuesday.

Uzbekistan, a largely Muslim nation in a region where militancy has been
growing, has been a strategic ally of the United States as it pursues terrorist
groups since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

In a report earlier this month, the International Crisis Group, an independent
monitoring organization, said the fight against terrorism should not be used to
justify Uzbekistan's human rights record.

''The regime has been given too much of a free ride because it is seen as a
partner against terrorism and Islamist extremism,'' said David Lewis, who heads
the group's Central Asia Project. ''But engagement with it must become much more
critical in order to stem the serious, potentially long-term damage being done
to the West's credibility in this predominantly Muslim region.''

At a news conference on Monday, Foreign Minister Sadyk Safayev said the attacks
had been carried out by ''by the hands of international terror, including Hizb
ut-Tahrir and Wahhabis.''

Hizb ut-Tahrir, which aims to set up a pan-Islamic state that would include
post-Soviet Central Asia, is outlawed in Uzbekistan, and many of its members
have been arrested. The strict Islamic Wahhabi sect is also outlawed.

In London, a spokesman for Hizb ut-Tahrir, Imran Waheed, denied involvement in
the attacks on Monday and asserted that the violence might have been staged by
the government as a pretext for more arrests.

The killings preceded several international assessments of the country's human
rights record.

In April the Bush administration must decide whether Uzbekistan has made
''substantial and continuing progress'' on human rights to be eligible for $50
million in aid, including military assistance.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Uzbekistan highlighting Tashkent: There were attacks in Tashkent
and an explosion in Bukhara.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%) Terrorism; Bombs and Explosives; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Military Bases and
Installations; Freedom and Human Rights; Islam; Attacks on Police

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Human
Rights Watch; International Crisis Group

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Rashid Kadyrov

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Tashkent (Uzbekistan); Bukhara (Uzbekistan); Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

3rd Day of Violence Claims 23 Lives in Uzbekistan

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 30


As many as 23 people were reported dead on Tuesday in bombings and gun battles
in Uzbekistan during a third day of violence in a strategic ally of the United
States that borders Afghanistan.

Bombs and shootings had already taken the lives of at least 19 people on Sunday
and Monday in the Central Asian nation, where the United States has maintained a
military base since shortly after Sept. 11, 2001.

The Interior Ministry issued a statement that seemed to oversimplify the
violence on Tuesday.

''In the process of being detained, 20 terrorists blew themselves up'' in a
suburb of Tashkent, the capital, the ministry said. ''Along with this, three
policemen died and five sustained wounds of various seriousness.''

There were many other reports from witnesses and local reporters of suicide
bombings aimed at police officers and of a gun battle that lasted nearly five
hours. The Associated Press reported that five bodies lay on the ground after
that battle.

In one attack, two witnesses described a female suicide bomber chasing police
officers who finally shot her and detonated her bomb.

The identity of the attackers was not immediately known, and it is also unclear
whether they included fighters from outside Uzbekistan. Reports of the number of
deaths varied.

The government immediately blamed local Muslim militants with ties to
international terrorism. Human rights groups and independent analysts said they
feared a new crackdown in a nation that already holds an estimated 7,000
political prisoners.

Human rights groups and other analysts say the Muslim organization blamed by the
government, Hizb ut-Tahrir, does not have a record of violence and has been the
target of repression for years.

''What we are afraid of now is, are we going to see an intensified crackdown as
a reaction to today's events,'' said Acacia Shields, the author of a 319-page
report by Human Rights Watch on religious repression that was released Tuesday
in Tashkent.

''Since Sept. 11 the government has tried to characterize its campaign against
these nonviolent, independent Muslims as part of its program of
counterterrorism,'' she said in a telephone interview.

The United States has described torture in Uzbekistan as systematic and is to
review the country's human rights record in April to determine if it is eligible
for $50 million in new aid, including military assistance.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld underscored Uzbekistan's strategic
importance on a visit in February, during which he said relations between the
two nations were ''growing stronger every month.''

The White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said in Washington, ''These attacks
only strengthen our resolve to defeat terrorists wherever they hide and strike,
working in close cooperation with Uzbekistan and our other partners in the
global war on terror.''

One expert on Central Asia with the Carnegie Foundation in Moscow, Aleksei
Malashenko, said the latest attacks on an American ally had been coordinated and
politically focused in a manner similar to that of the recent bombings in Spain.

He said it remained to be seen whether the armed fighters in Uzbekistan had
international connections. But he said: ''Of course there are ties between local
nationalist Islamists and global Islamism, global jihad.

''From that point of view we can make parallels between the events in Madrid,
New York, Turkey, Afghanistan, because its aim is to punish all American allies
who participate in combating international terrorism.''

The other Central Asian nation with an American base is Kyrgyzstan. ''The point
is that it will continue,'' Mr. Malashenko said. ''No one knows how to put an
end to this kind of evolution.''

Domestic repression has created fertile ground for recruitment into militancy,
said Alain Deletroz, an expert on Uzbekistan with the International Crisis
Group, an independent monitoring organization.

''By destroying any normal lay political parties in that country,'' he said,
''the only opposition groups which have structures and know-how to operate
underground are not the 'normal' Western-like parties.''

A number of the attacks in the current violence have made police officers a
target, particularly at checkpoints. Mr. Deletroz said that could be intended to
touch off a government crackdown that would in turn inspire increased
opposition.

During the current violence, witnesses described chaotic scenes involving
combatants who appeared to be ready to die. In one case, Agence France-Presse
quoted a witness named Marina who said she had seen a female suicide bomber
trying to kill police officers.

''I saw a woman chasing after a group of policemen,'' the witness was quoted as
saying. ''Then a bus came between them, a policeman shot her in the leg and she
exploded.''

A security officer was quoted as describing another bombing in which two men had
jumped from a car at a checkpoint and killed themselves and three police
officers.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Uzbek authorities, left, stood by the house, suspected of being
a hideout for Islamic militants, that was stormed by security forces in a
Tashkent suburb after a gun battle of several hours. As many as 23 people died
in a day of violence. Above, a resident nearby cleaned up debris. (Photo by
Associated Press)
 (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); RELIGION (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
SHOOTINGS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
EYEWITNESSES (88%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); FIREARMS
(78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(76%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); FREEDOM OF
RELIGION (70%); WRITERS (68%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (65%) Terrorism; Bombs and
Explosives; Islam; Freedom and Human Rights; Freedom of Religion

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Seth Mydans

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (93%); ASIA (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debate Rises In Argentina On Museum Of Abuses

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


At the military academy here, the commander of the Argentine Army has removed
portraits of two generals who presided over the last dictatorship. At the
notorious Naval Mechanics School, the site of many of that era's worst abuses,
not only have photos of victims been put up, but the entire complex is to be
turned into a Museum of Memory honoring their ordeal.

President Nestor Kirchner has made the defense of human rights a pillar of his
administration. He is doing everything from authorizing reparations to those
born in clandestine detention centers to apologizing to victims in the name of
the state. Human rights groups are finding it hard to keep up.

''We are used to chasing butterflies, so everyone was surprised when Kirchner
accepted our proposal for a Museum of Memory,'' said Horacio Verbitsky,
president of the Center for Legal and Social Studies. A debate has ensued about
the content of the museum, he said, with sharp differences emerging among human
rights groups. He called it ''a dialogue without conclusions.''

The Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, for example, supported Mr. Kirchner's
expropriation from the navy of the torture center, a 42-acre site on one of the
city's main boulevards; some 5,000 people suffered at the hands of the military
there.

But ''we are not in agreement with this museum project,'' said Hebe de Bonafini,
the group's leader.

''Museums mark the end of a story, and we haven't reached that point in
Argentina yet,'' she argued. ''It's much too soon to be setting up a museum,
because the historical events in question are too recent.''

Even the starting point of the history to be told has become the subject of
contention. By choosing the anniversary of the military coup, last March 24, to
activate the museum and apologize in the name of the state for what he called
''the shame of having remained silent during 20 years of democracy,'' Mr.
Kirchner, a Peronist, seemed to be suggesting that the focus will be on the
military dictatorship that dominated the country from 1976 to 1983.

But non-Peronists argue that such a timeline would only distort historical
realities. The policy of state terrorism associated with the so-called dirty war
actually began earlier, many historians argue, under the government of Maria
Estela de Peron, through a paramilitary group responsible for many early
disappearances and killings.

Indeed, at the insistence of some human rights leaders, Peronist governors from
five provinces stayed away from the March ceremonies.

When asked if abuses under the Peronist government would be included in the
museum display, Rodolfo Mattarollo, director general of the government's
Secretariat for Human Rights, replied, ''The human rights groups and the
bipartitite commission will decide that.'' But, he added, the principal focus
''has to be on the last dictatorship because of the distinct characteristics of
state terrorism that it employed.''

Mr. Kirchner's insistent policy has ruffled the feathers of some in the
military. In the days preceding the turnover of the Naval Mechanics School, two
senior generals and an admiral resigned in protest, and another senior officer
was quoted as describing Mr. Kirchner's actions ''not a closure or a healing of
a wound, but the opening of another.''

But the navy's top leadership apparently thinks otherwise. In a speech early
last month, the navy commander, Adm. Jorge Godoy, signaled his acceptance of
with an acknowledgment of responsibility in which he called the Naval Mechanics
School ''a symbol of barbarity and irrationality'' in which ''aberrant acts,
offensive to human dignity, ethics and law'' had occurred.One thing seems clear:
there will be no acknowledgement of what is known here as the ''doctrine of the
two demons,'' favored by the right. Gen. Carlos Alberto Rhode, commander of the
air force, was chastised recently when he said that ''there were errors and
horrors by both camps,'' government and guerrillas.

Some conservatives have expressed reservations about the museum's focus, but
Mabel Gutierrez, a leader of the Group of Relatives of the Disappeared and
Detained, said: "We are going to try to be as impartial as possible in telling
the story, but if those on the other side don't like it, let them make their own
museum. They have the money of the reactionaries of the right.''

Even as the debate rages on, a group called Memoria Abierta is assembling an
archive for eventual placement in the museum. The collection already contains
more than 4,000 photographs and is to contain oral histories of survivors.

''We do not want this museum for ourselves, but for Argentine society,'' said
Patricia Valdez, the director of the group. ''It has to be a place that
transcends the fluctuations of Argentine politics and lets the facts speak for
themselves.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); TORTURE (90%); MILITARY SCHOOLS &
ACADEMIES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY RULE (89%); HISTORY
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); COUPS (78%); MARTIAL LAW (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
TERRORISM (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); GENOCIDE (71%); POLITICS (71%);
ANNIVERSARIES (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (60%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Torture

ORGANIZATION: Center for Legal and Social Studies (Argentina); Mothers of the
Plaza de Mayo (Orgn)

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (79%) Larry Rohter; Nestor (Pres) Kirchner

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%)

REGION: Argentina; Argentina

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 8, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

For More Afghan Women, Immolation Is Escape

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: JALALABAD, Afghanistan


Waiflike, draped in a pale blue veil, Madina, 20, sits on her hospital bed,
bandages covering the terrible, raw burns on her neck and chest. Her hands
tremble. She picks nervously at the soles of her feet and confesses that three
months earlier she set herself on fire with kerosene.

Beside her, on the next bed, her mother-in-law, Bibi Khanum, and her
brother-in-law, Abdul Muhammad, 18, confirm her account but deny her reason,
which Madina would explain only outside on a terrace, away from her husband's
family. ''All the time they beat me,'' she said. ''They broke my arm. But what
should I do? This was my home.''

Accounts like Madina's are repeated across Afghanistan, doctors and human rights
workers say. They are discovering more and more young women who have set
themselves on fire, desperate to escape the cruelties of family life and harsh
tribal traditions that show no sign of changing despite the end of Taliban rule
and the dawn of democracy.

Doctors and nurses in Kabul and Jalalabad say they have seen more cases
recently, partly because the population has been swollen by the return of two
million refugees and because cases are being tracked for the first time by
rights groups, hospitals and the government.

But the trauma and social upheaval of decades of war, poverty and illiteracy in
Afghanistan have also intensified the traditional pressures on young women, they
say.

The recently formed Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission recorded 40 such
cases in just the past six months in Herat, a western city of half a million
people.

Karima Karimi, one of the commission's officers, says she suspects that the
actual figure is higher, and President Hamid Karzai has ordered an
investigation. Officials at the commission said it was reasonable to estimate
that Afghanistan had hundreds of such cases in a year.

''It is not only in Herat; it is in all of Afghanistan,'' said Dr. Soraya Rahim,
deputy minister of women's affairs, on her return from a government
investigative trip to Herat.

''It takes different forms in different provinces,'' she said in a telephone
interview. ''Some take tablets. Some cut their wrists. Some hang themselves.
Some burn themselves.

''But the reason is very important. The first reason is our very bad tradition
of forced marriage. Girls think this is the only way, that there is no other way
in life.''

Educated women in the cities who were repressed by the old Taliban government
have benefited from the changes in Afghanistan, and many are now working and
studying. But in villages and remote tribal areas, the new order has not
improved women's longstanding low status.

Daughters are often exchanged between families, are given in marriage as
compensation for crimes, or are married to men two or three times their age.

When young girls marry, they leave home to live with their husband's extended
family, where the mother-in-law rules the household. Often they are seen as
little more than a new source of labor.

While the authorities have little idea of the full extent of the burnings,
because families hide them out of shame and often claim they are accidents, the
desperate attempts of young women to escape lives dictated by tribal customs and
a deeply conservative Islam are undeniable.

Often they resort to burning, since kerosene and cooking fuels are easily
accessible to women. In heavily populated eastern Afghanistan, the chief of
anesthesiology at Jalalabad's Public Hospital No. 1, Muhammad Naseem, said the
hospital received an average of 20 burn cases a month, at least two or three of
which were self-inflicted.

The rest were household accidents, most caused by pressure cookers, gas or oil
stoves or kerosene lamps, which account for many more cases of burns to women
and children than those that are self-inflicted.

Nurses often learn the difference only in moments of confidence, or they spot
telltale signs of family problems, like the absence of hospital visits by the
husband. For the first time, human rights officials are paying attention, too.

The tribal areas, populated by Pashtuns who live by a code entirely their own,
are particularly harsh in their treatment of women, said Sharifa, an officer
from the human rights commission in Jalalabad. Like many Afghans, she uses only
one name.

She said that when she visited the women's wards of Hospital No. 1 one day last
month, she found five women who had tried self-immolation. One morning at the
hospital, one of the five died after suffering for 11 days.

Madina's account is typical of the hardships young women encounter. She was
married at 15 in an exchange of daughters between two families, a common
practice in Afghanistan. She married Din Muhammad, and his sister was married to
her uncle.

Madina said she had borne two children -- Najiba, 4, and Taj Muhammad, 2. When
her husband was jailed for drug offenses three years ago, she moved back from
Pakistan to live with her in-laws in the village of Charbagh, in eastern
Afghanistan.

In the interview on the hospital terrace, Madina explained that her troubles
began a year ago, when the girl who had married her uncle died during pregnancy.
Madina's mother-in-law turned her grief on Madina. ''She would say, 'My daughter
is in the grave, and you are still alive,' '' Madina recounted.

In the hospital room, her mother-in-law, Bibi Khanum, a small woman with blue
eyes and tiny hands, denied driving Madina to try to kill herself.

''God knows if it was cruelty,'' she said. ''The reason she was impatient was
because her husband was in jail.''

''It's not true,'' Madina whispered.

Madina's husband, freed from prison and remorseful, has promised to take her to
live away from the rest of the family. They are poor, and she is painfully thin
and ill, but recovering. Away from her mother-in-law, she does not tremble.

Qadri Gul, 20, one of Dr. Naseem's patients, was less fortunate, dying after 11
days. Married for five years, she was the mother of two children. Her husband
took a second wife shortly after they had wed, and she told the hospital staff
and her family that her husband and her in-laws had beaten her daily, and had
even encouraged her when she had threatened to burn herself.

She visited her parents and her numerous sisters in Jalalabad for the Muslim
festival of Id al-Fitr in November. ''Her body was completely bruised,'' her
sister Basmina recalled. ''She had marks on her buttocks and said, 'I don't know
if I will get better.' ''

They did not tell their mother, who nevertheless sensed that all was not well.
''She was upset,'' the mother, Bibi Jan, recalled. ''She did not put henna on
her hands. She looked unhappy.''

She went home after the holiday with a toy car for her son, but when the
children started fighting over it, she took it away. That sparked a fight with
her husband. He slammed a glass into her head, knocking her out. When she
regained consciousness, she threatened to kill herself by setting herself on
fire.

''He laughed and said: 'There are the matches and the kerosene. Burn yourself,'
'' Basmina recounted.

As she lay dying in the hospital, Qadri Gul told her mother and sisters what had
happened. Sharifa from the human rights office also interviewed her.

Her mother said: ''She blamed her husband, her brother-in-law and her
mother-in-law. I will leave them to God, but I will just ask them the question
'What did you do to my daughter?' '' She was sitting in her courtyard,
surrounded by relatives and mourners on the third day after her daughter's
death.

''She was a very good girl,'' her mother said. ''From neck to legs she was
burnt.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Madina, 20, is recovering in a Jalabad hospital after setting
herself on fire with kerosene. She says constant abuse by her in-laws drove her
to it. (Photo by Carlotta Gall for The New York Times)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); BURN INJURIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TRENDS (90%);
MARRIAGE (89%); WOMEN (89%); FAMILY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); BONE FRACTURES
(78%); HOSPITALS (78%); NURSES & NURSING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (73%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (70%); REFUGEES
(69%); INTERVIEWS (68%); LITERACY & ILLITERACY (64%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(64%); TERRORISM (59%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%) Women; Freedom and Human Rights;
Suicides and Suicide Attempts; Immolation; Social Conditions and Trends;
Economic Conditions and Trends; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Taliban

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (53%) Carlotta Gall

CITY: HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (93%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (91%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Explosion Reported in Uzbekistan, and Police Round Up Suspects

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 31


Violence continued in Uzbekistan on Wednesday with reports of at least one
explosion as the police carried out a campaign of dozens of arrests.

It was the fourth day of explosions, shootings and suicide bombings in
Uzbekistan, in Central Asia, on the border of Afghanistan. More than 40 people
were reported killed as of Tuesday night.

One explosion was heard Wednesday evening in the capital, Tashkent, but there
were no confirmed reports of casualties. [Early Thursday, Reuters quoted police
sources as saying the explosion was caused by a suicide bomber who blew himself
up.]

The Russian news agency Itar-Tass said another explosion occurred overnight in a
residential building in Adijan, in the Fergana Valley, but the report could not
be confirmed.

Reporters were not allowed near the scenes of conflict and accounts have been
sketchy or contradictory.

It was unclear who was behind the violence. On Monday, President Islam Karimov
blamed militant Muslims with international connections, but the group he named
did not have a record of militancy.

On Wednesday, officials announced that 30 people had been detained in connection
with the violence, but unconfirmed reports of arrests continued.

Alison Gill, a representative of Human Rights Watch, said by telephone from
Tashkent, ''Arrests are starting and we are very worried about another
broad-spectrum crackdown.''

In a report released Tuesday, Human Rights Watch said Uzbekistan, with a
population of about 26 million, holds 7,000 political prisoners, more than in
the entire Soviet Union in its last decades.

''The scale and brutality of the operations against independent Muslims make it
clear that these are part of a concerted and tightly orchestrated campaign of
religious persecution,'' said the group's regional director, Rachel Denber.

Ms. Gill said she knew the names of seven people who had been arrested and that
most, though not all, were devout Muslims. She added that there was particular
concern now that women were being rounded up. Several suicide bombers in recent
days have been women. She said family members were being turned away when they
sought news of people who had been detained.

''This is the time when all these people are at the highest risk of being
tortured,'' she said. ''This time, when people are held incommunicado, is when
the police can most easily apply pressure on them through torture, through
intimidation, to sign confessions, get them to name other suspects, sign
incriminating statements.''

The report said the methods of torture included beatings, electric shock,
asphyxiation, hanging by the wrists or ankles, submersion in boiling water, rape
and burning with cigarettes or lighted newspaper.

Two women were among the detainees listed by Ms. Gill: Diloram Mukhamedova, a
devout Muslim who, her family said, had not had problems with the authorities;
and Darmon Sultanova, whose son was killed several years ago in police custody
and whose husband is permanently disabled from police beatings.

In April, the United States is expected to decide whether Uzbekistan has made
the ''substantial and continuing progress'' on human rights that is required for
the release of $50 million in a new aid package.

Strategically positioned and the site of an American military base, Uzbekistan
has been an ally of the United States effort to combat terrorism. On a visit in
February, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the relationship between the
United States and Uzbekistan was ''growing stronger every month.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); NEWS
REPORTING (76%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%);
FAMILY (66%) Bombs and Explosives; Islam; Freedom of Religion; Freedom and Human
Rights; Political Prisoners; Torture; United States International Relations;
Foreign Aid; Confessions  ; News and News Media; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Islam (Pres) Karimov

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (88%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (57%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (90%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Officials Deny Reports Of Soldiers Beheading Prisoners

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: KABUL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 361 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 23


Senior Afghan officials on Wednesday denied a report that soldiers from the
country's new American-trained national army had beheaded four Taliban
prisoners.

The local militia commander who made the original claim, Namatullah Tokhi, then
retracted his statement.

In interviews on Tuesday and Wednesday, Mr. Tokhi, whose unit operates in the
southern province of Zabul, told reporters from Reuters and The Associated Press
that soldiers had beheaded four Taliban prisoners. He said the soldiers were
taking revenge for the beheading of an Afghan soldier and translator by Taliban
fighters in the Arghandab district, the scene of recent heavy fighting.

On Wednesday, the A.P. and Reuters reported that Mr. Tokhi had retracted his
account. No one answered repeated calls to Mr. Tokhi's satellite telephone on
Wednesday night.

The reversal came after Human Rights Watch, an American human rights group, said
the beheadings would be a war crime.

If true, the commission of war crimes by soldiers from the new American-trained
army would be a major setback for the United States, which has declared the
fledgling 10,000 soldier force professional and capable of eventually defending
Afghanistan on its own.

In an interview via satellite phone on Wednesday, Khial Muhammad Hussaini, the
governor of Zabul Province, said no beheadings had taken place, either of
Taliban or Afghan soldiers. He said that a clash in the Arghandab district
between government and Taliban forces had left one Taliban fighter dead but that
no prisoners had been taken by either side.

''I completely reject this report,'' he said.

Lt. Col. Tucker Mansager, a spokesman for American forces in Afghanistan, said
he had received no reports of any beheadings.

Gen. Zahir Azimi, a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense, said that
soldiers from the new national army were instructed on the laws of war and the
Geneva Conventions and that they would not do such things to a prisoner.

He also said that Mr. Tokhi never reported any beheadings to his superiors at
the Defense Ministry. ''I don't know why and how he told the media,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); TALIBAN (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); MILITARY TRAINING (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (73%); TERRORISM (72%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); GENOCIDE (68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (68%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (50%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Capital Punishment; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (57%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Taliban (Afghan
Group); Human Rights Watch

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (57%)

PERSON: David Rohde; Namatullah Tokhi

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia's Secret War

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 578 words


The guerrilla war in the Indonesian province of Aceh has raged on and off for
more than 25 years, but it has now gone underground. In May, the government
broke off peace talks, declared martial law and sent in 40,000 troops. Since
then, Aceh has been virtually sealed off. Foreign journalists, human rights
groups and diplomats cannot enter. For months, the government even barred groups
like Unicef and the World Food Program, which provide relief to besieged
civilians. Indonesian journalists can travel in Aceh, but intimidation from the
military and political pressures have kept them from reporting more than
official pronouncements. Local human rights groups, harassed by soldiers, have
gone into hiding.

Indonesian officials claim that they bar foreigners for their own security.
Indeed, in the past, some have been kidnapped by the guerrillas, the Free Aceh
Movement. But the dangers of Aceh come overwhelmingly from the army and the
paramilitary police. Even when plenty of watchdogs were present, Aceh was a
killing field, with a murder or kidnapping reported every day, and probably an
equal number going unreported. Eighty to 90 percent of those crimes were
committed by government forces. Lesser crimes were also rampant, as soldiers
supplemented their low pay through looting and extortion.

Today government troops in Aceh enjoy even greater powers and virtually no
scrutiny. In some cases, they have records of brutality in the 1999 war in East
Timor. One major general was sentenced to prison for war crimes but,
mysteriously, still serves in Aceh. Before the news blackout, humanitarian
agencies reported that hundreds of schools had been burned down. No one knows by
whom, and there has been no investigation. In October and November, Human Rights
Watch interviewed 85 recent refugees from Aceh who landed in Malaysia. The
refugees are not a representative sample of Aceh's population, but each of them
claimed to have been a victim of or a witness to abuses by troops.

Some Indonesian officials deny the abuses. But one former defense minister, now
an ambassador, argued instead that troops could simply not be controlled in such
a war. The government in Jakarta clearly thinks that it has little reason to
try. The war is enormously popular with ordinary Indonesians, who consider the
loss of East Timor a national humiliation. Aceh has oil and gas, which the
Indonesian government needs.

In Washington, the State Department has publicly criticized Indonesia's conduct
in Aceh and said that the war cannot be won militarily and must end through
negotiations. But the Bush administration does not want to offend a partner
against terrorism, so it has been reluctant to apply pressures that would really
matter: protesting the use of American weapons, like F-16's, in Aceh, and making
respect for human rights a condition for the aid it gives, like weapons for the
police and training for the military.

The abusive conduct damages Indonesia's cause. Acehnese separatism began as a
struggle for political and economic autonomy. But now the war is about the war
-- the Acehnese join or support the guerrillas because of the army's brutality.
Measures to control the behavior of troops, protect civilians and allow
observers to enter Aceh have no powerful constituency in Jakarta or elsewhere.
But they are crucial to persuading the Acehnese to abandon separatism and the
guerrilla war, and to negotiate an agreement that will keep them part of
Indonesia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MARTIAL LAW (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMIES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); REFUGEES (78%);
PEACE PROCESS (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); EXTORTION
(75%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); PRISONS (74%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); TERRORISM (73%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (71%); SENTENCING
(71%); FOOD CHARITIES (71%); JAIL SENTENCING (66%); MURDER (54%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (57%); UNITED NATIONS
CHILDREN'S FUND (57%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); TIMOR-LESTE (92%); MALAYSIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Long After Guerrilla War, Survivors Demand Justice From Brazil's Government

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1507 words

DATELINE: XAMBIOA, Brazil


At the cemetery here, a half dozen bodies once secretly buried have been
unearthed. More skeletons have been recovered from an Indian reservation just to
the north. Somewhere out in the jungle lie the remains of 50 or so others, whose
relatives are now belatedly demanding justice.

The dead were victims of a guerrilla war against Communist insurgents fought
largely in secret in this remote southeast corner of the Amazon from 1970 to
1974, the harshest years of Brazil's military rule.

When Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva took office more than a year ago as the country's
first president from the left-wing Workers' Party, many presumed that he would
be sympathetic to helping relatives of the dead locate the bodies of loved ones
and bring those responsible for their torture and killing to justice.

In neighboring Argentina and Chile, aggressive efforts are under way to address
much more widespread abuses under similar dictatorships. But Mr. da Silva's
government, like other Brazilian governments for 30 years, has so far resisted a
full accounting of the episode, one of the darkest and most divisive in this
nation's past, for fear of opening old wounds.

''This is not going to be done in a manner that creates a big national political
crisis,'' Nilmario Miranda, the government's human rights secretary, said in
response to growing accusations of betrayal and moral cowardice. ''It has to be
negotiated.''

All told, the Brazilian Armed Forces deployed more than 10,000 soldiers in this
rugged region where the Araguaia and Tocantins rivers converge. What became
known as the Araguaia guerrilla war ended only after more than 60 combatants
from the Communist Party of Brazil, hoping to carve out a Maoist ''liberated
zone'' in the Amazon, were hunted down and executed. Some were beheaded, and
many were killed after surrendering to troops and being tortured.

As many as a score of local peasants, caught in the cross-fire and under
pressure from both sides to collaborate, are also believed to have been killed,
according to residents and human rights groups. Hundreds more were displaced.

To this day, those villagers remain uncompensated and barred from returning to
their small farms, which the military summarily expropriated or bombed with
napalm three decades ago.

That the military carried out a deliberate policy of exterminating the rebels,
thereby sweeping up many local peasants as well, is supported in a new
best-selling book, ''The Dictatorship Defeated,'' which has renewed interest in
the conflict.

The author, Elio Gaspari, gained access to official audiotapes recorded by Gen.
Ernesto Geisel, Brazil's president from 1974 to 1979, in which top military
leaders spoke uninhibitedly about their decision not to capture the guerrillas
and put them on trial, but to eliminate them.

''This business of killing people is a barbarity, but I think it has to be
done,'' General Geisel said during one discussion early in 1974 with his
soon-to-be minister of the army. ''We can't let go of this war.''

Before leaving office, the general arranged an amnesty that applied to the
leftist guerrillas and exiles and also the military and police officers who had
tortured or killed them.

But in July, a federal judge ordered the military to supply relatives with
information on how the guerrillas and peasants had died and where they were
buried. The Workers' Party government immediately sought to block enforcement of
the decree, surprising human rights advocates.

The decision was interpreted here as an effort to cement relations with a
military establishment that traditionally viewed the Workers' Party as radicals,
and it generated deep anguish within the party itself. Some crucial party
leaders saw it as a betrayal of principles. A few have gone public with their
discontent.

''This is an open wound between us,'' Eduardo Greenhalgh, a member of Congress
who was Mr. da Silva's lawyer when the president was a labor leader, said in a
speech to the national bar association late last year. ''I felt a deep pain when
the president, who is my friend, comrade and former client, decided, for reasons
of state that I fail to comprehend, to appeal a ruling I had spent 21 years of
my life trying to win.''

To hold off its critics, the government has set up a commission to investigate
how the guerrillas died and where their bodies were buried. But that board
excludes family members and other nongovernment representatives and has no
mandate to punish those responsible for the killings. It has already missed two
deadlines to supply information to relatives.

''The creation of this commission serves to protect those who apprehended,
killed and disappeared opponents of the dictatorship,'' Elizabeth Silveira,
president of the human rights group Torture Never Again, said in testimony to a
congressional committee in the capital, Brasilia, last year.

''The government,'' she added, ''is strengthening impunity in our country and is
swimming against the tide of history.''

One of the leading figures in the negotiations, largely conducted behind closed
doors, between the Workers' Party and the armed forces is Jose Genoino, the
party president, himself a survivor of the war.

''We defend the right of the families to a concrete explanation of where these
bodies are and if it is not possible to locate them, what happened to them,'' he
said in an interview. ''But what the Workers' Party government will not do is
create a political tribunal to judge the behavior of the armed forces during the
military dictatorship.''

But to human rights advocates and some Workers' Party members, such a response
raises another important issue, that of just compensation to residents of the
region who also got caught up in the military's scorched-earth policy.

''As unjust as what happened to the guerrillas was, they made a conscious
decision to fight and knew what they were doing and what could happen to them,''
said Miriam Alves, a Workers' Party staff member of the human rights commission
of the lower house of the Brazilian Congress.

''But the local population had no choice in the matter, and it was massacred,''
she added. ''The state must redress this situation.''

The family of Eduardo Rodrigues dos Santos is among those that suffered the
most. It was the family's misfortune to be the neighbor of a group of settlers,
later identified as guerrillas, who had arrived from the south, befriended the
peasants and offered them medicine and other scarce services.

During one military campaign, Mr. Rodrigues dos Santos recalled, the family was
moved to an island in the middle of the Araguaia River. There they watched as
Brazilian Air Force planes bombed and strafed their settlement, destroying their
home and those of other families.

One day in 1972, two of his sons, Lauro and Sabino, found a strange object on
the ground, which they could not know was a grenade. It exploded, blowing off
Sabino's head, destroying most of Lauro's left arm and tearing through his
torso.

''It was Aug. 16, and we were on our lunch break,'' recalled Lauro, now 52, the
owner of a general store. ''I spent four months in the hospital, and the army
officers who came to visit me told me it was their grenade and that I'd be taken
care of for the rest of my life, with scholarships and disability payments. But
I've never received anything.''

Mr. Rodrigues dos Santos, now 78, was himself pressed into service as a guide
for the army along with his friend Otacilio Alves de Miranda, a local boatman.

''We felt we couldn't say no,'' Mr. Rodrigues dos Santos explained. Both men say
there were tortured in an attempt to pry information from them about the
guerrillas.

''I took a real beating when they flew me down there to Brasilia for
questioning,'' Mr. Miranda said in an interview at his home in Maraba, near
here. ''Hour after hour, they would shock my head with electricity and beat me
with bludgeons, screaming and yelling at me all the while.''

Such brutality was routine, other former guides maintain. Even today, Antonio
Alves de Souza said in an interview in Xambioa, a garrison town where the
Brazilian Armed Forces had a base, he and his friends bear scars and still
suffer nightmares.

''After torturing me with electricity and plunging my head into a water tank
until I could no longer breathe, they threw me into a pit of garbage that was
filled with snakes and scorpions and held me there for more than a week,'' he
recalled. ''When they finally pulled me out for questioning, they removed the
head of a man from a burlap bag and asked if I knew him.''

After being released, Mr. Miranda, then 33, suffered a stroke. He was
hospitalized, and doctors removed a brain tumor that he and his wife,
Felicidade, believe resulted from his torture. But when they went to the
military seeking compensation, they were turned away.

''For those who died, it is all over, their tribulations have ended,'' Mrs.
Miranda said. ''But those who survived are still suffering today from the
traumatic consequences of the horrors they were forced to endure.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eduardo Rodrigues dos Santos, top, was tortured in the
guerrilla war. Jose Genoino, shown when he was a prisoner during the war, is
president of the Workers' Party. (Photo by Agencio O Globo)
 Investigators say three bodies, believed to be victims of the Araguaia
guerrilla war, were found in 1996 under this site in Xambioa, Brazil.
(Photographs by Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times)Map of Brazil
highlighting Xambioa: Victims of a guerrilla war have been unearthed in Xambioa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); TORTURE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (76%); MILITARY RULE (75%); POLITICS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); WRITERS (63%); BESTSELLERS (60%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

PERSON: LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA (70%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%); ARGENTINA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

'The Bones Tell the Story': Revealing History's Darker Days

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA DREIFUS

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; Pg. 2; A CONVERSATION WITH: FREDY
PECCERELLI

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


Fredy A. Peccerelli spends his days exhuming mass graves and examining the bones
of murder victims, hoping that the dead will speak to him.

A forensic anthropologist, Mr. Peccerelli, 33, combines elements of pathology,
archaeology and anthropology to solve crimes.

Human rights organizations employ forensic anthropologists to document war
crimes and human rights abuses. Mr. Peccerelli, director of the Guatemalan
Forensic Anthropology Foundation, has investigated the deaths of thousands of
civilians killed in the civil war in Guatemala from 1960 to 1996.

''What we do is all about life,'' he said here last month on a break at the
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
''It's about people. This is about applying scientific knowledge for everyday
human issues.''

The association awarded its science and human rights prize for 2004 to Mr.
Peccerelli and his colleagues at the foundation for promoting ''human rights at
great personal risk.''

Q. What is the job definition of forensic anthropologist?

A. We use the tools of science to answer important historical questions. For
instance, what was the fate of thousands of people who disappeared in the 1970's
''dirty war'' in Argentina? Or what happened to approximately 7,000 or 8,000
Muslim men in Srebrenica in 1995, after United Nations troops left that Bosnian
village? Or who were some of the estimated 200,000 Guatemalans killed during 36
years of internal armed conflict?

To answer these sorts of questions, forensic anthropologists locate graves and
exhume remains. We then apply the techniques of physical anthropology,
archaeology and osteology, a branch of anatomy that deals with bones, to
identify the missing and establish how they died. A forensic anthropologist
tries to identify an individual victim by establishing a profile from the
skeleton. It has clues to age, ancestry, sex, stature, how this person lived and
how that lifestyle is reflected on the skeleton. We always say, ''The bones tell
the story.''

Q. How do you get the bones to speak, to tell the story of a victim?

A. We learn all we can about the victims and the incident where they died. From
the reports of eyewitnesses and family members, we get information that helps us
locate the graves. We then take everything out of the ground and document what
we've found. We next send the bones to an anthropologist in Guatemala City, who
analyzes the remains.

You look for obvious things in the bones, bullet holes, crushed skulls, breaks,
gashes. We are looking for evidence of trauma that will lead us to make an
interpretation on whether or not this was a wrongful death. After we've
identified the person and determined the cause of death, our findings are handed
over to the authorities, because we want to create the possibility of justice.

With Guatemala, I say ''possibility,'' because the organization has conducted
over 400 investigations, found the remains of about 3,000 people. We've seen
three cases go to trial.

Q. You grew up in Brooklyn, though you are Guatemalan. Why did your family
immigrate?

A. We moved in 1980, one of the heaviest years in the civil war in Guatemala, at
a time when the death squads were most active. My father was a lawyer who headed
the Guatemalan weight-lifting team at the Moscow Olympics. When he returned home
from it, someone denounced my father, ''He's a Red!''

They wanted my father's job. In those days, just pointing the finger was enough
to get a person killed. Then, my father started getting letters from the death
squads. He went into hiding in Guatemala City and then later he fled to New York
City. Soon, my mother got a letter saying they knew my father was gone, but if
he ever set foot in Guatemala again they would kill him that day. With that, my
grandparents took us all to New York. I was 9.

Q. Was Brooklyn a different world for you?

A. Oh, yes. As a kid, my worries were are the Yankees going to make the
playoffs, and not how many people are dying in Guatemala. I spent my teen years
wanting to be normal and to fit in. Some of that changed when I got to Brooklyn
College in 1991 and began feeling the need to reconnect to my heritage. I
studied anthropology and archaeology, because these were disciplines that I
hoped might take me back to Guatemala.

In 1994, Brooklyn College sent me to the annual meeting of the American
Anthropological Association, where Dr. Clyde Snow and Dr. Karen Burns, two
leaders of this emerging discipline, forensic anthropology, spoke about their
work. They talked about exhuming mass graves in Guatemala and about how forensic
anthropology was an important tool in winning justice for the dead. Afterward, I
went up to Dr. Burns and offered my help.

Q. In your work, are you able to use the new DNA technologies to make
identifications?

A. Not all that much. DNA testing can be a great thing. But it's very expensive,
and right now there are no labs in Guatemala that can do it.

Q. Do you find it difficult to be around cadavers?

A. In Guatemala, most of the massacres took place in the 1980's, and a lot of
time has gone by. So most of what you work with is bones, and the bones are dry.

Now, that's very different from working in Bosnia, in Srebrenica, where we went
for the International War Crimes Tribunal to identify the remains of that
massacre there. The ground had frozen, and when we opened the graves, the bodies
were still fresh and the smell was terrible.

At a certain moment, I had to decide whether I was cut out for this.

Q. Considering your family history, do you ever do exhumations and think that
could have been my father down there?

A. Sure. And that's part of what motivates me. The other part is that once
you've heard a relative tell of their search for a missing loved one, then you
want to do everything possible to help them.

By identifying the remains, it helps satisfy the natural needs of the family for
closure. After our investigations, the remains are returned to the families, and
they can have their ceremonies.

Q. Have you been threatened for your work?

A. Two years ago, a forensic anthropologist in Guatemala received a letter with
a list of 11 people they said they were going to kill. My name was No. 2. We
started getting phone calls at the office, ''Tell Fredy, we're going to kill
him.'' The threats were very specific, saying that none of the exhumations were
going to lead to prosecutions and that the foundation's work was to stop.

The American Embassy and the United Nations let the government know they
supported us. The work, of course, continued. Right now, I'm on sabbatical to
pursue my own studies in England, but my colleagues certainly have not stopped.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fredy A. Peccerelli was honored last month for scientific and
human rights investigations in Guatemala. (Photo by Toby Wales for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Interview

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (94%); FORENSICS (92%); WAR & CONFLICT
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); ARCHAEOLOGY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (78%); EYEWITNESSES (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); SCIENCE
POLICY (74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); WRONGFUL DEATH & SURVIVAL (73%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (71%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE (57%); UNITED
NATIONS (54%)

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (77%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syria Frees 130 Prisoners, But Why?

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, Feb. 10


The news came, Faris Mourad said, as ''a total surprise.'' For 30 years, he
endured life as a political prisoner here, suffering torture, harsh conditions,
an untreated disease that curved his spine, permanently and painfully. Then on
Jan. 31, along with almost 130 other political prisoners in Syria's police
state, he was suddenly freed.

Syria has still not explained to the nation this act of unexpected clemency
toward a handful of perhaps 3,000 such prisoners -- or even acknowledged
publicly that it happened. But some human rights officials say it is a sign, if
a small and ambiguous one, of the larger pressures Syria is under these days,
with more than 100,000 American soldiers next door in Iraq and increasing
impatience for change at home.

It was the first release of a large number of prisoners since 2001, in the early
days of promises by a new, young president, Bashar al-Assad, for greater
democracy.

''Time is running out,'' said Haitham al-Maleh, a lawyer and human rights
activist who has defended many political prisoners. ''Everything is changing all
over the world. The United States is trying to make pressure. The European Union
is trying to make pressure.''

And so are Syrian people, if gingerly for fear of a backlash from a state ruled
with iron for 30 years by Hafez al-Assad and, since his death in 2000, with
something slightly softer by his son, Bashar, 38. Mr. Maleh, for example, has
drafted a letter signed by 700 intellectuals, demanding the repeal of the state
of emergency in place since 1963.

But there is a paradox here that says much about the state of mind around the
Middle East: the United States is exerting the most pressure on Syria -- which
it accuses of sponsoring terror groups -- and talks loudest about democracy in
the region. Yet human rights activists, intellectuals and released prisoners
like Mr. Mourad say they distrust America deeply, seeing it working more for its
own larger strategic interests than pushing for improvements in civil rights for
ordinary Syrians.

''Where is American democracy?'' asked Mr. Mourad, 54, arrested for activity in
the Arab Communist Organization and one of the two longest-serving political
prisoners. ''Where are American human rights?''

American pressure has focused, in fact, almost wholly on terrorism and the war
in Iraq, and on those fronts the pressure has been unrelenting.

American and Israeli officials accused Syria last week of resuming shipments of
arms to the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah, and Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell suggested that Syria should take ''a hard look'' at its policies now that
it is largely encircled by allies of the United States: Israel, Jordan, Turkey
and, since last year, Iraq.

The accusation comes as American officials prepare a report on Syria that could
lead to economic sanctions as part of the Syria Accountability Act passed by
Congress last year. The act demands that Syria cut ties with Hezbollah and
Palestinian militant groups fighting Israel, withdraw its nearly 20,000 troops
from Lebanon, and close off its border with Iraq to anti-American insurgents.

The act does not address the issue of political prisoners. But the European
Union has made their freedom part of its negotiations over a new trade agreement
with Syria. Mr. Assad faces still others pressures: a soft economy; a surging
Islamic community; and many questions about whether Mr. Assad himself is the
real power in Syria or, as one intellectual speculated, only ''a point of
intersection between factions of power.''

The workings of the Syrian state -- murky, secretive, with overlapping security
services and no real opposition -- is a mystery to most observers, foreign and
domestic, so it is hard to say with any precision how exactly Syria is reacting
to these many pressures.

But Walid Moallem, the deputy prime minister and for years Syria's chief
negotiator with Israel, cautioned against reading too much into the prisoner
release: it was not a sign, he said, of pressure on Syria, though that pressure
has been substantial, he conceded. All nations in the region, he argued, are
feeling pressure, given that the conflicts in Iraq and Israel are far from
settled.

Rather, he said, the release showed that the government felt secure enough to
free people it had considered a danger to the state.

''It reflects the regime's self-confidence,'' Mr. Moallem said.

Many experts on Syria say they believe the prisoner release was partly a gesture
to the European Union, in anticipation of the coming signing of the trade pact,
and partly to show some movement on reforms to Syrians themselves. And since
most of the released prisoners were Islamists, some speculate that the release
was a way to create good will with the growing number of observant Muslims in
Syria.

In all, human rights activists, diplomats and other experts say the prisoner
release seems consistent with what they see as other recent steps to ease
pressure on several fronts: give a little but make no major changes that could
loosen the government's hold on power.

In recent months Syria has made much of a new willingness to reopen talks with
Israel, as a way to show the United States and other nations that it is
interested in peace, and last week its foreign minister, Farouk al-Sharaa,
repeated that readiness. Reiterating Syria's often-stated view -- an excuse,
critics say -- Mr. Moallem said internal reforms were difficult to carry out in
the absence of peace with Israel.

Yet experts say they have detected little willingness on Syria's part to move on
issues that could clear the way for talks, like cutting support for Hezbollah.
(It is also true, experts say, that Israel does not appear ready to sit down
with Syria, either.)

Damascus closed the offices of Hamas and Islamic Jihad, as the United States
demanded, but allowed their leaders to remain in Syria. American officials say
that it has beefed up security along the Iraq border but that some foreign
militants are still crossing into Iraq. Syrian officials say they have done
their best but cannot completely control the 370-mile border, much of it desert.

Mr. Assad took office encouraging more public discussion and criticism, yet many
who attended public forums have been arrested -- including 10 taken during a
brief blooming in 2000 and 2001 now known as the ''Damascus Spring.''

Then, out of the blue, came this latest prisoner release.

There have been limited releases of prisoners since 1998, while his father was
still alive and when Mr. Assad took office in 2000 and quickly freed about 700,
then 113 the next year. Others have trickled out of jail since, but nothing like
the 130 freed at the end of January.

Khalil Khayrat, who had spent 30 of his 58 years in prison, seemed as confused
as everyone about precisely how this prison release fit into the larger
pressures facing Syria.

''They have their own motives,'' said Mr. Khayrat, who was accused of belonging
to a rebel Baath wing.

Out nearly a week, he said he still had not left the house, being too busy
greeting visiting well-wishers. Still, he said, he felt a different mood in
Syria. ''In the past, I could never speak to you,'' he told a reporter.

But he did not think real change would come soon. ''It will be gradual,'' he
said. He amended the thought, with slightly more hope, ''Let's make it in
between -- not quick, but not slow either.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Faris Mourad, above, spent 30 years in jail as a political
prisoner in Syria before he was unexpectedly freed two weeks ago. Khalil Khayrat
had seen his 8-year-old granddaughter, Zenaib, only on prison visiting days.
(Photographs by Ian Fisher/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRADE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (85%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%);
IRAQ WAR (74%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(72%); TERRORISM (67%); ARMS TRADE (66%); HEZBOLLAH (63%) Freedom and Human
Rights; Political Prisoners; United States International Relations;
International Trade and World Market

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (82%) European Union

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (78%) Ian Fisher

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SYRIA (94%); IRAQ (93%); EUROPE (93%); ISRAEL
(92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); JORDAN (79%); TURKEY (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Syria; Europe

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Freedom Center Is Still a Somewhat Vague Notion

BYLINE: By ROBIN POGREBIN

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1302 words


The people behind the Freedom Center, one of the cultural institutions chosen
this month to occupy ground zero, have spent much of their time so far insisting
on what the nascent museum is not.

It is not an arm of the Bush administration, despite the longtime friendship of
its creator, the developer Tom A. Bernstein, with President Bush. It will not be
a palace of pro-American propaganda, Mr. Bernstein says, or a place for
sentimentally commemorating victims of the Sept. 11 terrorists.

What is less clear is what the institution will be.

''We're a work-in-progress,'' Mr. Bernstein said in a recent interview at his
office at Chelsea Piers, the sports and entertainment center he built with his
partner and fellow presidential friend, Roland W. Betts. (Both men were partners
with Mr. Bush in the Texas Rangers baseball team.) ''We have a very strong
concept, we have a very strong team and we have a lot of work to do.''

The center's organizing principle will be ''looking at different parts of the
world transitioning from tyranny to freedom,'' Mr. Bernstein said, citing South
Africa and the former Soviet Union.

It will also focus on people who have played important roles in that process.
One potential exhibit, for example, might be ''Freedom Beyond Bars,'' in which
visitors would walk through prison cells representing those that housed Susan B.
Anthony, Mother Jones, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Nelson Mandela,
Vaclav Havel and Natan Sharansky.

The Freedom Center is ''the one institution that was born of the events of Sept.
11 and links them into a broader theme,'' said Kevin Rampe, president of the
Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, which selected it and three other
institutions for the World Trade Center site.

Paula Grant Berry, who lost her husband, David, in the towers and is on the
development corporation's Families Advisory Council, said the center suited the
site and dovetailed with the memorial, which she helped select. ''I see the
memorial as the heart and the Freedom Center as the mind,'' she said.

The corporation has given the groups six months, starting July 8, to come up
with programming, a business plan and a schematic design for their buildings.

During that period, Mr. Bernstein said, he will ''put together teams of
historians, curators and storytellers to develop narratives'' for the center,
which is expected to open in 2009. It is modeled, he said, on the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington and the National Constitution Center in
Philadelphia, which feature videos, archival photographs and artifacts. It will
also draw on the success of experiential exhibits like those at the Lower East
Side Tenement Museum, where visitors walk through the rooms of a former tenement
building.

In the last two and a half years Mr. Bernstein has recruited some 40 scholars
and others for the center's planning and advisory committees. These include Bob
Kerrey, president of New School University in Manhattan and the former governor
and senator from Nebraska; Henry Louis Gates Jr., the chairman of the African
and African-American studies department at Harvard; Walter Isaacson, chief
executive of the Aspen Institute and author of a recent biography of Benjamin
Franklin; and Theodore C. Sorensen, who worked in the Kennedy administration.

''The danger is that it gets captured by partisan politics,'' said Thomas S.
Johnson, who lost his son in the terrorist attack and is on the development
corporation board. ''If it is to be a quality institution, it can't be
jingoistic and just patriotic.''

Mr. Bernstein points to the range of people on the board as evidence that the
center will be nonpartisan. He often mentions in particular Anthony Romero,
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, and John Raisian, the
director and senior fellow of the Hoover Institution.

''Democrats and Republicans will come and go,'' Mr. Bernstein said. ''This
institution will stand.''

While the advisory committee has not met face-to-face, the planning committee
has gathered to discuss what the Freedom Center might include.

Planning for the center is also being overseen by Peter W. Kunhardt, a
documentary filmmaker who was a co-producer of the eight-hour PBS series
''Freedom: A History of US,'' the PBS series ''The American President'' and the
ABC series ''Lincoln.''

Initially the center planned to have four floors, each with its own focus: the
terrorist attacks, New York City, the nation and the world. It has moved away
from that configuration without yet settling on an alternative.

The New-York Historical Society applied for a place at ground zero that would
focus on the city, but Kenneth T. Jackson, who this month stepped down as
president, ended up on the Freedom Center's advisory board instead. ''There was
part of me that really wanted the New-York Historical Society to do it,'' Mr.
Jackson said. ''But to be honest, I just want it done.''

The Freedom Center is expected to cost about $250 million to build and $25
million a year to operate, Mr. Bernstein said. He hopes to raise the operating
money largely from membership dues and a nominal admission fee. Five to 10
million people are expected to visit the site each year.

Ruth J. Abram, the director of the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, who is on
the planning committee, said the center should start by having ''conversations
all over the world'' about what belongs in a freedom center.

Alex Boraine, the founder and president of the International Center for
Transitional Justice, who is on the center's committee of scholars and advisers,
said he had stressed to Mr. Bernstein the importance of making the center about
more than America. ''Freedom is essentially a universal quest,'' said Mr.
Boraine, who was deputy chairman of the post-apartheid Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in South Africa. ''It really ought to be representative of the
struggle of mankind rather than of one particular nation.''

Others involved in the planning said it was important that the center not
whitewash the struggles on the road to freedom. ''There will be a focus on the
creation of America and the writing of the constitution and the founding of the
first great Western democracy,'' said Fareed Zakaria, a Newsweek columnist who
is an adviser to the center. ''But there will also be a focus on the peculiar
way liberty was defined to exclude blacks and to exclude women.

''It will be more thought-provoking and produce a greater sense of reflection,
rather than something that creates a sense of veneration,'' he added.

The center, which starts out without any collections or holdings, plans to
develop exhibitions, lectures, film series and educational programming in
partnership with institutions like the Aspen Institute, New York University,
WNYC Radio and New Visions for Public Schools, which aims to improve New York
City's public schools.

It will also borrow exhibits from organizations like the International Center
for Transitional Justice and the International Coalition of Historic Site
Museums of Conscience, whose members include the Gulag Museum at Perm 36 in
Russia and the District Six Museum in South Africa.

Mr. Bernstein said he had ''grown up in the world of human rights'' as the son
of Robert L. Bernstein, the founding chairman of Human Rights Watch. He is the
board president of Human Rights First, formerly the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, and is on the executive committee of the Holocaust Museum.

His advisers, meanwhile, say they are keenly aware of the need to guard against
allowing the center's program to veer into cheerleading for America.

''It could so easily be taken over and made into this flag-waving, rah-rah
thing,'' Mr. Boraine said. ''We have to make sure the politicians don't take
over and use it for their own ends.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 29, 2004



CORRECTION: An article in The Arts on Thursday about the Freedom Center, a
planned cultural attraction chosen for ground zero in Manhattan, included a name
supplied by the organizers erroneously on a list of historic figures whose
political imprisonment may be depicted in an exhibit. Susan B. Anthony was not
held in a prison cell; after her arrest for illegal voting in the 1872
presidential election she was placed under the custody of a United States
marshal.



GRAPHIC: Photos: THE ROAD FROM TYRANNY -- For these four, that road lay through
prison: Vaclav Havel, left, in Prague
Susan B. Anthony
Nelson Mandela in Durban, South Africa
and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (pg. E5)
 Tom A. Bernstein says the Freedom Center will avoid sentimentality and
propaganda. (Photo by Mike Appleton for The New York Times)(pg. E1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(89%); EXHIBITIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (79%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (78%); FAMILY
(78%); HISTORY (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); TERRORISM (76%); BASEBALL
(76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); BUSINESS PLANS (67%); HOLOCAUST (50%) Freedom and Human
Rights; Terrorism; World Trade Center (NYC); Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: TEXAS RANGERS (56%) Freedom Center (NYC)

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (88%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Tom Bernstein; Robin
Pogrebin

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

25 Years Later, Cambodia Proposes Trials of Khmer Leaders

BYLINE:  By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 7


Twenty-five years after Vietnamese tanks rolled into this capital, putting an
end to the murderous Khmer Rouge regime, a top Cambodian government official
said Wednesday that the time had come to put surviving leaders on trial.

"The unfortunate Cambodians who both survived and were killed have to receive
justice," the official, Chea Sim, president of the governing Cambodian People's
Party, said at somber ceremonies here that recalled the end of a government that
in less than four years killed about 1.7 million people, or as many as
one-fourth of Cambodia's population.

Citing the Khmer Rouge's "most cruel genocide policy," Mr. Chea Sim said before
a crowd of 10,000 that included Prime Minister Hun Sen, "We will be able to
completely close down this dark chapter through the successful implementation of
the law to form an extraordinary tribunal to judge the crimes committed under
the Democratic Kampuchea regime."

The government's call for a tribunal comes as human rights groups say that the
best way to mark the anniversary would be to start the trials.

"The tribunal is the issue that refuses to die," said Youk Chhang, director of
Documentation Center of Cambodia, a private group that researches the abuses of
the hard-line Communist government. Referring to years of official foot-dragging
over the trials, he said in an interview, "Those who survived refuse to be
killed again."

Sara Colm, an American researcher for Human Rights Watch/Asia, said here
Wednesday, "After 25 years, it is dispiriting to see leaders of the Khmer Rouge,
who brought so much tragedy and destruction to their country, living freely."

To complicate matters, in the nearly six months since parliamentary elections
last July, no new government has been formed. Mr. Hun Sen's party controls 59
percent of the 123 seats of the National Assembly. But a two-thirds vote is
needed to form a new government and to pass legislation implementing a tribunal
agreement reached last June between the United Nations and Mr. Hun Sen.

The political deadlock stretches on partly because leaders of the two opposition
groups, both currently in Paris, apparently believe that allowing the Khmer
Rouge trials to happen under Mr. Hun Sen would bolster him domestically and
internationally. Mr. Hun Sen, a Khmer Rouge deserter, returned to Cambodia with
the Vietnamese tanks and has been part of governments here ever since, wielding
prime ministerial powers since 1993.

The ceremonies were marked by heightened sensitivities among officials over the
fact that Vietnam was the midwife to their rule here. After initially calling
Jan. 7 "National Liberation Day," officials now call it "End of Genocide Day."
The Vietnamese invasion of 1978 turned into an occupation that lasted more than
a decade, and, in a generational split, some young Cambodians, born after the
Khmer Rouge horrors, denounce Jan. 7 as "Vietnam Invasion Day."

"We have mixed feelings," Thun Saray, director of Adhoc, a nationwide human
rights group, said Wednesday. "The first feeling is that we were saved by the
Vietnamese troops from the genocide. The other feeling is that the Vietnamese
invaded our country and then stayed for a decade."

But many middle-aged Cambodians interviewed said they would have died if
Vietnamese troops had not swept Khmer Rouge forces from Phnom Penh on Jan. 7,
1979.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: September 9, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on Jan. 7 about calls in Cambodia for a trial of the
leaders of the Khmer Rouge regime of the 1970's misstated Prime Minister Hun
Sen's tenure. He has wielded prime ministerial powers, either on his own or in a
power-sharing agreement, since 1985, not 1993. A reader first reported the error
in January; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); POPULATION SIZE (76%);
LEGISLATION (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); ANNIVERSARIES (71%); THIS
DAY IN HISTORY (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); VIET NAM (79%); FRANCE
(76%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Struggle to Bring Law and Order to Haiti

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, March 22


When Haiti's new police chief made a surprise tour of six police stations in the
capital earlier this month, they were nearly empty. Only about two dozen
officers were on duty when there should have been nearly 200. ''And they were in
civilian clothes,'' the chief, Leon Charles, said despondently.

As Haiti slowly emerges from weeks of violent political turmoil that led to the
exile of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Mr. Charles and other members of the
new interim government face the challenge of resurrecting the rule of law and
ending official impunity. They plan to strengthen an emaciated justice system
and to gut and rebuild a police force that is widely viewed as disorganized,
demoralized, ineffectual and corrupt.

''There was effectively no police in the last two years,'' said Mr. Charles, who
until recently headed Haiti's Coast Guard, working closely with the United
States on drug interdiction and other issues. Of the 6,000 officers on the
national police force's payroll, he said, he can count on fewer than 2,000 to
even show up, let alone provide law enforcement.

Officials of the new government and human rights activists say many police
officers have been involved in drug trafficking, extrajudicial killings and
kidnappings. Members of the Aristide administration often used police officers
to punish opponents, those officials say.

''The system was used not to protect but to abuse and oppress,'' the new
minister of justice and public security, Bernard Gousse, said in a recent
interview.

The interim government of Prime Minister Gerard Latortue, appointed on March 9
to lead Haiti to national elections, has moved quickly to track down officials
in Mr. Aristide's administration suspected of involvement in criminal
enterprises. The government plans to pursue several criminal cases that had
languished under Mr. Aristide, Mr. Gousse said, most notably the murder in 2000
of Jean Dominique, a leading radio commentator who criticized corruption in the
Aristide government.

The new government is also planning to investigate abuses committed or ordered
by the Aristide administration. Mr. Aristide's opponents have accused him of
human rights violations and embezzlement of state money. Officials say the
government intends to build a criminal case against Mr. Aristide and could
eventually seek his extradition back to Haiti to stand trial.

But Mr. Latortue, who has vowed to lead a nonpartisan government, will be
closely watched for how he handles the accused and the convicted criminals among
the ranks of his own government's perceived allies. Human rights advocates in
Haiti and abroad say they will not stand by if the Latortue administration
abuses its own power.

That challenge came into sharp focus on March 20 in the coastal city of Gonaives
during a visit by Mr. Latortue and his top justice and police officials. In a
raucous ceremony in the town's central plaza, commanders of the rebel army that
helped to drive Mr. Aristide into exile last month shared a stage with the
government officials.

Among the rebel leaders was the notorious Jean-Pierre Baptiste, smiling and
looking triumphant. It did not seem to matter that Mr. Baptiste, whose nom de
guerre is Jean Tatoune, had been freed by rebels last year from a prison where
he had been serving a life sentence for his participation in the killings of
Aristide supporters in Gonaives in 1994. Mr. Latortue hailed the rebels as
''freedom fighters.''

The events provoked alarm among some rights advocates and international
observers.

Jocelyn McCalla, executive director of the New York-based National Coalition of
Haitian Rights, has denounced the ''unholy alliance'' between the interim
government and the anti-Aristide rebels. They include Louis-Jodel Chamblain, who
was convicted in absentia for the murder in 1993 of a pro-Aristide businessman
and returned from a decade in exile in the Dominican Republic to lead the
insurgency against Mr. Aristide. Mr. McCalla accused Mr. Latortue of ''fanning
the flames of lawlessness.''

Mr. Baptiste and Mr. Chamblain are among hundreds of accused or convicted
criminals who are now freely walking the streets of Haiti. Some of them were
released from prison by rebels in the final days before Mr. Aristide's
departure, including Prosper Avril, a former general who seized power in a coup
in 1988 and had been in prison awaiting trial on charges stemming from a
massacre in 1990.

[Mr. Chamblain said Saturday that he would kill Mr. Aristide if he returned to
Haiti, Reuters reported. ''If Aristide comes tomorrow I will have 15,000, 20,000
Haitians armed to fight him and kill him as he killed my wife,'' said Mr.
Chamblain, who accuses Mr. Aristide of ordering his wife's death in 1991.]

Brian Concannon, an American lawyer who helped the Aristide government bring the
case against Mr. Baptiste and others involved in killings, says that hard-fought
gains in the prosecution of human rights violations are being reversed.

''Right now we're back to less than zero,'' Mr. Concannon said in a telephone
interview from Oregon, where he lives.

Camille Leblanc, a prominent lawyer in Port-au-Prince and a justice minister
under former President Rene Preval, said: ''We are waiting to see what the new
government will do about this. It is one of the major tests the new government
will have to pass. If you say you are not going to do anything about these
cases, it's as if you are condoning the reign of impunity under Aristide.''

Officials of the new government have not said how they plan to treat
anti-Aristide rebels accused or convicted of crimes. ''There is a plan to bring
to justice everyone who has broken the law,'' Justice Minister Gousse said in a
recent interview.

But, he added: ''When society itself is in disarray, we have to heal some
wounds. It's important not to forgive everything but to understand what led
them.''

Meanwhile, as Mr. Gousse and Mr. Charles push their new agendas to overhaul the
justice and law-enforcement systems, they warn that the campaign could turn
violent. An aide to Mr. Latortue said intelligence had indicated that assassins
might choose top officials as targets in an effort to destabilize the new
government.

Mr. Gousse now travels everywhere with a security detail. Mr. Charles still
drives himself to work on occasion. But he expects that he, too, may soon be
forced move only in a convoy of bulletproof vehicles packed with bodyguards.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (94%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%);
CORRUPTION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (86%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); RULE OF LAW (77%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (76%); POLITICS
(76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); EXTRADITION (76%); ETHICS (75%);
EMBEZZLEMENT (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%);
ELECTIONS (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); CIVIL WAR
(71%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (71%); MURDER (70%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); DRUG
INTERDICTION (68%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (68%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (67%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (65%); WAR & CONFLICT (63%); CITY LIFE (61%) Politics and
Government; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Ethics; Crime and Criminals;
Police; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Kirk Semple; Gerard (Prime Min) Latortue; Jean-Bertrand (Pres) Aristide

CITY: PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI (79%)

COUNTRY: HAITI (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Haiti; Haiti

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Advocates to Be Jailed in Syria

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, April 3


A Syrian military court has sentenced 14 human rights advocates to jail for
belonging to a banned group after they attended a lecture condemning the
country's emergency law, advocates said Saturday.

The court, in the northern province of Aleppo, jailed 13 of the advocates for
three months and one for a year because it was his second offense.

All remained free pending appeal, said a lawyer and rights advocate, Anwar
al-Bunni.

Amnesty International condemned the charges as arbitrary, said the military
trial was unfair and called for the sentences to be dropped.

''The organization once again calls on the Syrian authorities to take immediate
steps to curb human rights violations,'' it said in a statement, adding that
Syria should ''allow human rights activists and bodies to function freely.''

The 14 advocates went on trial in October on charges of trying to incite
factional conflict. They were arrested in August at a lecture criticizing the
fact that Syria has remained under emergency law since the country's revolution
in 1963.

Even if an appeal fails, Syria may not make the 14 serve full terms, advocates
said, noting that seven advocates jailed on similar charges were released less
than a year after they started jail terms of three to four years.

When Bashar al-Assad became president in 2000, after the death of his father, he
freed hundreds of political prisoners and tolerated political debates that
openly criticized Syria's autocratic rule. But later, crackdowns on critics
resumed.

Since the fall of Saddam Hussein's government in Iraq last year, Syrians have
increasingly tested the government's limits.

On March 8, about 25 protesters against the emergency law tried to demonstrate
outside Parliament. Later in March, security forces killed 15 people during a
clash after a soccer match in the Kurdish area of northern Iraq. Tensions
erupted into lethal violence again days later, after thousands of Kurds held
vigils on the anniversary of Iraqi chemical attacks on Kurds in northern Iraq in
1988.

Pressure on the Syrian government for greater respect for human rights has also
increased internationally.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SENTENCING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (78%); ARRESTS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); APPEALS (71%);
ANNIVERSARIES (65%); POLITICAL DEBATES (64%); SOCCER (50%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%)

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (95%); IRAQ (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 102 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about evidence of human
rights abuses in western Sudan misstated the sponsorship of a four-member
investigating team that interviewed Sudanese refugees in Chad and concluded that
Arab militias and government forces in Sudan had carried out attacks in the
Darfur region that ''may constitute war crimes and/or crimes against humanity.''
The report was issued by the United Nations. (Human Rights Watch issued a
similar report on Friday accusing Sudan government forces and militias of
clearing villages, destroying food supplies and executing men deemed enemies.)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); REFUGEES (88%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%) Correction Stories;
Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations;
Human Rights Watch

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Prisoners of G.I.'s Offer More Claims of Mistreatment

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ABUSE

LENGTH: 1015 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 3


The three times that Abbas Mehdi was interrogated by American soldiers, he
claims that he told them the same thing: ''I said: 'You are creating enemies.
You changed love into hate. Why do you make people hate you?' ''

Released only two weeks ago from a succession of prisons here, Mr. Mehdi, a
51-year-old merchant with heart trouble, said he had not been treated as badly
as the men he saw in photos that have shocked Iraq -- photos of black hoods,
naked prisoners and leering American guards -- but roughly, all the same. It was
not surprise that he felt when he saw the pictures on television last week, he
said, but anger and disappointment at the United States.

''I never would have expected this of them,'' said Mr. Mehdi, who said he was
beaten so badly that he had to be hospitalized for three days after his arrest
in December, when soldiers found a rocket-propelled grenade launcher -- which he
said was not his -- in the garden of his rented house. ''They are civilized
people. When the Americans came I was so happy. I said: 'We will have democracy.
We will have freedom.' ''

''After I was arrested,'' he added, ''the picture changed.''

Interviews with several former prisoners here turned up no accounts as
horrifying as the military's own report on the abuse that took place at the
hands of United States soldiers in Abu Ghraib, Iraq's most notorious prison
under Saddam Hussein, and apparently once again now.

But the prisoners and human rights officials said scores of complaints
documented a pattern of excessively rough treatment, which they said made the
recent reports of much worse treatment less difficult to believe. And the
allegations come at a bad time for the yearlong occupation here -- already
accused of heavy-handedness in the siege of the rebellious city of Falluja --
when many Iraqis are prepared to believe the worst about Americans.

For example, Muhammad al-Mussawi, a lawyer with the Human Rights Organization in
Iraq, said that as the fighting in Falluja peaked early last month, women who
were prisoners at Abu Ghraib smuggled out leaflets claiming that they had been
raped.

''As educated people, we didn't believe this,'' Mr. Mussawi said. ''But after
the big shock on TV, we thought, 'This could be true.' '' He referred to the
barrage of coverage of the abuse at Abu Ghraib.

It was not possible to verify the claims of the Iraqis who said in interviews
that they had been mistreated by the Americans. But such claims are being
reported in Iraq with much more attention now than in the past, including
interviews with two of the men said to be in the photos broadcast Monday by the
Arab news channel Al Jazeera.

A man who gave his name and age as Abu Ahmad, 30, said he was arrested in
November on charges of carrying out attacks against Americans. He said he and
other prisoners had been beaten regularly at Abu Ghraib and had been forced to
strip naked and bend over a wall, leading him to believe he would be raped.

''I realized that the reason for this was to break the spirit of the detainees
before interrogation,'' he told an Iraqi employee of The New York Times in
Najaf, the Shiite holy city south of Baghdad where the rebel cleric Moktada
al-Sadr is hiding out from the American military. He maintained that he had had
nothing to do with Mr. Sadr's militia, the Mahdi Army, until after he was
released from prison.

''The Americans are an occupation force, not liberators, and we should fight to
force them out of Iraq,'' he said.

Human rights officials say most of the complaints they have heard centered not
on treatment in prisons but on the arrests. American soldiers, they complain,
burst into houses with excessive force, breaking furniture and windows, using
foul language, placing hoods over suspects' heads and, often, beating them.

Mr. Mehdi said he was arrested on the night of Dec. 2 when six soldiers barged
into his house, pointing guns at him, his wife and his children. He said they
had handcuffed him, kicked him in the abdomen and placed a black hood on his
head. In the garden, he said, the soldiers made him kneel down as they retrieved
the rocket-propelled grenade launcher from a clay oven in the yard -- where he
said, it had been planted by his landlord, who wanted to evict him.

Then, he said, one of the soldiers -- he said he could not see who because of
the hood -- urinated on him.

''I could smell it,'' he said.

After what he said was a rough interrogation at a small military base, he was
taken to a military hospital because of his heart condition and because he was
beaten so badly. He said he stayed three days and had been treated every bit as
well there as a wounded American officer in the bed next to him.

''I spoke with a nurse, and I told her: 'I'm really confused. At the base, they
beat me and tortured me. Here they treat me like a human being,' '' he said.
''She said, 'They are animals.' ''

Mowafak Sami, 28, a lawyer who has brought a legal claim against the American
military, said he was arrested with his father and two brothers in early March,
originally, he said, on suspicion of financing anti-American insurgents. During
the arrest, he said, one soldier struck him with the barrel of his gun,
blackening his eyes and opening a gash on his left brow.

In the prison at Baghdad International Airport, he said, he and other prisoners,
including his 56-year-old father, a former general and construction company
owner with several contracts for rebuilding the country's wrecked
infrastructure, were forced to do knee bends until they were exhausted. He said
that at other times they were forced to stand on one leg, with both arms in the
air, for an hour at a time.

His father was released after five days, and he was let out four days later, but
his two brothers are still in prison, he said.

''We were very happy when the regime fell,'' he said, referring to the toppling
of Saddam Hussein last year. ''We were optimistic.

''But this savage process -- arresting the innocents, house raiding, attacking
houses with bombs -- makes us feel aggressive against the coalition forces.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mowafak Sami has brought a legal claim against the American
military, saying he was struck and mistreated during arrest and imprisonment.
(Photo by Paul Assaker/Sipa, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); ARRESTS (72%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (68%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (67%); SMUGGLING (65%);
GENOCIDE (63%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%); TERRORISM (59%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%) Ian Fisher; Abbas Mehdi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Red Cross Says That for Months It Complained of Iraq Prison Abuses to the U.S.

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS and ERIC LICHTBLAU; Fiona Fleck contributed reporting
from Geneva for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
OUTCRY

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


The International Committee of the Red Cross regularly complained to senior
United States officials in Iraq and in Washington over the last several months
about prisoner abuses at Abu Ghraib prison, a spokesman for the group said on
Thursday.

The spokesman, Roland Huguenin, said, ''Our reports to the U.S. administration
contained many aspects which have now been reported with clear descriptions of
the treatment of prisoners.''

Mr. Huguenin, who spoke by telephone from London, said the reports were based on
the Red Cross's interviews with prisoners and ''were very extensive and
detailed.''

''We knew everything that was going on,'' he said.

Mr. Huguenin would not describe the details of the reports, but he said that
they included accounts of the abuses like those disclosed over the last week in
news accounts involving prisoners made to strip naked and pose in demeaning
positions. ''We condemned most firmly these practices that are absolutely
humiliating to anyone in the world,'' he said.

He noted that some people had said that the offenses were ''even more awful''
for the Iraqi prisoners because, in Arab culture, that kind of treatment is
unbearably shameful.

He said one thing that Red Cross officials did not know was that guards were
taking photos of what was occurring.

Other human rights groups, including Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch
and Human Rights First, said this week that they had complained to the
administration about reports of prisoner abuse and humiliation. Officials with
the groups said they took personal appeals to L. Paul Bremer III, head of the
occupation authority in Iraq, and Condoleezza Rice, the national security
adviser, but that their appeals often seemed to fall on deaf ears.

''Unfortunately, we have not gotten the impression they've dealt with these
issues very seriously,'' said Alexandra Arriaga, who is in charge of government
relations for Amnesty International, which issued a report in March that
cataloged reports of beatings, torture and other abuse in Iraq.

The International Committee of the Red Cross, based in Geneva, is the only group
whose officials are allowed to interview the prisoners in Baghdad.

In exchange for such access, the Red Cross typically does not publicize its
findings but reports them only to the host government. But in rare cases like
the situation at Abu Ghraib, it makes its complaints public when its officials
believe its recommendations have been ignored.

The committee reports of the abusive behavior, Mr. Huguenin said, were
distributed to the prison authorities in Baghdad as well as to senior officials
of the Coalition Provisional Authority, the United States civilian
administration running Iraq. In addition, he said, the reports were given to
senior officials in the Bush administration, but he declined to say which ones.

He said that it was the committee's practice to make its complaints known widely
inside a government to prevent any one person from sitting on the report,
allowing senior officials to claim ignorance later on.

The assertion that the Red Cross warned United States officials of mistreatment
of prisoners in Iraq comes as the Bush administration is depicting a situation
in which many senior officials were unaware of the problem until a set of
photographs was shown on CBS last week.

At the State Department on Thursday, Richard A. Boucher, the department
spokesman, said the president of the Red Cross, Jakob Kellenberger, had phoned
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to discuss the situation in Iraq.

Mr. Boucher would not say precisely what information Mr. Powell knew about the
earlier Red Cross complaints. But he noted that Red Cross employees had visited
the prison at Abu Ghraib every five weeks for many months, and had unimpeded
access to all the prisoners.

''They have -- as is their job during visits, when they see things that they
think need to be modified, improved or corrected, they raise them,'' he said.
''We've made sure that appropriate authorities in the U.S. government heard
about their recommendations.''

A senior State Department official said that Mr. Powell had raised the issue of
the Red Cross complaints about the prison at meetings of cabinet officials. But
the official could not say whether Mr. Powell included the details of the Red
Cross reports about the demeaning of prisoners.

Legal experts said this week that the United States could be obligated to try
soldiers for war crimes.

Prof. Harold Hongju Koh of Yale Law School said that the Geneva Conventions were
explicit in prohibiting soldiers from treating prisoners of war or civilians
detained in a war in a degrading manner. The conventions describe violations of
that section as a ''grave breach,'' meaning they would be designated a war
crime.

''The evidence we have so far would clearly give probable cause to see whether
these grave breaches rise to the level of crimes against humanity,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TORTURE
(78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%);
GENOCIDE (65%); TERRORISM (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Photography  ; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST
(54%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%) Red Cross; Cbs Corp

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) Neil A Lewis; Eric Lichtblau; George W (Pres)
Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Military Archipelago

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30; The New Iraq Crisis

LENGTH: 775 words


The road to Abu Ghraib began, in some ways, in 2002 at Guantanamo Bay. It was
there that the Bush administration began building up a worldwide military
detention system, deliberately located on bases outside American soil and
sheltered from public visibility and judicial review. The administration shunned
the scrutiny of independent rights monitors like Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
International. It presumed that suspected agents of terrorism did not deserve
normal legal protections, and it presumed that American officials could always
tell a terrorist from an innocent bystander.

So far as we know, the psycho-sexual humiliations that military jailers
inflicted on Iraqi detainees last year at Abu Ghraib have no parallels in
American-run prisons elsewhere. Nevertheless, accounts from former prisoners at
other military detention sites -- including smaller holding centers in Iraq, the
main Afghan prison at Bagram Air Base near Kabul, and Guantanamo itself --
suggest there has been systemic, gratuitous brutality against people who in many
cases are not clearly guilty of any crimes. In one chilling indication of the
extent of the problem, the Pentagon said this week that 25 Iraqi and Afghan war
detainees had died in American custody in the past 17 months.

The interrogation and detention methods that the Pentagon acknowledges having
regularly used include forms of physical and psychological abuse that violate
American values, international standards of human dignity and the lawful rules
of war. These include sleep deprivation and forcing prisoners' bodies into
''stress positions'' for hours at a time. Until recently, detainees were
commonly interrogated with hoods over their heads. Stripping them naked was
permitted so long as a general signed off on the request. Judging from the
photos, that wasn't much of a barrier.

Accounts of sickening abuses have been published in the pages of this and other
newspapers for months, largely based on the testimony of detainees who were
ultimately found to pose no threat and were released. Reputable international
human rights groups have issued reports pointing to unacceptable treatment of
detainees.

President Bush said he had been kept in the dark about the pictures of the Abu
Ghraib abuse until they were broadcast on CBS last week. But if Mr. Bush was
unaware, it was only of the fact that there were pictures. We now know that that
he and senior administration officials were told months ago of concerns about
the severe mistreatment of detainees in Iraq. The administration has shown
little interest in addressing these problems, and there has been little
political will elsewhere to pressure the Pentagon to clean up its act. That must
now change.

In Iraq, as we now know, hooded detainees have been beaten, stripped naked,
fitted with animal leashes and forced into degrading sexual positions. More than
a year ago, released detainees from Bagram told Carlotta Gall of The Times that
they had been made to stand naked for hours at a time, with hoods over their
heads, their feet shackled and their arms chained to the ceiling. They also
reported that bound Muslim male prisoners had been kicked and humiliated by
female prison guards. Other released prisoners complained to Human Rights Watch
of being made to stand motionless for hours on end before interrogations, with
bright spotlights shining into their eyes. Some, though not all, of their
charges were explicitly denied by American military officials.

Less is known about the detention and interrogation conditions at Guantanamo,
but complaints have been made about abuses there as well. Many of the
allegations made by people released from America's various military detention
centers have been treated skeptically in the past. Now they all deserve careful
investigation.

It is troubling that the worst abuses at Abu Ghraib apparently occurred after
Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, then in charge of the Guantanamo detention center,
recommended changes in interrogation procedures for detainees in Iraq. General
Miller is the same official the Bush administration has now put in charge of
detentions and interrogations in Iraq.

Despite its best efforts, the government has never been able to demonstrate any
strong link between Iraq and Al Qaeda before the invasion. But since then, Iraqi
prisoners have been treated like suspected terrorists. The abuses in Abu Ghraib
and throughout the military detention system stain this country's reputation and
play into Osama bin Laden's portrait of an evil America. The Bush administration
has given a gift to Al Qaeda's worldwide recruitment efforts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TORTURE (76%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%);
GENOCIDE (71%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%) Editorials;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Photography  ; Torture; Mental Health and Disorders; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (58%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Women, Still in Chains

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 711 words


One of the bleakest, saddest and best movies I've seen lately is ''Osama,'' the
tale of a girl in Taliban-run Afghanistan who risks her life by pretending to be
a boy so she can leave her house and earn money for her widowed mother. ''I wish
God hadn't created women,'' the girl's mother moans -- and then the girl is
arrested, and the movie really gets depressing.

Americans should be proud that we took on that world and ousted the Taliban. As
President Bush declared in his 2002 State of the Union address, ''The mothers
and daughters of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes. . . . Today women
are free.''

But they aren't. More than two years later, many Afghan women are still captives
in their homes. Life is better in Kabul than under the Taliban, but in many
areas our triumphalism is proving hollow. Consider these snapshots of the new
Afghanistan:

* A 16-year-old girl fled her 85-year-old husband, who married her when she was
9. She was caught and recently sentenced to two and a half years' imprisonment.

* The Afghan Supreme Court has recently banned female singers from appearing on
Afghan television, barred married women from attending high school classes and
ordered restrictions on the hours when women can travel without a male relative.

* When a man was accused of murder recently, his relatives were obliged to
settle the blood debt by handing over two girls, ages 8 and 15, to marry men in
the victim's family.

* A woman in Afghanistan now dies in childbirth every 20 minutes, usually
without access to even a nurse. A U.N. survey in 2002 found that maternal
mortality in the Badakshan region was the highest ever recorded anywhere on
earth: a woman there has a 50 percent chance of dying during one of her eight
pregnancies.

* In Herat, a major city, women who are found with an unrelated man are detained
and subjected to a forced gynecological exam. At last count, according to Human
Rights Watch, 10 of these ''virginity tests'' were being conducted daily.

I strongly backed the war in Afghanistan. President Bush oversaw a smart and
decisive war, and when I strolled through Kabul in those heady days of
liberation, I was never more proud to be an American.

Yet now I feel betrayed, as do the Afghans themselves. There was such good will
toward us, and such respect for American military power, that with just a hint
of follow-through we could have made Afghanistan a shining success and a lever
for progress in Pakistan and Central Asia. Instead, we lost interest in
Afghanistan and moved on to Iraq.

Mr. Bush has refused to provide security outside Kabul. So banditry and chaos
are rampant, longtime warlords control much of the country, the Taliban is
having a resurgence in the southeast, and the U.N. warns that ''there is a
palpable risk that Afghanistan will again turn into a failed state, this time in
the hands of drug cartels and narco-terrorists.''

The rise of banditry and rape, often by the Afghan security authorities, has had
a particularly devastating effect on women. Because the roads are not safe even
in daylight, girls do not dare go to schools or their mothers to health centers.
And when women are raped, they risk being murdered by their own families for
besmirching the family honor.

''Many women and girls are essentially prisoners in their own homes,'' Human
Rights Watch declared. And Amnesty International quoted an aid worker as saying:
''During the Taliban era, if a woman went to market and showed an inch of flesh,
she would have been flogged. Now she's raped.''

Change in Afghanistan was never going to come overnight. Honor killings of girls
and forced early marriages are deeply ingrained. An Afghan proverb says, ''A
girl should have her first period in her husband's house and not her father's
house.''

But we should have started the process of change -- above all, by providing
security. We missed that opportunity (but it's still not too late). So as we
celebrate Valentine's Day and enjoy our bonbons, let's remember Afghanistan's
girls, like the one in ''Osama.''

Even now, in the new Afghanistan we oversee, they are being kidnapped, raped,
married against their will to old men, denied education, subjected to virginity
tests and imprisoned in their homes. We failed them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (88%); MARRIAGE (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); WOMEN'S HEALTH
(72%); SEX OFFENSES (71%); SENTENCING (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); DEATHS & DEATH
RATES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); HIGH SCHOOLS (65%); TERRORISM (63%);
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (63%); MILITARY WEAPONS (62%); MURDER (56%) Valentine's
Day; Women; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism; Kidnapping; Sex Crimes; Marriages; Education and Schools;
Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Nicholas D Kristof

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); IRAQ (79%);
ASIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3; Editors' Note

LENGTH: 527 words


''The Girls Next Door,'' an article about the importing of women and girls to
the United States for sexual slavery, has generated much discussion since it
appeared in The Times Magazine on Jan. 25. In response to questions from readers
and other publications about sources and accuracy, the magazine has carried out
a thorough review of the article.

On the issue of sources, the writer, Peter Landesman, conducted more than 45
interviews, including many with high-ranking federal officials, law enforcement
officers and representatives of human rights organizations. Four sources
insisted on anonymity to protect their professional positions. A magazine fact
checker also interviewed all relevant sources, many of them both before and
after publication. Some readers have questioned the figure of 10,000 enforced
prostitutes brought into this country each year. The source of that number is
Kevin Bales, recommended to the magazine by Human Rights Watch as the best
authority on the extent of enforced prostitution in the United States, who based
his estimates on State Department documents, arrest and prosecution records and
information from nearly 50 social service agencies.

In the course of this review, several errors were discovered in specific
details. One, an erroneous reference to the release date of ''Scary Movie 2,''
was corrected in the magazine last Sunday.

On the question whether women imported through Cottonwood Canyon, Calif., could
have been wearing high heels, the original source, when pressed, acknowledged
that his information was hearsay. The article should not have specified what the
women were wearing, and the anecdote should have been related in the past tense,
since the trafficking ring was broken up in 2001.

The woman in her 20's known to her traffickers as Andrea recalled an incorrect
name for the hotel to which she was taken in Juarez, Mexico. The Radisson Casa
Grande had not yet opened when she escaped from her captors.

After the article was published, the writer made an impromptu comment in a radio
interview, noting that Andrea has multiple-personality disorder. The magazine
editors did not learn of her illness before publication. Andrea's account of her
years in slavery remained consistent over two and a half years of psychotherapy.
Her therapist says that her illness has no effect on the accuracy of her memory.
Her hours-long interview with the author, recorded on tape, is lucid and
consistent.

An independent expert consulted by the magazine, Dr. Leonard Shengold, who has
written books and papers about child abuse and the reliability and unreliability
of memory, affirms that a diagnosis of multiple-personality disorder is not
inconsistent with accurate memories of childhood abuse. Because
multiple-personality disorder has been associated with false memory, however,
the diagnosis should have been cited in the article.

The magazine's cover showed a 19-year-old nicknamed Montserrat, who escaped from
a trafficker four years ago. An insignia on her school uniform had been
retouched out of the picture to shield her whereabouts. The change violated The
Times's policy against altering photographs.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editors' Note

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (89%); SEX TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); WRITERS (89%); SLAVERY (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); CHILD ABUSE (78%);
MAGAZINE PUBLISHING (77%); REFUGEES (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%); PROSTITUTION
(74%); EVIDENCE (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); PSYCHIATRY (66%); PSYCHOLOGY
(66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (55%) Prostitution; Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2004 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Mistreatment of Prisoners Is Called Routine in U.S.

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PRISONERS

LENGTH: 1272 words


Physical and sexual abuse of prisoners, similar to what has been uncovered in
Iraq, takes place in American prisons with little public knowledge or concern,
according to corrections officials, inmates and human rights advocates.

In Pennsylvania and some other states, inmates are routinely stripped in front
of other inmates before being moved to a new prison or a new unit within their
prison. In Arizona, male inmates at the Maricopa County jail in Phoenix are made
to wear women's pink underwear as a form of humiliation.

At Virginia's Wallens Ridge super maximum security prison, newly arriving
inmates have reported being forced to wear black hoods, in theory to keep them
from spitting on guards, and say they were often beaten and cursed at by guards
and made to crawl on their knees.

The corrections experts say some of the worst abuses have occurred in Texas,
whose prisons were under a federal consent decree during much of the time
President Bush was governor because of violence by guards against inmates and
overcrowding. Judge William Wayne Justice of Federal District Court imposed the
decree after finding that guards were allowing inmate gang leaders to buy and
sell other inmates as slaves for sex.

The experts also point out that the man who directed the reopening of the Abu
Ghraib prison in Iraq last year and trained the guards there resigned under
pressure as director of the Utah Department of Corrections in 1997 after an
inmate died while shackled for to a restraining chair for 16 hours. The inmate,
who suffered from schizophrenia, was kept naked the whole time.

The Utah official, Lane McCotter, later became an executive of a private prison
company one of whose jails was under investigation by the Justice Department
when he was sent to Iraq as part of a team of prison officials, judges,
prosecutors and police chiefs picked by Attorney General John Ashcroft to
rebuild the country's criminal justice system.

Mr. McCotter, 63, is director of business development for Management & Training
Corporation, a Utah-based firm that says it is the third-largest private prison
company, operating 13 prisons. In 2003, the company's operation of the Santa Fe
jail was criticized by both the Justice Department and the New Mexico Department
of Corrections for unsafe conditions and lack of medical care for inmates. No
further action was taken.

In Texas, in a case that began in 2000, a prisoner at the Allred Unit in Wichita
Falls was repeatedly raped by other inmates, even after he appealed to guards
for help, and was allowed by prison staff to be treated like a slave, being
bought and sold by various prison gangs in different parts of the prison. The
inmate, Roderick Johnson, has filed suit against the Texas Department of
Criminal Justice and the case is now before the United States Court of Appeals
for the Fifth Circuit in New Orleans, said Kara Gotsch, public policy
coordinator for the National Prison Project of the American Civil Liberties
Union, which is representing Mr. Johnson.

In a 1999 opinion, Judge Justice, wrote of the situation in Texas, ''Many
inmates credibly testified to the existence of violence, rape and extortion in
the prison system and about their own suffering from such abysmal conditions.''

Asked what Mr. Bush knew about abuse in Texas prisons while he was governor,
Trent Duffy, a White House spokesman, said the problems in American prisons were
not comparable to the abuses exposed at Abu Ghraib.

Nationwide, during the last quarter of a century, over 40 state prison systems
were under some form of court order, for brutality, overcrowding, poor food or
lack of medical care, said Marc Mauer, assistant director of the Sentencing
Project, a research and advocacy group in Washington that calls for alternatives
to incarceration.

The corrections experts are careful to say they do not know to what extent the
brutality and humiliation at Abu Ghraib were an intended to break the prisoners
for interrogation or were just random acts.

But Chase Riveland, a former secretary of corrections in both Washington State
and Colorado and now a prison consultant based near Seattle, said, ''In some
jurisdictions in the United States there is a prison culture that tolerates
violence, and it's been there a long time.''

This culture has been made worse by the quadrupling in the number of prison and
jail inmates to 2.1 million over the last 25 years which has often resulted in
overcrowding, he said. The problems have been compounded by the need to hire
large numbers of inexperienced and often undertrained guards, Mr. Riveland said.

Some state prison systems have a hard time recruiting enough guards, Mr.
Riveland said, particularly Arizona, where the pay is very low. ''Retention in
these states is a big problem and so unqualified people get promoted to be
lieutenants or captains in a few months.''

Something like this process may have happened in Iraq, where the Americans tried
to start a whole new prison system with undertrained military police officers
from Army reserve units, Mr. Riveland suggested.

When Mr. Ashcroft announced the appointment of the team to restore Iraq's
criminal justice system last year, including Mr. McCotter, he said, ''Now all
Iraqis can taste liberty in their native land, and we will help make that
freedom permanent by assisting them to establish an equitable criminal justice
system based on the rule of law and standards of basic human rights.''

A Justice Department spokeswoman, Monica Goodling, did not return phone calls
asking why Mr. Ashcroft had chosen Mr. McCotter even though his firm's operation
of the Santa Fe jail had been criticized by the Justice Department.

Mr. McCotter had a long background working in prisons. He had been a military
police officer in Vietnam and had risen to be a colonel in the Army. His last
post was as warden of the Army prison at Fort Leavenworth.

After retiring from the Army, Mr. Cotter was head of the corrections departments
in New Mexico and Texas before taking the same job in Utah.

In Utah, in addition to the death of the mentally ill inmate, Mr. McCotter also
came under criticism for hiring a prison psychiatrist whose medical license was
on probation and who was accused of Medicaid fraud and writing prescriptions for
drug addicts.

In an interview with an online magazine, Corrections.com, last January, Mr.
McCotter recalled that of all the prisons in Iraq, Abu Ghraib ''is the only
place we agreed as a team was truly closest to an American prison. They had cell
housing and segregation.''

But 80 to 90 percent of the prison had been destroyed, so Mr. McCotter set about
rebuilding it, everything from walls and toilets to handcuffs and soap. He
employed 100 Iraqis who had worked in the prison under Saddam Hussein, and paid
for everything with wads of cash, up to $3 million, that he carried with him.

Another problem, Mr. McCotter quickly discovered, was that the Iraqi staff,
despite some American training, quickly reverted to their old ways, ''shaking
down families, shaking down inmates, letting prisoners buy their way out of
prison.''

So the American team fired the guards and replaced them with former Iraqi
military personnel. ''They didn't have any bad habits and did things exactly the
way we trained them.''

Mr. McCotter said he worked closely with American military police officers at
the prison, but he did not give any names.

In a written statement Friday, Mr. McCotter said he had left Iraq in September
last year just after a ribbon cutting ceremony to open Abu Ghraib.

''I was not involved in any aspect of the facility's operation after that
time.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 26, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on May 8 about the abuse of detainees at Abu Ghraib
prison referred incompletely to an agreement in a federal lawsuit by inmates
against the Texas Department of Corrections that was intended to improve
treatment of those held in Texas prisons. While the agreement was in force while
President Bush was governor of Texas, it began before then, in 1981, and was
lifted in 2002.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lane McCotter, who oversaw the reopening of the Abu Ghraib
prison, once ran prisons in Utah. (Photo by The Salt Lake Tribune, 1991)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (92%); CORRECTIONS (92%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PRISON PRIVATIZATION (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LITIGATION (76%); PUBLIC
POLICY (73%); CONSENT DECREES & ORDERS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
APPEALS COURTS (72%); POLICE FORCES (72%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%); LAWYERS
(68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (68%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (67%); TERRORISM (67%);
MENTAL ILLNESS (67%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (66%) Prisoners of War; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Prisons
and Prisoners; Freedom and Human Rights; Guards

COMPANY: MANAGEMENT & TRAINING CORP (64%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Fox Butterfield; Lane Mccotter

CITY: SANTA FE, NM, USA (79%); NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%); PHOENIX, AZ, USA
(72%)

STATE: UTAH, USA (95%); TEXAS, USA (93%); ARIZONA, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA
(92%); NEW MEXICO, USA (79%); LOUISIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Utah

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday
                             1Late Edition - Final

From Rogue State to Pariah State

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 7; Sudan's War on Itself

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: GENEINA, Sudan


IT is sometimes hard to figure out what Sudan's current status is in the war on
terror. The Bush administration would love to enlist its Arab-led government as
an ally in a critical part of Africa. But the more the dictatorship wages wars
on its own citizens, the more impossible such an alliance becomes.

Though they once harbored Osama bin Laden, the country's Islamic leaders rooted
out the Al Qaeda leadership in the late 1990's and reached out to the United
States after Sept. 11. The administration then encouraged Sudan to negotiate an
end to decades of civil war with black Christians in the south whose suffering
had captured the sympathies of American churchgoers.

Peace talks drew close to an agreement last winter, raising hopes in Washington
-- to the point where administration officials began planning to invite some
Sudanese officials to the White House and to the president's State of the Union
address in January. But those plans were quietly dropped when it became clear
that the Islamic dictatorship in Khartoum was stepping up a new war -- this one
in western Sudan, on rebellious black Muslims.

Over the past year, even as the talks to end the siege against the Christians in
the south have proceeded, perhaps a million Muslims have been uprooted in the
west, amid massacres that are drawing comparisons to the ethnic cleansing in the
Balkans a decade ago.

So, with Congress and religious and human rights groups repeatedly calling for
tough American action to stem the onslaught in the west, relations with Sudan
seemed to worsen again this spring. In March, when Sudan was selected to lead
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the American delegate walked out
in protest and the Sudanese delegate mocked American treatment of detainees in
Iraq.

True, the administration keeps talking to the Sudanese government, fearful that
a total break would doom the peace effort and Christians in the south, as well
as any chance of working with Sudan in the future.

But nobody talks much anymore about a strategic alliance against terrorism, even
though Sudan's potential importance has only grown. The largest country in
Africa, it is part of a region between the Arab deserts of North Africa and
black Africa to the south -- turf the administration has identified as crucial
to stemming the spread of terrorist cells throughout the continent.

The current war in the south dates to 1983, when the Muslim government began
applying Islamic law to non-Muslims. Sudanese in the south rebelled, and the
government's brutal treatment of the predominantly Christian population stirred
outrage in American churches. When he took office, President Bush vowed to end
the religious war.

Meanwhile, after Sept. 11, Sudan began moving to dampen American anger about its
previous support for terrorists. Five years ago, after Al Qaeda bombed two
American embassies in nearby countries in Africa, the Clinton administration
fired cruise missiles at Khartoum in response. American sanctions have been in
place against Sudan since 1997, the last American ambassador was pulled out in
1998, and the State Department has included Sudan on the list of state sponsors
of terrorism for the last 11 years.

In spite of this, Sudan has provided intelligence about Al Qaeda to American
officials, and that cooperation opened the way for the peace talks on the
southern front. American officials have played a key role in the talks, in which
they have frequently intervened to break the many impasses that have developed.
So far, the two sides have agreed to hold a referendum in the south that will
allow the southerners to decide whether they want to remain part of a united
Sudan or attain self-rule. To encourage them to keep Sudan unified, the
government has agreed to merge its military with rebel fighters, share oil
revenue with the south and divide up political positions.

But even as peace seemed to come within reach in the south, another part of
Sudan deteriorated into war. In the western region known as Darfur, rebellious
black Muslims looked at the concessions granted to the Christians and began
demanding the same.

Furious at that turn of events, Sudan's army moved to crush any dissent. It also
unleashed militias, known as Janjaweed, to take control of the countryside. Over
the past year, more than a million black Africans from Darfur have been driven
from their villages by the Janjaweed, backed by government troops, and many
thousands of refugees sit on the verge of starvation at the border with Chad.
The militias routinely kill men and rape women.

The growing conflict in the west now even threatens the still-fragile prospect
of peace in the south -- particularly with human rights and religious groups
clamoring for the administration to put more pressure on the Sudanese government
to stop the new slaughter.

''This administration has invested enormously in peace in southern Sudan,'' said
Ted Dagne, an Africa expert at the Congressional Research Service in Washington.
''They wanted a diplomatic success badly. Unfortunately, this is becoming a
distant dream that we may not see.''

Even if a deal is reached, can it be implemented? The residents of Darfur now
huddled in camps, afraid to return home, say they do not trust the officials in
Khartoum, who claim that they have restored stability to Darfur. Diplomats
trying to resolve the situation in Darfur, as well, find it hard to put much
stock in the words of a government that is denying and playing down the
atrocities unfolding there.

Religious groups, too, are pessimistic.

''What makes the Christians in the south trust the government when it is going
to turn around and treat fellow Muslims the way they are in Darfur,'' asked
Diane L. Knippers, president of the Institute on Religion and Democracy, a
Christian group in Washington.

Charles Colson, the Watergate figure and Christian activist, agreed. ''Three
months ago, I met with the president and I congratulated him on all his work on
Sudan,'' Mr. Colson said. ''It looked very hopeful. It's disappointing that it's
coming unglued.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The government-backed Janjaweed fighters are blamed for Sudan's
latest atrocities. (Photo by Agence France-Presse/Getty Images)Chart/Map:
''Rebel Turf''Groups of black Sudanese in rebellion against the Arab-led
government in Khartoum control these areas:SUDAN LIBERATION ARMY and JUSTICE AND
EQUALITY MOVEMENT (Muslim)Sections of Darfur region along the border with
Chad.SUDAN PEOPLES LIBERATION ARMY (Christian)Most of the states south of the
Darfur region with the exception of the city of Juba and other government
garrisons. Parts of the Nuba Mountains as well.Map of Sudan highlighting Nuba
Mountains, Darfur Region, Juba, Port Sudan, and Khartoum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); WAR & CONFLICT (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM
(91%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON
TERROR (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); GENOCIDE (71%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (71%); STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(70%); POLITICS (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%) United States
International Relations; Politics and Government; Terrorism; Christians and
Christianity  ; Islam; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) Marc Lacey; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); AFRICA (95%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%);
IRAQ (79%); CHAD (79%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (54%)

REGION: Sudan; Balkan States; Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigerian Declares Emergency in Restive Region

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: JOS, Nigeria, May 18


President Olusegun Obasanjo declared a state of emergency in the central state
of Plateau on Tuesday, suspending its elected officials and putting a retired
general in charge of a region racked for months by sectarian violence.

On state radio and television, Mr. Obasanjo accused Plateau officials of having
''wittingly and unwittingly encouraged acts that have subverted peace and
tranquillity.''

The president temporarily suspended the state governor, his deputy and the state
assembly.

Chris Ali, a retired army general, was appointed administrator for a six-month
period.

Mr. Obasanjo issued the order two weeks after a Christian militia attacked the
largely Muslim market town of Yelwa, killing what could have been several
hundred people and forcing thousands to flee their homes. Estimates of the death
toll have varied widely, from 67 to 600. The incident in Yelwa set off
retaliatory attacks against Christians in Plateau and spread to Kano, a largely
Muslim city in the north, driving thousands more to seek refuge in police
barracks.

The sectarian violence in Plateau began with an eruption of fighting between
Christians and Muslims here in Jos, the state capital, in September 2001. A
government inquiry determined that about 1,000 people had been killed in a
single week.

On Tuesday, a presidential adviser, Femi Fani-Kayode, singled out Plateau's
governor, Joshua Dariye, for what he called ''sheer incompetence'' in handling
the state's religious and ethnic tensions. He said the emergency decree was
issued to prevent the violence from spreading to other parts of the country.

The presidential order is to be reviewed by the Nigerian legislature on
Wednesday. It has already prompted warnings from human rights advocates, who
said they feared potential abuses by security forces in the name of restoring
law and order.

Adotei Akwei, advocacy director for Africa for Amnesty International USA, said
in a statement, ''Given the human rights record of the Nigerian security forces,
we're concerned this could turn into in a case of the fox guarding the henhouse,
as in the past those deployed to protect civilians used excessive force against
them and carried out extrajudicial killings.''

Earlier this week, Human Rights Watch, based in New York, accused the police of
using excessive force to quell rioting in Kano.

''What Obasanjo has done portends great danger for our democracy,'' said Gani
Fawehinmi, a leading human rights activist, according to The Associated Press.

Mr. Obasanjo, 66, is a former military ruler who voluntarily stepped down from
power in 1979 and ran for office as a civilian 20 years later. His election in
1999 was seen as a landmark in Nigerian politics, ending 15 years of military
rule and signaling the return of democracy.

But political and ethnic violence has dogged Mr. Obasanjo's presidency. His
re-election last year was marred by charges of fraud by his principal opponent,
Muhammadu Buhari, another former military leader.

Here in Jos, shops and businesses operated as usual. There was no curfew, though
more police officers than usual were deployed on the streets.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Nigeria highlighting Jos: Jos, Plateau State's capital, has been
plagued by religious strife.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
STATES OF EMERGENCY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); RESIGNATIONS (89%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); ELECTIONS (79%); POLITICS
(79%); APPOINTMENTS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); ARMIES (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); MILITARY RULE (75%); RIOTS (72%) Suspensions,
Dismissals and Resignations; Christians and Christianity  ; Islam

PERSON: Olusegun (Pres) Obasanjo; Chris Ali; Somini Sengupta

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Nigeria; Plateau State (Nigeria)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's in a Word? Torture

BYLINE: By Adam Hochschild.

Adam Hochschild is the author of ''King Leopold's Ghost'' and the forthcoming
''Bury the Chains,'' a history of the British antislavery movement.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


As Orwell pointed out most effectively, governments control language as well as
people. Since the Abu Ghraib prison scandal broke, our government, from the
highest officials in Washington to Army prison guards in Baghdad, have used
every euphemism they can think of to avoid the word that clearly characterizes
what some of our soldiers and civilian contractors have been doing: torture.

''What has been charged so far is abuse, which I believe technically is
different from torture,'' said Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. ''I'm not
going to address the 'torture' word.'' And nobody else seems to want to address
it either. Rather, we are told, military police officers at Abu Ghraib were
encouraged to treat the prisoners so as to create ''favorable conditions'' for
interrogations. What does this mean? Give the prisoners English lessons? New
clothes? Come on. In any bureaucracy, orders or clearance to do something beyond
the law always comes in code. For those in senior positions, deniability is
vital.

Some years ago, I heard a man who had narrowly escaped the death squads in El
Salvador explain how deniability worked there. ''The military will call a
meeting of commanders,'' he said. ''They will say, 'You know, this man David X
is getting to be a threat to us.' Then the commanders, when they have their
meetings with their own officers, they'll say, 'You know, today we heard of this
man who's making a lot of trouble for us.' Then when those officers meet with
the sergeants, his name will be floated again. And you can assume David X will
soon be dead.''

Shortly afterward I interviewed a general who had some of the most notorious
Salvadoran death squads under his command. Death squads? Orders for executions?
Of course not! He showed me a loose-leaf notebook, carefully listing complaints
of human rights abuses with a chart showing how each case had been investigated.

Pentagon officials doubtless have their own versions of that general's
loose-leaf notebook to show to human rights investigators. Obviously, no coded
orders, suggestions or hints given to the Abu Ghraib prison guards will appear
in them. And, no, these were not orders for deaths -- but they were for actions
similarly beyond the law. What the paper trail will have, however, are the
euphemisms for what was actually done:

* ''Sleep management.'' This apparently benign term -- doctors use it in
discussing insomnia -- disguises a form of torture that has long been popular
because it requires no special equipment and leaves no marks on the body. Widely
used in the Middle Ages on suspected witches by inquisitors, it was called the
tormentum insomniae. Hundreds of years later, in the interrogation rooms of
Stalin's secret police, it was known as the ''conveyor belt,'' because relays of
interrogators would question a prisoner, day and night, until he or she signed
the desired statement and named enough co-conspirators.

After being kept awake for a hundred hours or so, almost anybody will confess to
almost anything, from flying through the night sky on a broomstick to being a
capitalist spy. Soviet prisoners of the 1930's had to sign each page of their
interrogation record. In the files that have been released from archives in
recent years, you can sometimes see how a prisoner's signature, clear and firm
on the first day, gradually turns into an indecipherable scrawl as the sleepless
nights roll by.

*''Water-boarding.'' This, as we now know, does not involve water skis, but
holding prisoners under water for long enough that they think they are drowning.
Again, interrogators favor it because after the prisoner has coughed the water
out of his lungs, it leaves no identifiable marks. Reports by human rights
groups on countries including Brazil, Ethiopia and El Salvador have noted the
prevalence of ''simulated drowning'' or ''near drowning.''

*''Stress positions.'' What is a stress position? Mike Xego, a former political
prisoner in South Africa, once demonstrated one for me. He bent down and clasped
his hands in front of him as if they were handcuffed, and then, using a
rolled-up newspaper, showed me how apartheid-era police officers would pin his
elbows behind his knees with a stick, forcing him into a permanent crouch.
''You'd be passed from one hand to another. Kicked. Tipped over,'' he explained.
''The blood stops moving. You scream and scream and scream until there is no
voice.''

This begs an obvious question: when the Abu Ghraib detainees were in ''stress
positions,'' were they then kicked, tipped over, rolled around like soccer
balls? We do not yet know, but chances are that if the guards were told to
create ''favorable conditions'' for interrogation, the prisoners were not
lectured politely about the benefits of human rights and the rule of law that
the United States is supposedly bringing to Iraq.

Granted, the torture of prisoners under Saddam Hussein was incomparably more
widespread and often ended in death. The same is true in dozens of other regimes
around the world. But torture is torture. It permanently scars the victim even
when there are no visible marks on the body, and it leaves other scars on the
lives of those who perform it and on the life of the nation that allowed and
encouraged it. Those scars will be with us for a long time.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); ARMIES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
SCANDALS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); SLEEP DISORDERS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(74%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (69%); TERRORISM (60%) Prisoners of War; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Adam Hochschild

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%); EL SALVADOR (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who Would Try Civilians From U.S.? No One in Iraq

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE LAW; Pg.
11

LENGTH: 1024 words


Though civilian translators and interrogators may have participated in the abuse
at Abu Ghraib prison, prosecuting them will present challenges, legal experts
say, because such civilians working for the military are subject to neither
Iraqi nor military justice.

On the basis of a referral from the Pentagon, the Justice Department opened an
investigation on Friday into the conduct of one civilian contractor in Iraq, who
has not been identified.

''We remain committed to taking all appropriate action within our jurisdiction
regarding allegations of mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners,'' Mark Corallo, a
Justice Department spokesman, said in a statement.

Prosecuting civilian contractors in United States courts would be ''fascinating
and enormously complicated,'' said Deborah N. Pearlstein, director of the U.S.
law and security program of Human Rights First.

It is clear, on the other hand, that neither Iraqi courts nor American
courts-martial are available.

In June 2003, L. Paul Bremer III, the chief American administrator in Iraq,
granted broad immunity to civilian contractors and their employees. They were,
he wrote, generally not subject to criminal and civil actions in the Iraqi legal
system, including arrest and detention.

That immunity is limited to their official acts under their contracts, and it is
unclear whether any abuses alleged can be said to have been such acts. But even
unofficial conduct by contractors in Iraq cannot be prosecuted there, Mr.
Bremer's order said, without his written permission.

Similarly, under a series of Supreme Court decisions, civilians cannot be
court-martialed in the absence of a formal declaration of war. There was no such
declaration in the Iraq war.

In theory, the president could establish new military commissions to try
civilians charged with offenses in Iraq, said Jordan Paust, a law professor at
the University of Houston and a former member of the faculty at the Army's Judge
Advocate General's School. The commissions announced by President Bush in the
wake of the Sept. 11 attacks do not, however, have jurisdiction over American
citizens.

That leaves prosecution in United States courts. There, prosecutors might turn
to two relatively narrow laws, or a broader one, to pursue their cases.

A 1994 law makes torture committed by Americans outside the United States a
crime. The law defines torture as the infliction of severe physical or mental
pain or suffering.

But some human rights groups suspect that the administration may be reluctant to
use the law, because its officials, including Defense Secretary Donald H.
Rumsfeld, have resisted calling the abuse at Abu Ghraib torture.

''If they don't want to use the word 'torture,' '' Ms. Pearlstein said,
''prosecutions under the torture act aren't likely.''

A 1996 law concerning war crimes allows prosecutions for violations of some
provisions of the Geneva Conventions, including those prohibiting torture,
''outrages upon personal dignity'' and ''humiliating and degrading treatment.''

Bush administration lawyers cited potential prosecutions under the law as a
reason not to give detainees at Guantanamo Bay the protections of the Geneva
Conventions. But the administration has said that the conventions apply to
detainees in Iraq.

Both the torture law and the war-crimes law provide for long prison sentences,
and capital punishment is available in cases involving the victim's death.

The broader law, the Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act, allows people
''employed by or accompanying the armed forces outside the United States'' to be
prosecuted in United States courts for federal crimes punishable by more than a
year's imprisonment. People who are citizens or residents of the host nations
are not covered, but Americans and other foreign nationals are.

The law has apparently been invoked only once, in a case involving charges that
the wife of an Air Force staff sergeant murdered him in Turkey last year. The
case will soon be tried in federal court in Los Angeles.

The law was passed to fill a legal gap that had existed since the 1950's, when
Supreme Court decisions limited the military's ability to prosecute civilians in
courts-martial during peacetime.

In 2000, a three-judge panel of the federal appeals court in New York, citing
that gap, reluctantly overturned the conviction of an American civilian who had
sexually abused a child in Germany. In an unusual move, the judges sent their
decision to two Congressional committees. That helped encourage enactment of the
law that year.

The law requires the Pentagon, in consultation with the State and Justice
Departments, to establish regulations on how to carry it out. Though it was
enacted four years ago, the regulations are still under consideration.

In any event, there are gaps and uncertainties in the law.

For one thing, it applies only to contractors employed by the Defense
Department. Contractors hired by other agencies, like the C.I.A., are not
covered.

It is also unclear precisely where in the United States such prosecutions could
be brought. Legal scholars have suggested that three places might be available:
the area of the defendant's last known residence, the place where the defendant
is first brought from abroad and the District of Columbia.

In addition to such criminal charges, the companies that provided the
translators and interrogators may be subject to civil suits for money, under a
1789 law that allows federal courts to hear ''any civil action by an alien for a
tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations.'' Torture is such a
violation, legal experts say.

The Supreme Court is considering a case concerning the scope of that law, which
has been used to hold American companies accountable for abusive actions abroad.

But, in an echo of the defenses offered by several members of the military
police who have been ordered to face courts-martial for actions in Iraq,
companies may be able to offer a ''government contractor defense,'' in an effort
to show they were operating under specific instructions from the government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); TORTURE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
IMMUNITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); LAW OF WAR
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); JURISDICTION (75%); CRIMINAL
DEFENSES (72%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (70%); GENOCIDE (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (63%); TERRORISM (61%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Translation;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Immunity
From Prosecution; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN
RIGHTS FIRST (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) Adam Liptak; L Paul III Bremer

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Should U.S. Take Sides in Mideast?

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 133 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof says that previous presidents tried to be ''honest brokers''
in the Mideast. But for decades, American presidents have given Israel the
military, economic and diplomatic support that enabled it to expand illegal
settlements in occupied lands. In the process, Israel has violated human rights
and international law, as documented by the State Department, Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch and Israeli human rights groups.

Why haven't we heard American presidents strongly denounce the torture of
Palestinians? And for decades, American administrations have voted against
United Nations resolutions condemning Israeli violations of Palestinians'
rights.

EDMUND R. HANAUER
Director, Search for Justice
and Equality in Palestine/Israel
Framingham, Mass., May 26, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
Palestinians; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); UNITED
NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: Edmund R Hanauer; Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); ISRAEL (94%)

REGION: Israel; West Bank

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saying Farewell to an Indonesia She Knew Too Well

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: Jakarta, Indonesia


THE last thing Sidney Jones was thinking about when the scrap of paper was
hand-delivered to her office early this month was that she was being served with
a deportation order. But once she got over the shock, she was outraged -- the
government had already refused to renew her work visa, so she was already being
forced out.

''It was so gratuitously excessive,'' she said before her rushed departure. ''It
was so unnecessary, so over the top.''

Over the years, Ms. Jones, an Albany native who has worked for a number of human
rights organizations, had emerged as a leading analyst of Indonesia, with a
particular expertise in the country's chief terror group, Jemaah Islamiyah. Her
knowledge ran deep -- too deep, it seems, for the comfort of Indonesia's top
intelligence officer.

For some months, she had been aware that Gen. A.M. Hendropriyono, director of
Indonesia's intelligence agency, was unhappy with her detailed reports on the
terror group, as well as on separatist groups in two far-flung provinces.

Ms. Jones, a gregarious 52-year-old, had been in and out of Indonesia for 25
years, spoke the language fluently and knew many, many people in places high and
low. She also knew the radical Islamic community -- the lawyers, prisoners,
Islamic clerics and principals of Islamic schools. And if she didn't know the
important people, she knew people who did.

Her reports, written for the International Crisis Group, a Brussels-based
organization with prominent former American diplomats on its board, were keenly
read by Western intelligence and law enforcement agencies. Some had invited her
to brief them.

Here in Jakarta, she was a valued resource for foreign embassies whose diplomats
had no chance of ferreting out the inside information themselves.

Ms. Jones, who worked on Asian issues for Human Rights Watch for 14 years before
joining I.C.G., and had been the Asia officer for Amnesty International in the
mid-1980's, says she does not know what specifically upset General
Hendropriyono. ''I tried to find out what we did wrong,'' she said. ''We
couldn't get a meeting.''

The potency of Ms. Jones's work became clear in the aftermath of the bombing of
a Bali nightclub in October 2002.

Only two months before, Ms. Jones had published a report describing the
backgrounds and training of the people who made up the core network of Jemaah
Islamiyah, the group responsible for the attack. It quickly became a standard
reference.

The story of how she came to know so much about Jemaah Islamiyah starts with her
connection to the principal of an Islamic boarding school, Ngruki, that many of
the militants attended.

''When I was at Amnesty, I began to take an interest in Muslim prisoners,'' she
said. That was back in the mid-80's, when the Indonesian strongman, Suharto,
arrested Muslims for their political activities on behalf of Islam.

One of those arrested was Irfan Awwas, who later became the principal of Ngruki.
His offense was writing a newsletter, though ''there was nothing that suggested
violence'' in his material, Ms. Jones said. Amnesty designated Mr. Awwas as a
prisoner of conscience, and Ms. Jones kept in touch with his lawyers.

So on her return to Indonesia in 2002, she got in touch with Mr. Awwas, and the
group he headed, the Indonesian Mujahedeen Council, as well as former students
of Ngruki. They all received her warmly, and spoke with her openly. That changed
with the publication of her report, ''Al Qaeda in Southeast Asia: The case of
the Ngruki Network in Indonesia.''

''They called me a traitor,'' she said.

On another occasion, Ms. Jones wanted to find out who was behind terrorist
bombings in the city of Medan in Sumatra Province. She quickly found out that
the lawyer for one of the defendants was an old friend. ''He not only said,
'I've got all the documents here,' he said, 'Do you want to meet the guys in
prison.'''

Why do these people talk to her, when they have so much to fear? ''People behind
bars are lonely and interested in talking to anyone on anything,'' she said.
Some of her sources were disaffected members of Jemaah Islamiyah. ''In at least
one case, the person was unhappy with the Bali and Marriott bombings. Some
thought the attacks were a tactical mistake,'' referring to the 2002 nightclub
bombing and an attack on a Jakarta hotel in 2003.

IN many respects, tropical Indonesia is an unlikely place for Ms. Jones, the
upstate New York native who calls shoveling snow ''fun.''

Her mother, Anna Martha, who worked for a local museum and reviewed books for
Publishers Weekly, and her father, Kearney, who was a New York State assistant
health commissioner, have always been ''very strong liberals.'' She particularly
identifies with her mother's rebellious streak: ''She broke with her very
conservative Kentucky family when she left home to go to college.''

Ms. Jones's high school years coincided with the peak of the anti-Vietnam War
protests, and she was an active participant.

She says her involvement with Indonesia was ''a complete fluke.'' After training
as a Middle East specialist at the University of Pennsylvania, she spent a year
in Iran before the fall of the Shah. She thought she was an ideal candidate for
a job at the Ford Foundation in the Arab world, but they sent her to Indonesia
instead with the assignment of looking at Islamic education.

The best way to fulfill her mission, she decided, was to attend a mainstream
Islamic boarding school. Photographs of Ms. Jones from that period show her with
a soft shawl over her hair, the only Westerner in animated discussion with
fellow students.

Those were the hard years of Suharto. ''It wasn't what you think it was, there
was not a sense of overt oppression. There were a lot of arrests of students,
but you didn't feel it.''

Some of the persecuted fled the country for the United States and became good
friends of Ms. Jones when she returned home and took up their cause at Human
Rights Watch in New York. Her reputation as an Asia specialist grew in the
1990's as she became a familiar face on television interviews. She testified
before Congress and was invited to a White House state dinner.

Ms. Jones is a workaholic, on call at all hours by e-mail and cellphone, even
during trips to the most remote quarters of Indonesia. She lived in Jakarta
without the handsome perquisites of most expatriates, choosing instead a modest
high-rise apartment where her most frequent visitors were Indonesians.

''I have more friends here than anywhere else in the world,'' she said with some
passion in the days before leaving. ''I have longer and greater friendships and
I have more in common with them.'' Even strangers consider her a friend. One
sent a text message on her cell phone: ''Sidney, sorry for your troubles. Do you
want to marry me? The only way you can stay is by being an Indonesian citizen.''

AS her time ran out here, friends told her she should have adopted more of the
character of the Javanese, the dominant Indonesian ethnic group known for their
opaque nature. ''They tell me I am too much of a Batak,'' an ethnic group known
for its forthrightness.

Ms. Jones says she most worries about her Indonesian staff members, who gave her
an emotional airport send-off.

''I feel as though I have abandoned ship,'' she said. She will set up shop in
Singapore, continue to work on Indonesia and wait for the moment to return.

''In retrospect I knew we were treading on sensitive ground,'' she said. ''But
if I went back over it, I wouldn't change a word.'' Then, she added: ''I have
absolutely no doubt I will be coming back.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Sidney Jones

GRAPHIC: Photo: SIDNEY JONES (Photo by Kemal Jufri for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); DEPORTATION (77%);
EMPLOYMENT VISAS (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (76%);
SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (69%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (69%); BOARDING SCHOOLS (69%);
EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (69%); BOMBINGS (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (67%); POLITICS (65%) Intelligence Services; Politics and
Government; Terrorism; Armament, Defense and Military Forces

ORGANIZATION: JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (83%); INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP (59%) Jemaah
Islamiyah (Terrorist Group); International Crisis Group

Jane Perlez; Sidney Jones; A M (Gen) Hendropriyono

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (77%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (71%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); SINGAPORE (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Indonesia; Singapore; Indonesia

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Drops Death Penalty for Professor Guilty of Blasphemy

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 510 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, June 28


Iran's hard-line judiciary backed off from the death sentence issued against a
history professor, his lawyer said Monday. The sentencing of Hashem Aghajari had
sparked days of protests in 2002.

Mr. Aghajari was convicted of blasphemy after he said in a speech that Muslims
were not ''monkeys'' to follow blindly the teachings of clerics. Although that
charge, carrying the death penalty, was dropped earlier this month, he may still
face up to five years in prison for ''insulting religious values,'' said his
lawyer, Saleh Nikbakht. Mr. Aghajari has been in jail since 2002.

The head of the Supreme Court, Ayatollah Mohammad Mohammadi Gilani, said last
week that Mr. Aghajari could be freed on bail. But the court ruled Monday that
he must remain in jail for another month.

Mr. Aghajari, a reformist politician who lost a leg while serving in the 1980-88
war with Iraq, had said he would not appeal his death sentence. But in keeping
with Iranian law, the verdict was sent to the Supreme Court, which ordered a
review.

''He had said that he would not appear in court today because it was behind
closed doors,'' said his wife, Zahra Behnoodi, the ILNA news agency reported.
''The only reason he went to court today was to show his good intention.''

Mr. Nikbakht said Mr. Aghajari did not accept the charge of insulting religious
values that was brought against him on Monday. ''I am a Shiite Muslim and do not
accept any of the charges leveled against me,'' Mr. Nikbakht quoted his client
as saying.

Two other dissidents appeared at the court on Monday. Emadedin Baghi, a
reformist journalist, was tried for insulting senior officials. Fatimeh
Haghighatjoo, an outspoken former member of Parliament, was charged with
spreading lies.

The European Union and Human Rights Watch denounced Iran this month for human
rights violations, including infringements of the rights of political prisoners.

But Mr. Nikbakht said Monday that dismissing the blasphemy charge against Mr.
Aghajari was evidence that international pressure had forced Iran's judiciary to
show greater lenience.

''I do not think the judiciary will seek charges that carry death sentences
anymore,'' he said. ''Anyone who was visiting Iran brought up Mr. Aghajari's
case with Iranian officials. This had huge effect.''

                             --------------------


U.N. Visits Suspected Nuclear Site

 MOSCOW, June 28 (Reuters) -- United Nations nuclear inspectors on Monday
visited the Lavizan site in Tehran, where Washington suspects that Iran carried
out secret atomic weapons activities, said Mohamed ElBaradei, head of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

In a telephone interview, Dr. ElBaradei said: ''We went there today and we took
environmental samples. Tomorrow we will also visit places in the country to look
at relevant equipment.''

Recent satellite photos showed Iran had removed all the buildings and much of
the topsoil at Lavizan, which is near a military installation. The United States
said this suggested that Iran was conducting activities there linked to what it
said was a secret atom bomb program.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hashem Aghajari as he left court. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (94%); SENTENCING (91%); JAIL
SENTENCING (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); LAWYERS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); APPEALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (85%); HISTORY
(78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (77%); PRISONS
(75%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (75%); BAIL (73%); POLITICS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(70%); CHURCH & STATE (70%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (70%); JOURNALISM (70%);
NEWS REPORTING (70%); INTERVIEWS (70%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (63%); EUROPEAN UNION
(62%); RIOTS (61%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%)
Capital Punishment; Demonstrations and Riots; Freedom of Speech and Expression;
Sentences (Criminal); Freedom and Human Rights; Islam; Church-State Relations;
Politics and Government

PERSON: MOHAMED ELBARADEI (79%) Nazila Fathi; Hashem (Prof) Aghajari

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (89%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); IRAN (89%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 3, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dutch Arrest 2 Africans Suspected of War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 29


The Dutch police have arrested two former military officers, one from Rwanda and
the other from Congo, on charges of war crimes in their home countries, one
result of an effort to screen asylum seekers for possible human rights
violations.

The Rwandan is suspected of playing a significant role in the mass killings of
the 1990's in Rwanda, and the Congolese is suspected of torture and rape in
Congo.

An official in the Dutch prosecution office said a special team was created
several years ago because ''we were getting clear indications that there were
people who may have fled because they had committed atrocities and were seeking
to hide here.'' Some were posing as victims themselves, the official said.

''The Netherlands does not want to be a hiding place for war criminals,'' said
Wim de Bruin, a spokesman for the prosecutor's office in Rotterdam.

The Rwandan detainee, Ephrem Setako, was picked up by detectives at a refugee
center in Amsterdam last month. A spokesman said Mr. Setako had been sought at
the request of the United Nations tribunal dealing with the killings in Rwanda
in 1994. The tribunal charged the former army lieutenant with being an organizer
in the north of the country during the killings. The Dutch police said they were
awaiting the indictment from the tribunal, based in Arusha, Tanzania, and would
most likely hand him over to tribunal authorities.

The other suspect is a former colonel in the civil guard of Congo and is
scheduled to be tried in the Netherlands on charges of multiple rapes and
torture. He was found by the detective squad while he was living in the
Netherlands as a refugee, claiming persecution at home.

The police declined to provide further details, including his name, until the
trial, which is scheduled for March 24 in Rotterdam. The police said the former
colonel would be tried under Dutch law because the country had signed the
Convention Against Torture of 1987 and was obliged to prosecute him. A similar
effort to detain human rights abusers exists in Britain and Belgium. A British
spokesman said the ''war criminals team'' was investigating 18 cases, some
involving people who had been in Britain for a long time.

While many Europeans favor punishing human rights violations, there is also a
growing anti-immigrant mood. Many asylum seekers have suffered persecution at
home, but others have been found to be only economic refugees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARRESTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); TORTURE (89%); SEX OFFENSES
(78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Immigration and Refugees; Asylum (Political);
Extradition; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; ephrem setako

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%); ROTTERDAM,
NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (97%); RWANDA (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); AFRICA (92%);
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%);
EUROPE (79%); BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: Rwanda; Congo (Formerly Zaire); Tanzania; Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Studies Framed By Holocaust

BYLINE: By MERRI ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 4; COMMUNITIES

LENGTH: 1325 words

DATELINE: SCARSDALE


PERHAPS it was those pretzels that made such a lasting impact on Stephanie
Harley.

As a young black girl growing up in the Bronx, attending Catholic school with
mostly Irish and Italian children, Mrs. Harley still recalls what it felt like.

''As a minority person, I was always aware and sensitive to the fact that people
may perceive you as different,'' she said. ''It was hard in elementary school. I
didn't get very many birthday party invitations. I didn't always get to be a
part of things. There were girls who brought bags of pretzels to school to
share, and I never got the pretzels. Maybe it's the reason I'm passionate about
this.''

What Mrs. Harley is passionate about is teaching her fourth graders at the
Greenacres Elementary School here about intolerance, bigotry, racism,
anti-Semitism and the Holocaust. That passion for teaching this topic is the
reason that the Westchester Holocaust Education Commission gave her its Susan J.
Goldberg Memorial Teacher Award, which was presented earlier this month at the
center's annual observance of Yom Hashoah, the Jewish commemoration in
remembrance of the Holocaust, at Manhattanville College in Purchase. The award
was established in 2002 in memory of Mrs. Goldberg, a Hastings-on-Hudson
resident and an English teacher at Westlake Middle School in Thornwood, to honor
teachers who shared her passion ''to eradicate hatred and bigotry through
education.'' Recipients receive $500.

At a time when anti-Semitism is on the rise in the county, with 10 incidents
documented by the New York regional office of the Anti-Defamation League last
year, it is perhaps especially significant that Mrs. Harley has been selected to
receive the award. As a black woman and an elementary school teacher, she has
been committed for the more than two decades of her career to imparting
tolerance to her students through a curriculum of human rights. After she took a
course on the Holocaust from the Westchester Holocaust Education Commission, she
introduced the material to her class about four years ago.

''When I first met Stephanie, it was when we gave a course on Holocaust
curriculum at Purchase College,'' Andy Cahn, co-director of education for the
Westchester Holocaust Education Commission, said in a telephone interview. The
Westchester Holocaust Education Center is a nonsectarian, nonprofit organization
founded in 1990, which has expanded its original mission and teaches about more
than the World War II Holocaust. The organization has recently sponsored
programs on the Armenian genocide, Japanese-American internment during World War
II and the Irish famine.

''She was one of the only elementary school teachers taking that course,'' Mr.
Cahn said. ''There are very many people who think that the Holocaust and other
subjects like that aren't appropriate for elementary school, that the students
are too young to deal with these topics. Stephanie deals with it in a sensitive
way. She really gets to the students. The students understand right and wrong.''

Mrs. Harley is a good example, Steve Goldberg, the chairman of the social
studies department at New Rochelle High School, and Susan Goldberg's widower,
said in a telephone interview.

''When you honor someone, you're not just honoring what someone has done,'' he
said. ''You're also trying to send a message. This is saying to elementary
teachers, 'You should be doing this, integrating human rights education in an
elementary program.' Stephanie's a good role model.''

According to state mandates established in 1994, students beyond the age of 8
are expected to receive instruction in the Holocaust and human rights issues.
What that means is that the material is usually worked into units during
eighth-grade English and 10th-grade social studies classes.

What distinguishes Mrs. Harley's efforts is not only that she has brought the
material into fourth grade -- where also she covers slavery, the civil rights
movement, apartheid and other human rights issues -- but that she has made it an
integral part of her lessons.

''What's really superb about Stephanie is that she's woven it into her
curriculum throughout the year,'' said Gerry Young, the principal of the
Greenacres Elementary School. ''It's not a unit on tolerance. She brings
Holocaust survivors into the classroom, people who've actually gone through that
particular experience, and the children come to internalize it. The kids are
enriched by the way she does it.''

In Mrs. Harley's classroom, one bulletin board features photographs of
significant Holocaust figures like Miep Gies, who helped hide Anne Frank and her
family; Oskar Schindler, whose factory helped save Jews during the war, and
Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who worked to rescue victims of the
Nazis. There are also pictures of two Holocaust survivors who have spoken to
Mrs. Harley's pupils, including one who is a pupil's grandfather.

Nor is Mrs. Harley's concern limited to the Holocaust. There are also books
about slavery and civil rights, Native American narratives and fictional tales,
as well as age appropriate Holocaust stories.

''I do this all throughout the year, through literature, art, and film,'' Mrs.
Harley said. ''As an educator, in this climate of hate crimes, you don't want to
wait until children have formed their minds.

''Children will learn to respect people for who they are and move away from
hatred and bigotry and racism. I'm trying to educate them to prepare them to be
able to deal with racism and bigotry and give them the tools to speak out, to
take the role of the rescuer and not be a bystander.''

Mrs. Harley has promoted an exchange between her Scarsdale pupils and American
Indian students living on a reservation near Scottsdale, Ariz., including a
visit to the reservation. She has also traveled to Soweto, South Africa, and
shared her experiences with her fourth graders.

For Mrs. Harley, these issues are all related, whether it is about Jim Crow and
the segregated South, South Africa under apartheid, slavery or the Holocaust.

''I try not to concentrate on atrocities,'' she said. ''It's more about 'this is
what happened, why it happened, who were the people who stood up, and were not
just bystanders.' I talk about how it tore families apart and disrupted lives,
and also how hatred and racism affected the perpetrators who missed the
opportunity to learn about new cultures.''

These are lessons that seem to stick with the children.

Elise Flagg, whose three children have been in Mrs. Harley's class, said in a
telephone interview: ''It's been an amazing experience for my son. He literally
comes home and says he'll 'never forget.' It really touched him and affected
him.''

Mrs. Harley's life experiences clearly led to this path.

After the Bronx, she grew up in a mixed community in New Rochelle, where her
family lived next door to yeshiva. And a childhood visit to her mother's
Manhattan office at a dress manufacturer piqued her curiosity further, when Mrs.
Harley saw the tell-tale concentration camp blue numbers on a woman's arm and
wondered what they represented.

Still, her own educational experience was perhaps the most direct influence.

''When I was at the Cathedral High School, a Catholic school in Manhattan, I got
my interest in the Holocaust,'' said Mrs. Harley, the mother of four grown
children and grandmother of three, who lives with her husband in New Rochelle.
''My ninth-grade English teacher gave us the assignment to read 'The Diary of
Anne Frank.' I read it six times. I couldn't believe how human beings could be
so cruel. Then I read some anthologies of Holocaust poetry and I kept reading.''

Mrs. Harley hasn't ever lost sight of her purpose.

''My mom said, 'Get this education so you can make the world better, so you can
make a difference,''' Mrs. Harley said. ''That's the message I try to bring to
my children, and these children. If I influence only one child a year, I feel
I've made a difference.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 9, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on April 25 about Stephanie Harley, a teacher in
Scarsdale honored for her programs about intolerance, bigotry and the Holocaust,
gave an incorrect name at several points for the sponsoring group. It is the
Westchester Holocaust Education Center, not Commission.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Stephanie Harley, with her fourth graders at Greenacres
Elementary School, includes lessons on the Holocaust, anti-Semitism and racism.
A display of pupils' work on the Holocaust is posted in Mrs. Harley's classroom.
(Photographs by Susan Farley for The New York Times)(pg. 4)
 Stephanie Harley's pupils listen as she reads about the Holocaust. (Photo by
Susan Farley for The New York Times)(pg. 6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (92%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (90%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL
TEACHERS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); PRIMARY
SCHOOLS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); CURRICULA (89%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
EMPLOYEES (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (84%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(78%); RACE & RACISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (73%); WORLD WAR II (73%); FAMINE (72%); JEWISH HOLIDAYS &
OBSERVANCES (71%); INTERVIEWS (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); ARMENIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 5, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: WORLD REACTION;
Revulsion at Prison Abuse Provokes Scorn for the U.S.

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1069 words


Across the Arab world and beyond, the tormenting of Iraqi prisoners by their
American guards shredded already thin support for Washington's invasion of Iraq
and its vow to install democratic values and respect for human rights.

The outrage over the abuse shown in pictures splashed across front pages and
television screens drew emotional comparisons asking how the American occupation
of the country could be distinguished from the way Saddam Hussein's government
oppressed ordinary Iraqis.

A few commentators in the Middle East criticized what they called an element of
hypocrisy in the reaction, since virtually no voices were raised during decades
of torture in Iraqi prisons or elsewhere. But more commonly the images seemed to
feed existing deep anger at the United States because it had promised that it
would be better.

"The United States already had very little credibility in the Middle East, and
it is now approaching zero," said Abdelmonem Said, the director of Al Ahram
Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo.

"What remains of the American logic for being in Iraq?" he asked. "If we start
with the issue of weapons of mass destruction, there are no weapons of mass
destruction.

"There was talk about fighting terrorism, and they brought terrorism with them.
Finally, the issue of democracy and respect for human rights: Saddam was a
butcher who tortured people; now the United States is torturing people."

Even conduits for the Egyptian government's views, normally somewhat circumspect
in taking direct potshots at the American administration except as regards its
support for Israel, said the abuses confirmed that Washington had been lying
when it said toppling Mr. Hussein was in the best interest of the Iraqis.

"The fact is that the behavior of these soldiers is totally in line with the
mission for which they came to Iraq to begin with," the semiofficial daily Al
Ahram editorialized, charging that Washington's real goals were "to invade this
major Arab country, destroy its economic and military capabilities, tear up its
state as a service to Israeli interests, control its enormous oil wealth and
eliminate anything that might hinder these aims, whether coming from the army,
the people or the armed national resistance."

Such reactions were not limited to the Arab world. Overall the treatment of the
prisoners was seen as a vivid example of the chaos enveloping the entire
enterprise. In France, where most people had opposed the war as misguided, some
commentators could barely contain their sense of vindication.

Le Monde ran a front-page cartoon yesterday showing an American military boot
crushing the head of an Iraqi while its owner told him, "Repeat after me:
DE-MO-CRA-CY!"

Some saw the episode as an extension of the United States exempting itself from
international rules, for instance refusing to recognize the 600 detainees at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as prisoners of war. "Countries like America that exempt
themselves from international rules are vulnerable to such excesses," wrote
Joseph Limagne in Ouest-France, the country's most popular daily.

A German paper, Die Welt, said it seemed to be yet another example of the
problems in controlling Iraq arising because senior officials like Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were determined to prove that it could be done with
a minimum number of soldiers.

In Iraq, the Governing Council demanded that Iraqis gain a role in running the
prisons and that Iraqi judges be included in investigating the abuses. "They
should let the ministries here have free access to those prisons as well as
human rights organizations," said Mahmoud Othman, a member of the council.

Small repercussions were already noticeable. At the United Nations, when the
United States walked out of a vote for the organization's human rights agency,
protesting the re-election of Sudan to the agency, the Sudanese ambassador fired
back by accusing the Americans of ignoring the mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners.

Some predicted a more dire reaction. "In the minds of many this may well justify
attacks against Americans or other Westerners," said an American official in the
Middle East.

A few remarked that focusing criticism solely on Washington was sheer hypocrisy,
considering the history of torture in Arab jails.

Writing in the daily Al Bayan in the United Arab Emirates, Ahmad Amorabi said
the United States probably expected to get away with such horrible abuse because
Arabs had long been passive about torture.

"Who will take pictures of the even more hideous practices in the Arab world's
prisons where thousands upon thousands of prisoners of conscience have been
tortured for many years while we, the millions of Arabs outside the prisons,
pretend to neither see nor hear?" he wrote.

Analysts expressed the belief that the fallout from the pictures would not just
undermine the credibility of the United States, but that of local rights groups
and individuals pushing Western democratic systems.

"Eventually the images will fade away, but it will be very difficult for the
U.S. to preach democracy and freedom and respect for human rights," said Dr.
Mohamed Kamal, an American-educated professor of political science at Cairo
University.

That certainly seemed to be the reaction in the street.

"They do not respect us," said Mervat Ali, an Egyptian government employee.
"They do not respect Islam or our humanity or values."

"Is this the democracy they are talking about?" she said. "To rape the Iraqis?"

Some papers made even nastier allegations than those reported in the American
press. The opposition daily Al Wafd in Cairo published a front-page picture that
it said showed the gang rape of an Iraqi woman by United States soldiers. Its
authenticity could not be verified, and Al Wafd did not disclose its source.

Many commentators suggested that public trials were the only way to assuage
widespread anger.

"If the U.S. seriously puts on trial, court-martials and punishes those from the
highest to the lowest ranks, and thus shows the world that it is taking this
seriously, this will get people to look beyond the photographs," said Mona
Eltahawy, a columnist for the pan-Arab daily Al Sharq al Awsat.

She did note that President Bush has asked the world not to judge his countrymen
on thedebased acts of a few. "That's what we said after 9/11," she said. "Don't
judge the intentions of the Muslim world by the crazed, deranged acts of a few."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: On a Baghdad street, papers carried front-page articles on the
abuse of Iraqi prisoners by American guards. (Photo by Ashley Gilbertson for The
New York Times) Chart: "Overseas, Shock and Condemnation"Al Wafd -- May
1Opposition newspaper in Cairo Headline: 'Disgrace! The American Army tortures
the Iraqi prisoners with electricity and forces them to practice debauchery' Le
Monde -- May 4Newspaper in Paris Headline: "The revelation of torturein Iraq
jolts America"Cartoon: "Repeat after me: DE-MO-CRA-CY!" Al Quds al Arabi -- May
1London-based Arab newspaper Headline: "Abu Ghraibs pictures disclose America:
torture, sexual abuse against the Iraqi prisoners"

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PRISONS (89%); POWS & MIAS (78%);
ARMIES (74%); TERRORISM (71%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (71%); WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION (71%); ARMED FORCES (63%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (78%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (90%); PARIS, FRANCE (51%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); CUBA
(90%); EGYPT (90%); FRANCE (67%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture Is Often a Temptation And Almost Never Works

BYLINE: By JAMES GLANZ

SECTION: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review; Pg. 5; The World

LENGTH: 1095 words


IT was two months before Sept. 11, 2001, in an Arab country that will remain
unnamed, and the Iraqi subject of the interrogation was not talking. So the
translator, a 6-foot-5, iron-jawed local man with scars from the wars he had
been in, turned to the interrogator.

''Do you want me to soften him up?'' the translator asked.

No one in the room had any doubt about the import of those words, said Marc
Garlasco, an intelligence officer who was present. But instead of continuing
with the perfect B-movie script and allowing the stonewalling Iraqi to be beaten
up or humiliated, the interrogator blew up.

''Are you nuts?'' he shouted.

After calling a break, he asked the translator if he had ever revealed secrets
under torture when he had been captured. Never, the translator said. ''Listen,''
the interrogator lectured him. ''Torture doesn't work.''

Torture can make people talk -- but experienced interrogators know that they
usually can't tell if what the subject says under torture or humiliation is
true, because the subject will say what he or she thinks will end the torture.
Novice interrogators are seldom aware of how compromised information gained
under duress is likely to be.

It now seems apparent that after 9/11, scenes like the one in the Arab
interrogation room became more rare. Even before the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison
in Iraq, at least according to human rights organizations, questionable
interrogation practices verging on torture were taking place at bases in
Afghanistan and the American detention center at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.

Whatever the truth of the other allegations, the abuse of prisoners at Abu
Ghraib shouts out for an explanation: how could ordinary American soldiers and
civilian contractors inflict such degradation on other human beings?

One answer, say psychologists, former intelligence officers and military
analysts, may lie in the nature of torture itself: Torture and humiliation is a
landscape without boundaries, a terrible slope that even the most practiced
interrogators can slide down once they allow themselves to apply the slightest
physical or psychological pressure.

Yehezkel Lein, head of the research department at B'Tselem, an Israeli human
rights organization, said that after Israel began curbing the use of physical
pressure in the late 1980's, it initially limited its use only to so-called
ticking time bombs -- prisoners with knowledge of an imminent attack. But he
said that B'Tselem research showed that even under those guidelines, roughly 80
percent of detained Palestinians ended up being subjected to physical techniques
like severe sleep deprivation, sitting in painful positions for hours and worse.

''It was impossible to draw a clear line,'' Mr. Lein said. He cited the practice
of grabbing a prisoner's shirt and shaking him. He said the shaking sometimes
became so violent that several prisoners died.

''You can try to put it onto a continuum,'' said Dr. Rona M. Fields, a
psychologist and senior researcher at the Center for Advanced Defense Studies at
George Washington University's engineering school.

But, she added, ''as soon as the person is intimidated, it's torture.''

Dr. Fields gave another example of how torture in the wrong hands can quickly
spiral out of control and waste lives. After the coup that brought Gen. Augusto
Pinochet to power in Chile, military interrogators who used ''grotesque and
terrible'' torture often killed their subjects before learning anything of
value, Dr. Fields said, forcing the country to turn to the better-trained
police. Employing methods she said they had learned from C.I.A. and Defense
Department manuals, the police were better able to keep their subjects alive
until they revealed information, which they sometimes did.

The debate over what went horribly wrong at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq has
oscillated between the assertion that the soldiers and contractors who
mistreated prisoners were, in a twisted way, having a good time, and the
possibility that they were acting under orders.

''Maybe it's a 'Lord of the Flies'-type situation where basic social norms break
down,'' said Mr. Garlasco, who is now a senior military analyst at Human Rights
Watch, an independent rights monitor. If so, the low-level soldiers were being
led by what Boaz Ganor, director of the International Policy Institute for
Counterterrorism in Israel, called ''their own weird satisfaction, which has
nothing to do with counterterrorism.'' Judging by other cases of abuse, the
reservists and civilian contractors at the prison were probably poorly
supervised, Dr. Fields said. That, she said, could have left them ''responsible
for judgments and choices for behaviors that in civilian life they would never
be entrusted with because they are not capable of that.''

Another possibility is that they were ordered by higher-ups to ''soften up'' the
prisoners, in the words of the iron-jawed translator. But if that was true, then
those in charge were if anything even more unskilled at real interrogation than
their subordinates, the experts say.

''You've got to be able to count on the quality of the information you're
obtaining,'' said Michael Baker, a 16-year veteran of the C.I.A. who is now
chief executive of Diligence Middle East, a private security company that is
working in Iraq. ''And once the prisoner is being tortured, how do you rely on
what he's saying, because people will do anything to make the torture go away,''
Mr. Baker said.

In other words, torture doesn't work.

The Geneva Convention against torture prohibits ''any act by which severe pain
or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person
for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or a
confession.''

Even that careful bureaucratese is ''obviously very subjective,'' Mr. Garlasco
said. Legal guidelines set forth by the Army Intelligence Center and Fort
Huachuca in Arizona, where government interrogators are trained, are more
explicit: ''Soldiers cannot use any form of physical torture, including food
deprivation, beating, infliction of pain through chemicals or bondage, or
electric shock. Soldiers also may not use mental torture, such as mock
executions, abnormal sleep deprivation or chemically induced psychosis.''

But somehow, none of the guidelines worked. As the world waits for the outcome
of investigations into the Abu Ghraib abuses, the message may be that only the
most highly skilled and disciplined interrogators have a chance of keeping
themselves on the crest of the frightful and dark slope called torture.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: 100 years ago and today: In 1905, top, Japanese troops beat a
Korean man to get a confession
last week, Americans in Iraq were accused of abusing prisoners. (Photos Courtesy
of The Washington Post
 top, Hulton Archive/Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); PSYCHOLOGY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(78%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); PRISONS (69%); MENTAL
HEALTH PRACTICE (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%); ARMED FORCES (62%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (92%); CUBA (90%); IRAQ (90%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: KILLINGS;
Assassinations Tear Into Iraq's Educated Class

BYLINE:  By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1237 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 6


Abdul al-Latif al-Mayah was never safe. Not before the war started, and not
after.

A couple of weeks ago, Dr. Mayah, a 53-year-old political scientist and human
rights advocate known in his neighborhood here as "the professor," was driving
to work when eight masked gunmen jumped in front of his car. They yanked him
into the street, the police said, and shot him nine times in front of his
bodyguard and another university lecturer.

In an instant, he became one of hundreds of intellectuals and midlevel
administrators who Iraqi officials say have been assassinated since May in a
widening campaign against Iraq's professional class.

"They are going after our brains," said Lt. Col. Jabbar Abu Natiha, head of the
organized crime unit of the Baghdad police. "It is a big operation. Maybe even a
movement."

These white-collar killings, American and Iraqi officials say, are separate from
-- and in some ways more insidious than -- the settling of scores with former
Baath Party officials, or the singling-out of police officers and others thought
to be collaborating with the occupation. Hundreds of them have been attacked as
well in an effort to sow insecurity and chaos.

But by silencing urban professionals, said Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, a spokesman
for the occupation forces, the guerrillas are waging war on Iraq's fledgling
institutions and progress itself. The dead include doctors, lawyers and judges.

"This works against everything we're trying to do here," the general said.

It has never been easy being part of the educated class in Iraq, certainly not
under the repression by Saddam Hussein. Now, all over the country, it is a
lethal business.

In Baghdad, Haifa Aziz Daoud, a high-ranking electricity manager, was shot dead
through her front door in June. The deputy mayor, Faris Abdul Razzaq al-Assam,
was also shot and killed near his home in October. Every member of the Baghdad
City Council has been threatened, said Muhammad Zamil Saadi, a lawyer and
council member.

"In the past, it was the party people who got the good jobs," said Mr. Saadi,
who has two bullet holes in his windshield. "Now it is the professionals. These
killers are desperate to go back to those times."

The American authorities say foreign terrorists may be behind the attacks.
"There is a huge incentive for foreign terrorists to create chaos here," General
Kimmitt said.

The Iraqi authorities point to former Baath Party elements or displaced military
officers. They say the killings have been coordinated.

American and Iraqi officials say there is no tally of all the professionals
assassinated. But Lt. Akmad Mahmoud, of the Baghdad police, said there had been
"hundreds" of professionals killed in Baghdad.

Mr. Saadi, the Baghdad city council member who works closely with the police,
estimated the number at from 500 to 1,000.

Colonel Natiha, the head of the organized crime unit, said there were too many
to count. He blamed the general sense of lawlessness in Iraq, which is still
struggling to form its own police forces.

General Kimmitt said the military was not involved in the investigations, though
advisers from the F.B.I. were helping train Iraqi detectives.

Lieutenant Mahmoud, 28, says he has not met with any American advisers. He has
been left to investigate Dr. Mayah's death by himself, one in a sea of similar
cases.

In Basra, Asaad al-Shareeda, the dean of the engineering college, was
assassinated in November. Two months later, Muhammad Qasim, a teacher in the
technical college, was stabbed to death in his home.

In Mosul, Yousef Khorshid, an investigative judge, and Adel al-Haddidi, head of
the local lawyer's association, were killed in drive-by shootings in December.
The same car was seen by witnesses in both cases.

Iman al-Munim Yunis, director of the translation department at Mosul University,
said someone recently slipped a note under her door. It read, "It's better to
leave your job or you will face what you don't want." In the envelope was a
bullet.

She resigned.

Several physicians have been killed. Many more have been threatened. Some have
closed their practices. Others have held on.

"I was given one week," said Abid Ali Mahdi, director of the Institute of
Radiotherapy and Nuclear Medicine in Baghdad. "But I can't quit. If I step down,
nobody would come and take my place."

Dr. Mayah, the professor who was killed, had also refused to be intimidated. He
spent years ducking the secret police under Mr. Hussein. As a member of the
Shiite underground, he pushed for the overthrow of the government, his family
recounted.

In the 1990's, he formed a secret society called United Iraq Is Our Home. He
drove around at night in his blue Volkswagen, other activists said, slipping
flyers out the window detailing the government's abuses.

Once, he pasted small messages onto Iraqi dinars, which he folded and left
behind on buses and park benches. People would pick up the money and read about
revolution.

"He was an old-fashioned activist, completely committed to the cause," said Sami
Mahmoud al-Baydhani, a historian at Mustansiriyah University in Baghdad, where
the professor served as director of Arab studies.

A few years ago, the secret police took the professor to their headquarters. "We
have an expression," said Khalid Ali al-Mayah, the professor's brother, "anybody
who goes into that building, comes out a body."

But one of the agents was a former student and let Dr. Mayah go. According to
his family, he had many allies in the security services. They considered him the
professor with nine lives.

His daughter and only child, Hiba, 16, used to sit up with him at night as he
drafted fliers. Once, she asked him if he was scared.

"He told me, 'If I'm scared and you're scared, who's going to do anything?' "
Hiba recalled.

After the war, Dr. Mayah turned down an invitation to meet with Jay Garner, the
former general who was first American administrator for Iraq. He told his
friends that it was wrong that a military man should control the country.

Instead, colleagues said, the professor concentrated on human rights, going to a
conference in Jordan and holding symposiums.

Then the threats started.

Last fall, the police said, a man came to his office and told him to close the
human rights center at Mustansiriyah University. The professor told him to go
away.

Two days before he was killed, his brother said, Dr. Mayah received a final
threat: Resign or else.

He gave a stack of his papers to his secretary for safekeeping. He told his
daughter that when the time came for marriage, she should consult with her
uncle. It was as if he was saying goodbye.

"I knew my father was surrounded by danger," said Hiba, wearing a black veil and
a black leather jacket, a product of two worlds. "I was closer to my father than
to my own soul."

That last night, Dr. Mayah went into town for an interview with Al Jazeera, the
Arab television network, in which he criticized the occupation and called for
prompt elections.

The next morning, Jan. 19, Dr. Mayah left for work in his blue Mitsubishi. He
made it as far as a dusty side street about a mile away.

"We had a pledge, to live together and die together," Khalid, the professor's
brother, said as he started to cry. What hurts most, he said, is that after all
the years his brother secretly worked for democracy in Iraq, its arrival was
just around the corner.

"These people are not just assassinating our brothers," he said. "They are
assassinating our future."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Abid Ali Mahdi, an Iraqi doctor whose life has been
threatened.; The windshield of Dr. Mayah's car, after his shooting. Officials
say he is one of hundreds of intellectuals who have been assassinated since
May.; Khalid Ali al-Mayah, whose brother Abdul al-Latif al-Mayah, an Iraqi
professor, was recently assassinated. (Photographs by Farah Nosh/Panos, for The
New York Times)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSASSINATION (92%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
SHOOTINGS (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%);
CITIES (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (86%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS
(76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); LAWYERS (74%); MAYORS (74%); IRAQ WAR (73%);
ORGANIZED CRIME (73%); JUDGES (69%) Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations
; Politics and Government; Terrorism; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Doctors;
Legal Profession; Judges; Terrorism; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations
; Politics and Government; Terrorism; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Doctors;
Legal Profession; Judges; Terrorism; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Jeffrey Gettleman; Mark (Brig Gen) Kimmitt; Khalid
Ali Al- Mayah; Abdul Al-Latif Al- (Prof) Mayah; Jeffrey Gettleman; Mark (Brig
Gen) Kimmitt; Khalid Ali Al- Mayah; Abdul Al-Latif Al- (Prof) Mayah

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (96%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Dark Side of America

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 594 words


The sickening pictures of American troops humiliating Iraqi prisoners have led
inevitably to questions about the standards of treatment in the corrections
system at home, which has grown tenfold over the last 30 years and now jails
people at eight times the rate of France and six times the rate of Canada.
Conditions vary widely from state to state and community to community. But as
The Times's Fox Butterfield reported recently, some of the chilling pictures
from Iraq -- such as the ones of inmates being paraded around naked -- could
have been taken at some American prisons. And humiliation by prison guards is
far from the first thing on most American inmates' list of worries.

The nearly 12 million people who pass through the corrections system each year
are often subject to violent attacks by other inmates, and prisoner-on-prisoner
rape is endemic. Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis, easily transmitted in
tight spaces, have become a common problem. Illegal drugs ferried in by prison
employees -- and used by inmates who share needles -- have made prison a
high-risk setting for H.I.V. infection and most recently the liver-destroying
hepatitis C.

Some prisons have actually cut back on testing for disease, rather than risk
being required to treat large numbers of infected inmates at bankrupting costs.
That means, of course, that released inmates will unknowingly pass on diseases
to others. By failing to confront public health problems in prison, the country
could be setting itself up for new epidemics down the line.

It is hard to quantify how many American prisoners are abused, or allowed to
suffer from untreated illnesses, since the system operates largely in the
shadows, outside public scrutiny. The maze of federal, state and local
institutions defies easy assessment.

Things are more transparent in Europe, thanks to a powerful, independent prison
commission, informally known as the Committee for Prevention of Torture.
Established in 1987, The C.P.T. has unlimited access to places of detention,
including prisons, juvenile centers, psychiatric hospitals and police station
holding areas. Human rights violations -- including medical problems -- quickly
become public. Such a system is long overdue in the United States.

The need for such a body was underscored last year, when Congress passed the
Prison Rape Elimination Act, ordering the Justice Department to collect data on
this serious problem and to create a mechanism for dealing with it. Prison
officials predictably play down rape as a problem, but a harrowing report from
Human Rights Watch suggested that prisoner-on-prisoner rape accompanied by
savage violence was commonplace, and that officials often looked the other way.

Psychiatric care for psychotic inmates is poor to nonexistent. A recent study by
the Correctional Association of New York found that nearly a quarter of inmates
assigned to disciplinary lockdown -- confined to small cells 23 hours a day --
were mentally ill. Their symptoms worsened in isolation; nearly half had tried
to commit suicide. Dissociated and sometimes violent, these people are dumped
onto the streets when they finish their sentences.

The prison system can no longer be seen as the province of prison officials who
cover up or mismanage problems that eventually come back to haunt the rest of
the society. The country needs to formulate national prison standards and create
an independent body that enforces them, if only by opening prisons to greater
public scrutiny.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (93%); PRISONS (91%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); MENTAL
ILLNESS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); PSYCHIATRY (78%);
TORTURE (78%); TUBERCULOSIS (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SEX OFFENSES (73%); HEPATITIS C (73%);
HEPATITIS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (73%); MEDICAL
DIAGNOSTICS  SCREENING & TESTING (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); EPIDEMICS (71%);
POLICE FORCES (71%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (70%); DRUG RESISTANCE (69%); PUBLIC
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (68%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (65%); GENOCIDE (61%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (61%)
Prisons and Prisoners; Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; Sex Crimes;
Assaults; Tuberculosis; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Barred Legal Review Of Detentions, Lawyer Says

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PROCEDURES

LENGTH: 850 words


Military lawyers, who had an active role in supervising interrogations in the
first Gulf War, have been excluded from them in the current war in Iraq, a human
rights lawyer who has studied the matter says.

The lawyer, Scott Horton, a former chairman of the Committee on International
Human Rights of the City Bar Association in New York, said this might have
played a part in the abuse of detainees at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.

''In the interrogation process,'' Mr. Horton said, ''the fact that lawyers were
cut out just opened the door for abuse.''

Mr. Horton said he learned of the changed procedures from senior military
lawyers in two confidential meetings last year. Prompted in part by the
meetings, the committee issued a report in April on the interrogation of
detainees.

A Pentagon spokesman did not respond to requests for comment.

In the Gulf War of 1991, members of the military's Judge Advocate General's
Corps, known as JAG's, took an active role, experts said.

''We had JAG officers at all of the detention facilities where interrogations
took place,'' said John Norton Moore, a law professor at the University of
Virginia and a former American diplomat.

Mr. Horton said, ''There had been a process of lawyers being on duty on site at
detention centers'' in the first gulf war. Interrogation rooms there, he said,
were equipped with two-way mirrors. ''The interrogators never knew if a lawyer
was on the other side,'' he said, ''and lawyers had a right to intercede if
interrogators crossed the line.''

''This practice,'' Mr. Horton said, ''has stopped.''

Mr. Horton, a lawyer with Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler in New York, said the
military lawyers spoke in generalities and did not indicate that they were
concerned about conditions in Iraq.

''We all thought that this has really got to be about Guantanamo and
Afghanistan,'' Mr. Horton added, referring to sites at which the United States
also holds prisoners, including members of Al Qaeda and the Taliban. Recent
disclosures about abuse of prisoners in Iraq made him realize that the absence
of lawyers there might have been a contributing factor.

Professor Moore said he did not know what procedures were in place at Abu Ghraib
and other detention centers in Iraq but said the current Bush administration
seems less concerned with legal standards and the role lawyers can play than its
predecessors.

''Something happened with the significance with which law was taken,'' he said.

Legal experts noted other instances of the phenomenon.

Miles P. Fischer, the chairman of the bar association's Committee on Military
Affairs and Justice, said, for example, that ''JAG officers were given very
little opportunity to participate in the order establishing military
commissions.'' The commissions, created by executive order in 2001, are to try
prisoners designated unlawful combatants, including some held at Guantanamo Bay.

Jordan Paust, a law professor at the University of Houston and a former member
of the faculty at the Army's Judge Advocate General's School, noted similar
concerns.

''I have seen for two years inklings and rumblings from active-duty JAG
officers,'' he said, ''about the attitude of this administration.''

Mr. Fischer said that military lawyers can serve an important function.

''The commanders want it,'' he said, referring to readily available lawyers.
''We have sensitized the commanders that they may be guilty of grave breaches of
the Geneva Conventions'' should they fail to comply with the law. The
conventions protect prisoners of war, civilian detainees in wartime and others.

Sidney S. Rosdeitcher, an expert in human rights law and a member of the
committee that released the report on interrogations, said that the United
States had in recent years shown disdain for the conventions.

''The very fact that the lawyers were taken out says something,'' Mr.
Rosdeitcher said. ''There's just an aura of lawlessness. Once you depart, and
once you start engaging in conduct that goes over the line, whatever your
justification, it goes out of control.''

He noted that previous administrations adhered to the Geneva Conventions even
when they were not obviously applicable.

''During the Vietnam War,'' he said, ''we treated the Vietcong as P.O.W.'s as a
matter of policy,'' he said. ''They were no more entitled to that treatment than
Al Qaeda.''

The Bush administration has said that the conventions do not apply to captured
members of Al Qaeda or the Taliban held at Guantanamo Bay and in Afghanistan. It
has acknowledged, however, that the conventions apply in Iraq.

Mr. Fischer dismissed concerns that giving lawyers a significant role can slow
and complicate military decision-making.

''The JAG's are so integrated that it normally doesn't cost time,'' he added.

Mr. Horton said the officers who met with him were disturbed by what they called
the administration's disdain for international law.

''They talked about a dismissive attitude,'' Mr. Horton said. ''They have a
strong feeling of pride, of 50 years of compliance with the Geneva Conventions.
They have a sacred feeling about this.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The military police searched detainees on May 11 near an
interrogation room at the Abu Ghraib prison. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (94%); DESERT STORM (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%);
IRAQ WAR (79%); TALIBAN (79%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (78%);
PRISONS (76%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (66%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (65%);
AL-QAEDA (60%); TERRORISM (60%) Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Persian Gulf War; Terrorism

COMPANY: PATTERSON BELKNAP WEBB & TYLER LLP (84%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (84%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (84%)

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush; Scott Horton; Adam Liptak

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); GULF STATES (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Forced Nudity of Iraqi Prisoners Is Seen as a Pervasive Pattern, Not Isolated
Incidents

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE and DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: SEXUAL
HUMILIATION; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1592 words


In the weeks since photographs of naked detainees set off the abuse scandal at
Abu Ghraib, military officials have portrayed the sexual humiliation captured in
the images as the isolated acts of a rogue night shift.

But forced nudity of prisoners was pervasive in the military intelligence unit
of Abu Ghraib, so much so that soldiers later said they had not seen ''the whole
nudity thing,'' as one captain called it, as abusive or out of the ordinary.

While there have been reports of forced nakedness at detention facilities in
Afghanistan and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the practice was apparently far more
aggressive at Abu Ghraib, according to interviews, reports from human rights
groups and sworn statements from detainees and soldiers. The detainees said
leaving prisoners naked started as far back as last July, three months before
the seven soldiers now charged and their military police company arrived at the
prison. It bred a culture, some soldiers say, where the abuse captured on film
could happen.

Detainees were paraded naked past other prisoners and guards; some were ordered
to do jumping jacks and sing ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' in the nude, according
to a several witnesses. Also, a father and his grown son were stripped, then
forced to stand and stare at each other. The International Committee of the Red
Cross, visiting in October, found prisoners left naked in their cells for days,
modestly trying to shield themselves behind cardboard from meals-ready-to-eat
boxes.

It is not clear how the practice emerged and, if it was official policy, exactly
who authorized it. Col. Thomas M. Pappas, the military intelligence officer in
charge of interrogations at the prison, told Army investigators that detainees
might be stripped and shackled for questioning, but not without ''good reason.''
When Red Cross monitors expressed alarm about prisoners being left in their
cells or forced to move about naked, they said military intelligence officials
''confirmed that it was part of the military intelligence process.''

''It was not uncommon to see people without clothing,'' Capt. Donald J. Reese,
the warden of the tier where the worst abuses occurred, told investigators in a
sworn statement in January. ''I only saw males. I was told the 'whole nudity
thing' was an interrogation procedure used by military intelligence, and never
thought much of it.''

An analyst from the 205th Military Intelligence Battalion, who asked not to be
identified for fear of being punished for speaking out, said: ''If you walked
down through the wing of the prison where they were being held, they would have
them strip down naked. Sometimes they would stand on boxes and would hold their
arms out. That happened almost every night -- having them naked. I wouldn't say
it's abuse. It's definitely degrading to them.''

Soldiers said at least one civilian interrogator, Steven Stefanowicz, had been
so alarmed by the use of nudity that he reported a military intelligence
interrogator after she made a detainee walk naked down a cellblock to humiliate
him. His lawyer said Mr. Stefanowicz, who an Army report said might have been
''directly or indirectly'' responsible for abuses, had not thought stripping
detainees was an appropriate interrogation technique, and had worried that doing
so would incite more unrest at a time when guards were fending off rioters with
live bullets.

Nudity is considered particularly shameful in Muslim culture, a violation of
religious principles. While nudity as a disciplinary or coercive tool may be
especially objectionable to Muslims, they are hardly the only victims of the
practice. Soldiers in Nazi Germany paraded naked prisoners in daylight, and
human rights groups have documented the use of nudity during conflicts in Egypt,
Chile and Turkey, and in Afghanistan during the Soviet occupation. Central
Intelligence Agency training manuals from the 1960's and 1980's taught the
stripping of prisoners as an interrogation tool. Nudity and sexual humiliation
have also been reported in American prisons where a number of guards at Abu
Ghraib worked in their civilian lives.

Complaints about sexual humiliation have also emerged in Afghanistan. Seven
Afghan men who had been held at the main detention center in Bagram, where the
deaths of two detainees and accusations of abuse are now under investigation,
said in recent interviews that during various periods from December 2002 to
April 2004, they had been subjected to repeated rectal exams, and forced to
change clothes, shower and go to the bathroom in front of female soldiers.

''I'm 50 years old, and no one has ever taken my clothes,'' said Abdullah Khan
Sahak, who was released from American custody on April 19 and complained that he
was photographed nude in Afghanistan. ''It was a very hard moment for me. It was
death for me.''

Zakim Shah, a 20-year-old farmer, and Parkhudin, a 26-year-old farmer and former
soldier who, like many Afghans, has only one name, said female soldiers had
watched groups of male prisoners take showers at Bagram and undergo rectal
exams.

''We don't know if it's medical or if they were very proud of themselves,'' Mr.
Shah said. ''But if it was medical, why were they taking our clothes off in
front of the women? We are Afghans, not Americans.''

On two or three occasions, the two men said, the women commented to one another
about the size of prisoners' penises. ''They were laughing a lot,'' Parkhudin
said, adding that the women taunted prisoners during showers, saying, ''You're
my dog.''

Three other prisoners reported being questioned while naked at an American
firebase in the city of Gardez in 2003. And at Camp Rhino, John Walker Lindh,
the American now serving a 20-year sentence for aiding the Taliban, was stripped
and bound with duct tape to a stretcher for two days, according to the statement
of fact in his plea-bargain agreement.

At Guantanamo Bay, where some prisoners from Afghanistan were taken, a few
British detainees said forced nudity had occurred. One of them, Tarek Dergoul,
said after his release that some detainees had been stripped of their clothing,
which would then be returned piece by piece in exchange for good behavior.

But Lt. Col. Leon H. Sumpter, a spokesman for the military joint task force that
runs the detention center, said in a recent interview that nudity had never
occurred in connection with interrogation or discipline and had not been
approved.

A military official who served at Guantanamo said that after a wave of suicide
attempts by prisoners in late 2002 and early 2003, the military police guards
did take away clothing from some detainees who were considered suicide risks,
out of concern that they might rip up their garments to make nooses.

In its visits to detention centers and prisons in Iraq, the Red Cross singled
out the military intelligence section at Abu Ghraib for using public nudity in a
''systematic'' pattern of maltreatment. By contrast, the committee said it had
heard no complaints of ''physical ill treatment'' at Camp Bucca, another large
detention center.

A list of interrogation techniques posted at Abu Ghraib in September, indicating
which were acceptable and which needed special authorization, makes no mention
of leaving detainees naked. A senior military officer said, ''There was no
interrogation authority that authorized the removal of all clothing from a
detainee.''

But detainees who made sworn statements after the prison abuse scandal broke all
mentioned having been left naked, some for days. The practice goes back at least
as far as July 10, when, according to his statement, a detainee named Amjed
Isail Waleed was left unclothed in a dark room for five days. Another detainee,
Ameen Saeed al-Sheik, said he was stripped on Oct. 7, a week before the arrival
of the 372nd Military Police Company, the unit where soldiers are now charged
with abuse.

By Oct. 20, forced nudity was such accepted practice that an incident report
written by two of the soldiers now charged said an inmate in the cell where
prisoners were held for interrogation had been ordered ''stripped in his cell
for six (6) days'' for apparently whittling a toothbrush into what a soldier
believed was a knife.

In late October, Red Cross monitors were so alarmed by the number of nude
detainees that they halted their visit and demanded an immediate explanation.

''The military intelligence officer in charge of the interrogation explained
that this practice was 'part of the process,' '' the Red Cross wrote in a report
in February.

In November, Specialist Luciana Spencer of the 66th Military Intelligence Group
ordered a detainee stripped and handcuffed behind his back during his
interrogation, then paraded him outdoors in the cold past other detainees to his
cell.

''I remember we said, 'Do you really have to walk him out naked?' '' said the
intelligence analyst, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''And they said,
'Yeah, yeah, we have to embarrass him.' ''

Mr. Stefanowicz reported the incident, and Specialist Spencer was moved out of
the interrogation unit. Sometime around December, the nudity seemed to stop,
according to several soldiers. Captain Reese, the tier warden, credited the Red
Cross.

''They were concerned with the amount of nudity, and the area was cold and
damp,'' he said in his statement to investigators on Jan. 18. ''The detainees
did not have appropriate clothing and bedding. The second visit occurred two
weeks ago, and things were much better. The nudity has stopped, and they seemed
happy with what they saw.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Col. Thomas M. Pappas of military intelligence was in charge of
interrogations at Abu Ghraib. (Photo by Department of Defense)
Iraqis picked up for looting weapons were marched naked through a park into a
building after their clothes were burned by American troops in April 2003. They
were then freed and chased naked onto the street. (Photo by Tomm W.
Christiansen/Dagbladet)
Capt. Donald J. Reese, a warden, said he never thought much about the ''whole
nudity thing.'' (Photo by Associated Press)
 Steven Stefanowicz, a civilian, reported a military interrogator for forcing a
detainee to go naked. (Photo by ''Today Tonight'' Seven Network, Australia)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX SCANDALS (90%); SCANDALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PRISONS (89%);
EVIDENCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); NATURISTS & NATURISM (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); RELIGION (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); WITNESSES (74%);
INTERVIEWS (74%); SECURITY & ALARM SYSTEMS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
GENOCIDE (69%); CONVENIENCE FOODS (64%); TERRORISM (59%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
Islam; Nudism and Nudity; Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(54%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (54%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; David Rohde

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Urged To Charge Hussein Soon

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: LAWS OF WAR; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 14


If the United States government does not bring charges against Saddam Hussein
relatively soon it will be technically required, because of his prisoner-of-war
status, to release him after the restoration of limited sovereignty, officials
with human rights and aid groups said Monday.

None of the officials were advocating Mr. Hussein's release, and they said they
wanted him to stand trial. But they also said that since the United States
insists that the occupation will formally end on June 30, when limited powers
will be handed to the interim Iraqi government, the Geneva Convention requires
that the Americans bring charges against their prisoners of war or release them.

''We're not making any ultimatums or calls for release,'' Antonella Notari,
chief spokeswoman of the International Committee of the Red Cross, told The
Associated Press in Geneva on Monday. ''What we're saying is: 'Saddam Hussein,
as far as we understand today, is a P.O.W., prisoner of war, protected by the
third Geneva Convention as all prisoners of war are.'

''In theory, when a war ends and when an occupation ends, the detaining force
has to release prisoners of war or civilian detainees if there are no reasons
for holding them.''

But she added that a prisoner of war who is suspected of committing criminal
acts should be prosecuted and tried rather than simply released.

Vice President Dick Cheney said Monday that Mr. Hussein had ''long-established
ties'' with Al Qaeda, The Associated Press reported. He offered no details to
back up his assertion in a speech here before James Madison Institute, a
conservative research group.

In making its case for war in Iraq, Bush administration officials frequently
cited what they said were Mr. Hussein's decade-long contacts with Qaeda
operatives. They stopped short of claiming that Iraq was directly involved in
the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the United States, but critics say administration
officials left that impression with the American public.

In an interview Monday on Al Jazeera, the Qatar-based television channel, Iraq's
interim prime minister, Iyad Allawi, said the United States would hand over Mr.
Hussein and other leaders of his government for trial within two weeks.

''The transfer of Saddam Hussein and the others will take place within two
weeks,'' Mr. Allawi said.

The State Department said Monday that the United States would negotiate terms
with the Iraqi interim government for holding prisoners who, like Mr. Hussein,
were deemed to be threats.

Wilder Tayler, the legal director for Human Rights Watch, echoed Ms. Notari's
statement that prisoners of war should be released at the end of a conflict or
occupation unless they have been charged with any crimes.

''I wouldn't say there is much time for retaining somebody after that,'' he said
in a telephone interview.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (94%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (75%); INTERVIEWS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
CONSERVATISM (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (64%); TERRORISM (64%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (60%) United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; Geneva
Conventions; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (93%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (56%) State Department

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%); DICK CHENEY (58%) Saddam Hussein; Iyad (Prime Min)
Allawi; Edward Wong

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%); QATAR (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Chief to Join Powell in Sudan to Try to Halt Massacres

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 25


Secretary General Kofi Annan said Friday that he would meet Secretary of State
Colin L. Powell in Sudan next week in an effort to compel the Sudanese
government to end the ''catastrophe'' facing its people.

''The people of Darfur are suffering a catastrophe -- terrible crimes have been
committed against them,'' Mr. Annan said, referring to the area of the country
where pro-government Arab militias have been evicting and killing black Muslims
in a campaign that he said ''is bordering on ethnic cleansing.''

He said that he and Mr. Powell would be ''collectively putting pressure'' on
Sudan to ease restrictions and halt attacks on aid workers trying to get to tens
of thousands of people needing food and water, and to disband the so-called
Janjaweed militias, which are financed and equipped by the government.

In announcing Mr. Powell's plans to go to Darfur, Richard A. Boucher, the State
Department spokesman, said Thursday that the United States had not seen any
evidence that the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, was following
up his pledge earlier this week to disarm the militias.

International pressure on the Sudanese government to halt the killings and cease
blocking assistance has taken on particular urgency because of the imminent
onset of the rainy season, which makes much of the Darfur region difficult for
aid missions to reach.

Foreign ministry officials from France, Italy and Switzerland, as well as United
Nations officials, have been in Khartoum, the capital, expressing their concern
to the government, leading Mr. Bashir to complain that foreigners were
exploiting the plight of the people of Darfur to intervene in Sudanese affairs.

He has denied aid organizations' repeated reports that their workers are being
intimidated and impeded from reaching Darfur.

The violence in Darfur goes back to February 2003, when black African rebel
groups rose up against the government, charging that their region was being
neglected and their people left unprotected.

The government's response was to give license to the militiamen to retaliate,
and United Nations relief workers have reported seeing rampaging militia members
burning down homes and killing villagers while government police officers and
soldiers stood by without intervening.

The Bush administration says hundreds of villages have been bombed from the air
in attacks that in addition to killing residents have destroyed crops and
irrigation systems.

A United Nations human rights report last month accused the Sudanese government
of committing widespread rights violations in Darfur, where more than 10,000
people have been killed, another one million displaced and more than 120,000
forced into refugee camps in neighboring Chad.

Leaders of human rights organizations have warned that unless the world reacts
now, the ethnic killings in Darfur may become a massacre on the scale of the one
in 1994 in Rwanda and which the United Nations and the international community
failed to stop.

Mr. Annan has taken institutional and personal blame for that catastrophe, which
occurred while he was the head of the United Nations peacekeeping office.

He said failure by Sudan to respond now should cause the Security Council to
take up the case and consider measures like sanctions or military intervention.
''If the Sudanese government doesn't have the capacity to protect its
population,'' he said, ''the international community must be prepared to
assist.''

He acknowledged that the Council was not prepared to step in yet. ''I don't
think we are ready to send in the cavalry,'' he said. ''I'm not sure I have that
many countries willing to go. The Council will have to think about what to do if
it becomes necessary to take concrete action. Someone suggested sanctions, but
there are all sorts of actions the Council can take.''

Mr. Annan made his remarks at a news conference at United Nations headquarters
in New York before leaving this weekend on his three-week trip, which will take
him to Asia and Europe as well as Africa. He and Mr. Powell will meet in Darfur
on Wednesday.

Mr. Annan said that donor nations had come up with only $60 million of a
promised $200 million to assist in Darfur and that the money was desperately
needed for basic matters like health, water and sanitation. According to the
United Nations, the lead donor has been the United States, followed by the
European Union, Britain, Canada, Australia and Germany.

Asked if he would hold the government in Khartoum responsible for directing the
militias, Mr. Annan said: ''The perpetrators ought to be put on notice that they
will be held accountable, whoever they are. It is not just the field commanders,
but also some of the leaders who are giving the orders who may also be held
accountable.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (91%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (86%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); EVICTION (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); MUSLIM
AMERICANS (76%); RELIGION (75%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (75%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); REFUGEES (71%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); POLITICS
(66%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (60%) United States International Relations;
Islam; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Colin L (Sec) Powell

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Officials Blame Taliban in the Killing of 12 Civilians

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Jan. 8


The Taliban have returned to the offensive in southern Afghanistan with a string
of attacks, Afghan officials said Thursday.

After something of a lull during the constitutional convention, or loya jirga,
Taliban militants have killed at least 27 people in three days.

Twelve civilian men were tied up and executed on a remote mountain road in
Helmand Province, west of Kandahar, on Tuesday night. The attack had all the
hallmarks of Taliban militants, police and human rights officials said. On
Thursday, two Afghan soldiers were wounded in a bomb blast at a military base in
Kandahar.

The latest attacks also came two days after a double bomb blast that killed at
least 15 people and wounded 55. Among the dead and wounded were many children
who happened to be emerging from a nearby school. Officials immediately blamed
the Taliban, citing intelligence reports warning that the Taliban were preparing
a campaign of urban violence.

The United States military said in a statement on Thursday that it had evacuated
28 wounded from the double bombing to their field hospital at an air base east
of the city. Three of the wounded died, and the others were treated in military
hospitals in Bagram and Kandahar. In addition, 30 people were treated at the
civilian hospital in Kandahar, the statement said.

The attack on the 12 civilians was a calculated murder, Col. Muhammad Ayub, a
police official in Helmand Province, said. The civilians were villagers among a
group of 20 traveling from their home in Kijeran in Oruzgan Province south
through Helmand to the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, witnesses said. They had
stopped for the night at a small hotel when at 10 p.m. gunmen surrounded the
building and broke in, tying the hands of the travelers. They took the 12 men
outside, up a small hill and executed them, the witnesses said.

The men who were killed were all Shiite Hazaras, said Musa Husseini, 30, who
said he arrived at the village on Wednesday morning and saw the bodies. Six men
were missing and two had managed to escape. One was injured in the shooting and
was now in a hospital, he said.

"Obviously, it is those people who are against national unity and are making
problems between the tribes," Colonel Ayub said. "We are investigating into it,
but I am sure it is those terrorists -- Taliban, Al Qaeda and followers of
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar."

Amir Muhammad Ansari, the local representative of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, said, "Unfortunately, the situation is bad in these
provinces."

He said some of those behind the violence and instability in the region were
allied to the government, in particular commanders who often fight one another.
"The Taliban are taking advantage of this situation and making things worse," he
said.

In Kabul, Nader Naderi, chief spokesman of the Human Rights Commission, said,
"The nature of attacks of the Taliban in the last six to eight months is that
they are not choosing targets on specific grounds. They are attacking any
accessible target that creates an impact. To attack Afghan nationalities, such
as the Hazaras, is easy. It is a soft target and makes a noise."

Allied forces recently established a provincial reconstruction team in Kandahar
to try to enhance security and increase reconstruction efforts in the region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Afghanistan highlighting Kandahar: Twelve men were killed in the
mountains west of Kandahar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (95%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (75%);
MILITARY BASES (75%); CHILDREN (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
MURDER (57%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); LASHKAR GAH,
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putting the Sex Trade on Notice

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 369 words


Around the world, about one million women and children are seduced into leaving
their homelands every year and forced into prostitution or menial work in other
countries. Most are duped with promises of good jobs in more prosperous nations.
These cases are not confined to remote parts of the world. Of the 15 nations the
State Department listed last year as having done little or nothing to stop this
growing human rights abuse, five of the worst offenders were in the Western
Hemisphere: Belize, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Suriname.

A study by the Inter-American Commission of Women at the Organization of
American States in Washington shows that Latin American nations have mostly sat
back as women and children were treated as chattel. Women from Colombia were
smuggled as far away as Japan, and Dominican women ended up against their will
in Switzerland. Young Mexicans were enslaved in several states, including Texas,
Florida and New Jersey. Costa Rica and Belize became destinations for
impoverished women from Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. Without
passports or money, they were forced to supply sex to tourists, usually from the
United States and Europe. At least 70 Internet sites promote sex tourism in
Costa Rica.

Fortunately, all that is beginning to change, largely because of pressure from
Washington. Since the United States first passed a law against human trafficking
in 2000, an unusual alliance of religious groups, including conservative
evangelicals, and liberal women's and human rights organizations has pressed for
more action. Evangelical groups were partly responsible for President Bush's
strong statement at the United Nations on human trafficking. They also won the
appointment of John Miller, a former congressman from Washington State, as an
adviser on human trafficking to Secretary of State Colin Powell.

The Bush administration deserves credit for its tough stance. Its efforts in
Eastern Europe and Asia in particular improved law enforcement and helped women
freed from captors. But Washington has yet to give as much attention to Latin
America. That needs to change if sex traders are to understand that their free
ride in our backyard is over.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING
(89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); CONSERVATISM (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); LIBERALISM (71%); RELIGION (70%); SMUGGLING (69%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (67%); LEGISLATION (65%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (53%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (52%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); TEXAS,
USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); COSTA RICA (92%); EUROPE
(92%); BELIZE (91%); HONDURAS (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%); HAITI (79%); ASIA (79%);
SURINAME (79%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); MEXICO (79%);
SWITZERLAND (75%); CENTRAL EUROPE (70%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (57%); EASTERN
EUROPE (54%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
A Refugee's Loss of Innocence, A Lawyer's Loss of Ignorance

BYLINE:  By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 4; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 736 words


It is a pretty safe bet that a made-for-television movie about a persecuted
Afghan woman's struggle for asylum in the United States is not going to dwell on
the softer side of the Taliban regime.

Court TV's "Chasing Freedom" is a much better film than its didactic and perhaps
predictable topic would suggest. The story is based on an actual Immigration and
Naturalization Service case, but the film's creators resisted the temptation to
punch up the plot with a invented romance or phony perils. Instead, "Chasing
Freedom" follows two parallel themes: the Afghan refugee's loss of innocence and
her American lawyer's loss of ignorance.

Juliette Lewis steals every scene as Libby Brock, a self-centered corporate
lawyer who reluctantly takes on the case of 26-year-old Meena Gardizi (Layla
Alizada) to fulfill her firm's pro bono obligation. Ms. Lewis is hypnotically
grating as a callow, multitasking Type A lawyer who upbraids slow security
guards and checks her e-mail messages during a moving speech by the head of the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. When her supervisor at the Lawyers Committee
urges her to take her commitment seriously and gether client to believe in her,
she snaps back: "Believe in me? Like, what, like I'm a religion?"

Ms. Lewis captures her character's arrogance and heedlessness, but also manages
to signal an underlying layer of self-doubt. (It is also to the credit of the
writers, however, that even as Libby grows emotionally and intellectually
involved in Meena's cause, she never entirely sheds her annoying manner. At one
point a harried African-American I.N.S. guard tells her off for her snooty
attitude.)

Libby's grudging first steps on the case are juxtaposed with flashbacks of
Meena's desperate moves to evade the Taliban. A university student until the
Taliban took power, Meena starts an underground school for girls in her home,
and when found out, she is jailed and beaten by Islamic fundamentalist police
officers.

With the help of a brother and friends, Meena is sneaked across the border under
a burka. (Ever mindful of Islamic fundamentalist niceties, the Taliban police at
the checkpoint order a boy to peek under her voluminous tentlike veil to verify
that she is in fact a Afghan woman.)

She makes it to the United States in the spring of 2001, only to find herself
caught in the Catch-22 hidden beneath the Statue of Liberty: she destroyed her
identity papers to escape persecution, but political asylum is not granted to
aliens who cannot prove their identity.

The two women's lives intersect at a meeting in an I.N.S. detention center, then
reverse course. While Libby begins to understand what Meena has lived through
(in shock she watches an underground tape showing an Afghan woman being executed
at a soccer stadium), Meena's spirits start to flag, and she grows increasingly
disillusioned and depressed. She is still in detention when the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks happen, and her hopes for release fade even further.

"I see my home," she tells Libby despondently after describing how Americans now
mistrust Muslims. "Suddenly here in America, I am watching Afghanistan."

"Chasing Freedom," which was based on a case handled by the Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights and was made in collaboration with that organization, has an
unimpeachable message.

But it is also a lawyers' story. One of the best scenes in the film occurs when
Libby goes up against an I.N.S. lawyer (Gail Hanrahan) at a court hearing,
confident that Meena's plight speaks for itself. The government lawyer rips
Meena's claim that any contact with Meena's relatives in Afghanistan would put
them at mortal risk.

"The Taliban seemed to know everything," she with studied sarcasm. "And yet this
is a country that, according to the background material provided by Ms. Brock,
was pretty much back in the Stone Age. No infrastructure, no telephones, hardly
any mail delivery, and yet the Taliban seem to be better organized than the
F.B.I."

Until Sept.11 most Americans probably would have shared that skepticism.

CHASING FREEDOM
Court TV, tonight at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time

Directed by Don McBrearty; Mary D. Silverman and Rosalie Muskatt, Court TV
executives for movies; John Morayniss, Noreen Halpern and Judy Ranan, executive
producers. Produced by Blueprint Entertainment.

WITH: Juliette Lewis (Libby Brock), Layla Alizada (Meena) and Gail Hanrahan
(I.N.S. Lawyer)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Layla Alizada plays Meena, an Afghan refugee, in "Chasing
Freedom," tonight on Court TV. (Photo by Court TV)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); REFUGEES (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); TELEVISION
PROGRAMMING (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); WOMEN (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); WRITERS (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%);
RELIGION (69%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (68%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (67%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (66%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Source for USA Today Reporter Disputes Details of Kosovo Article

BYLINE:  By JACQUES STEINBERG; Marlise Simon, in Paris, contributed reporting
for this article.

SECTION: Section C; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1372 words


A human rights advocate identified by Jack Kelley, the USA Today correspondent
who resigned under pressure this month, as a source for a 1999 article about
ethnic cleansing in a Kosovo village disputes many of the details in the
article.

The rights advocate, Natasa Kandic, the executive director of the Humanitarian
Law Center in Belgrade, made these assertions in a telephone interview from
Belgrade late last week, raising further questions about the veracity of the
article, which the newspaper published on its front page in July 1999.

In the article, Mr. Kelley wrote about a Yugoslav Army notebook that had a typed
order to "cleanse" a Kosovo village, although he did not identify the person who
showed him the notebook. He added that United Nations investigators considered
this "the strongest and most direct evidence linking the government of Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic to 'ethnic cleansing' in Kosovo."

Last year, while being questioned during an internal investigation of his work,
Mr. Kelley told senior editors that he was interviewing Ms. Kandic when he was
shown the notebookby a United Nations investigator, USA Today said.

During the interview last week, Ms. Kandic disputed the size and kind of
notebook Mr. Kelley said he had examined and whether the reference to
"cleansing" was an order typed on official military stationery, as he had
described.

Ms. Kandic, who does not specifically remember being interviewed by Mr. Kelley,
told USA Today about her disagreements with the article in a meeting last
October. In last week's interview, she also said that she did not believe that
Mr. Kelley could have seen the notebook, as he suggested in the article. The
journal, she said, was not in her possession in July 1999 but was instead being
held at the headquarters of the Kosovo Liberation Army.

Mr. Kelley's editors began questioning the article, and several others he had
written over the years, after receiving an anonymous complaint about his work
from a USA Today staff member last May. Mr. Kelley, a foreign correspondent who
reported from various war zones for more than a decade, was a finalist for the
Pulitzer Prize in 2002.

In an article on Jan. 13 announcing his resignation, USA Today said it had
concluded a seven-month investigation of a sampling of his articles, including
the article about the notebook, without having resolved "whether Kelley might
have embellished or fabricated stories." It has since said an independent panel
will assess all his work for the paper.

In his July 1999 article, Mr. Kelley referred to a three-ring notebook with a
black vinyl cover that contained a direct order "typed on army stationery and
stamped by the Supreme Defense Council of the Yugoslav Army Headquarters in
Belgrade, which is headed by Milosevic." The order, which Mr. Kelley said was
typed in Cyrillic letters and intended for a lieutenant, read: "The aim of the
military activity should be to cleanse Cusk and the surrounding villages and
terrain."

Mr. Kelley wrote in the article that 44 ethnic Albanian men were killed in the
village of Cusk, near the western Kosovo city of Pec, in May 1999 -- a massacre
that Human Rights Watch, among other organizations, has documented.

Ms. Kandic said it was possible that she once met Mr. Kelley, adding that she
spoke to many foreign correspondents as part of her job. But she said an
officer's notebook she examined at the time in Kosovo -- and which she later
described in a report published by her organization -- bore little resemblance
to the description of the notebook in Mr. Kelley's article. She said the
notebook she saw was bound and that its cover was red. And while she recalled a
reference to the word "cleansing," she said the word was written, not typed, and
was not contained in a military order.

A red notebook fitting the rough description provided by Ms. Kandic was later
turned over to lawyers in The Hague who are prosecuting Mr. Milosevic, according
to a court official, who insisted on anonymity.

Mr. Kelley said in his article that the materials contained in the notebook he
examined "will be used by the U.N. war crimes tribunal investigating Milosevic
and four other associates." But the court official said that no document fitting
the description provided by Mr. Kelley had been received.

Karen Jurgensen, the newspaper's editor, said in a statement posted on the USA
Today Web site on Jan. 13 that Mr. Kelley identified Ms. Kandic to his editors
as the unnamed person who had shown him the Yugoslav Army journal. Ms. Jurgensen
said Ms. Kandic told the newspaper's editors last fall that she had done no such
thing.

When confronted last fall by his editors, Mr. Kelley directed his editors to
another woman, who, he said, had acted as his translator on the article. The
newspaper later discovered that the translator was uninvolved in the reporting,
Ms. Jurgensen said in the statement. It was after being informed of that
finding, Mr. Kelley resigned, Ms. Jurgensen said.

(Another woman, whom neither the newspaper nor Mr. Kelley has identified
publicly, told the newspaper that she saw Mr. Kelley interview Ms. Kandic, but
did not see Ms. Kandic show him a notebook during that conversation, Ms.
Jurgensen said.)

Mr. Kelley has admitted, in an interview with The Washington Post, that he
"panicked" during the investigation and ultimately misled his editors during
parts of their inquiry but he maintains that the original article was accurate.
"In my 21-year career, I have never fabricated or plagiarized a story," he said
in a statement.

A lawyer representing Mr. Kelley, Lisa Banks, said on Friday that Mr. Kelley
still insists that the notebook he saw had a black cover, although, she said, he
now believed that what he saw might have been a photocopy.

"There's got to be a reason why Kandic is afraid to say or isn't willing to say
she had the document in Belgrade," Ms. Banks said. "We just don't know what it
is yet."

Ms. Banks also said she noted inconsistencies between Ms. Kandic's comments to
The New York Times, as conveyed by a reporter, and another interview with her
that was reported this month. On Jan. 15, Reuters, citing an interview Ms.
Kandic gave to Danas, a Belgrade newspaper, quoted her as saying she "got the
diary, but did not keep it," before passing it on to an investigator working
with the war crimes tribunal. Ms. Banks pointed to the quotation as suggesting
that Ms. Kandic might well have had a notebook to show Mr. Kelley.

Asked on Saturday to comment on Ms. Banks's assertion, Ms. Kandic said the
quotation in Danas, when translated from Serbian to English, did not convey the
nuance she intended. "It means I held the diary with my hands," she said,
referring to her examination of it in Kosovo. She said she then handed it to the
investigator, who had accompanied her, and that it was he who ultimately
arranged its transfer to The Hague. It was never in her office in Belgrade, she
said.

Asked if it was possible that she had made a photocopy of the notebook in Kosovo
and showed Mr. Kelley a copy in her office, Ms. Kandic said no. "It was
immediately after the war," she said. "The city was without electricity. It was
impossible to find photocopy machines."

The newspaper and Mr. Kelley have different interpretations of an October
meeting held in Washington with Brian Gallagher, the newspaper's executive
editor, Ms. Kandic and Mr. Kelley. (The meeting was first disclosed in an
article in The Washington Post.) Mr. Gallagher said he had permitted Mr. Kelley
to sit in on the session with the hope that "seeing Jack would jog her memory."
Instead, Mr. Gallagher said, Ms. Kandic said she could not recall having met Mr.
Kelley before, and she then outlined differences between the notebook Mr. Kelley
had described and the one she saw.

Mr. Kelley recalled the meeting differently, said his lawyer, Ms. Banks. Ms.
Kandic, the lawyer said, "agreed that the document had an order to cleanse and
indicated that Jack had gotten it right."

Asked on Friday if USA Today intended to publish a correction of the article,
Mr. Gallagher said that no correction was planned. "Because of differing
recollections, we still can't be certain what occurred," Mr. Gallagher said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Natasa Kandic, right, a human rights advocate, as she and a
United Nations official, left, interviewed a family at their home in Pristina,
Kosovo, in 2000. (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); ARMIES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); RESIGNATIONS (78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (77%); MISAPPROPRIATION (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%);
INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); EVIDENCE (68%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (50%)
NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  COMPANY REPORTS AND FORECASTS;  FRAUDS, MISAPPROPRIATION
AND SECURITIES VIOLATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) USA TODAY

PERSON: KELLEY, JACK

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%)

COUNTRY: KOSOVO (95%); SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 7, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leader of Russian Republic Narrowly Escapes Assassination

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 6


The leader of the southern Russian republic of Ingushetia narrowly escaped an
assassination attempt on Tuesday when a car bomb exploded next to his motorcade,
officials said. The powerful explosion killed at least one person, apparently a
suicide bomber, while wounding seven others.

Murat M. Zyazikov, president of Ingushetia, the nominally autonomous republic
that borders Chechnya, received minor injuries, including burns, in what
appeared to be the latest in a series of suicide attacks in Russia, though a
rare assassination attempt against an elected official.

''This was another attempt to drag Ingushetia into the conflict zone, to expand
the zone of hostilities and undermine stability in the North Caucasus as a
whole,'' Mr. Zyazikov, 46, told the Interfax news agency.

His remarks suggested that he blamed Chechen insurgents fighting federal forces
for the attacks, though no group took responsibility and officials did not
immediately identify any suspects.

Mr. Zyazikov, who became president of Ingushetia in 2002, said that a Russian
Lada following his motorcade along a highway to the republic's capital, Magas,
abruptly sped up and detonated as it collided with his armored Mercedes at 9:45
a.m.

''It is difficult to imagine what would have happened if the car had not been
armor plated,'' he said.

The force of the explosion, estimated to be the equivalent of more than 200
pounds of dynamite, obliterated the bomber's car and damaged several cars in the
president's motorcade, as well as houses hundreds of yards away, according to
officials.

Officials indicated that only a driver was in the car that exploded, but some
news agencies, including the official Russian news agency Novosti, reported that
two people might have been inside. The damage was so extensive that officials
said it may be impossible to verify.

The explosion wounded four of Mr. Zyazikov's bodyguards, some of them seriously,
as well as two bystanders, one of them a young boy.

Officials ordered heightened security in the republic, where checkpoints and
patrols are already ubiquitous because of its proximity to the conflict in
neighboring Chechnya.

Ingushetia, home to thousands of refugees from the fighting in Chechnya, has
largely escaped the worst of the conflict. But Chechen rebel groups have used
the republic as a base for attacks, and federal security forces have routinely
staged raids there against those suspected of links with the rebels.

Human Rights Watch, the international organization based in New York, said in a
statement on Tuesday that conditions in Ingushetia were ''seriously
deteriorating.''

''Over the last three months human rights violations that have been the hallmark
of the Chechnya conflict have been increasingly spilling over the border, with
both internally displaced Chechens and local Ingush falling victims of the
abuses,'' the statement said.

Mr. Zyazikov, a former officer in the K.G.B and its successor, the Federal
Security Service, is a political ally of President Vladimir V. Putin, who has
pledged to crack down on criminal activity in the region. Under his leadership,
hundreds of refugees have had to leave a number of refugee camps, though Mr.
Zyazikov and others denied applying pressure on refugees to return.

''This assassination was organized by those who disagree with the positive
changes in Ingushetia,'' he told Interfax.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Murat M. Zyazikov, president of the republic of Ingushetia.
(Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSASSINATION (93%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (75%); CIVIL WAR (74%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%);
REFUGEES (72%); BURN INJURIES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%) Assassinations and
Attempted Assassinations; Terrorism; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Bombs and
Explosives

PERSON: Steven Lee Myers; Murat M (Pres) Zyazikov

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (51%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%); UNITED STATES (51%)

REGION: Russia; Ingushetia (Russian Republic); Magas (Ingushetia); Chechnya
(Russia)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Back in Argentina, Priest Faces 'Dirty War' Charges

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1476 words

DATELINE: LA PLATA, Argentina


The parishioners in the coastal village in Chile knew their priest simply as the
Rev. Christian Gonzalez. Only his accent gave away that he was an Argentine.

So it came as a shock to them when he traveled back to Argentina last year and
had to face charges here for crimes dating to the military dictatorship of the
1970's. Under his real name, Christian von Wernich, he is accused of 19 counts
of murder and 33 of abduction and torture.

Father von Wernich, 65, has emerged as a potent symbol of the institutional
atrocities of the period, when the junta chased down leftist opponents,
sometimes winning the support of the Roman Catholic Church's hierarchy for its
goals. He has attracted particular attention because he combines both elements:
he was a priest who also worked for the government, as a chaplain for the feared
Buenos Aires provincial police.

That trauma of three decades ago is being re-examined now that President Nestor
Kirchner has ended a long amnesty that protected people responsible for the
abuses. Father von Wernich was indicted in September and is fighting the
charges, on both constitutional and religious grounds.

But that has not stopped the case from provoking protest in both Argentina and
Chile, which suffered under its own dictatorship, over the past role of the
church and whether religious leaders conspired to hide a priest accused of
taking part in the abuses of the ''Dirty War.''

''There were other clergy who supported or blessed the dictatorship and the
repressive measures it employed,'' said Marta Vedio, a lawyer with the Permanent
Assembly for Human Rights, the group that has been leading the investigation
that led to the priest's indictment here in La Plata. ''But for a priest to have
participated directly and so intensely in repression and torture, that strikes
hard in a society that still regards itself as essentially Roman Catholic.''

The Vatican has not directly addressed questions about the church's conduct
during the dictatorship. During his visits to Argentina, Pope John Paul II has
made only vague statements that could be interpreted as something of an indirect
apology for that behavior.

Regarding Father von Wernich, local church officials in Argentina and Chile have
been largely silent. The Rev. Jorge Oesterheld, a spokesman for the Argentine
Conference of Bishops, said that while the case was painful because it involves
''shameful and lamentable acts,'' the Argentine church ''has no jurisdiction
over this matter.'' It is a diocesan matter, he said.

The bishop of the priest's home diocese in Argentina, Msgr. Martin Elizalde, in
a public statement issued shortly after Father Gonzalez was exposed last May,
dismissed suggestions of improper behavior in how the diocese handled the
priest. The church has no responsibility, he said, ''since when he went to
Chile, there were no charges pending against him.''

Such denials have disillusioned Catholic faithful in both countries,
particularly since Father von Wernich's links to the dictatorship had been well
established by the time he dropped out of sight in 1996, only to reappear seven
years later with a different name in Chile under circumstances that the church
authorities refuse to explain.

''The policy of the church has consistently been silence, silence, silence,''
Hernan Brienza, author of ''Cursed Art Thou: The Church and Illegal
Repression,'' said in an interview. ''There was obviously an agreement to
protect von Wernich from public opinion in Argentina by sending him to Chile, a
place where no one knew who he was. But we do not know how or when he became
Gonzalez.'' Mr. Brienza helped expose the priest's new identity last year, as
part of an investigative team formed by two magazines.

For a decade after Argentina's democracy was restored in 1983, Father von
Wernich was the target of protest marches that forced the church hierarchy to
move him from one parish to another. Former political prisoners testified in
chilling detail to official commissions of the priest's treacherous modus
operandi in the aid of the military junta.

After they had been subjected to days of intense torture, the prisoners
recounted, Father von Wernich would appear offering spiritual consolation. But
at the same time he would seek information and urge detainees to ''get right
with God'' by acknowledging their political activities and by identifying
comrades still at large.

''Once I heard Christian von Wernich reply to a prisoner who pleaded with him
not to die that 'the life of men depends on God and your collaboration,''' a
former prisoner, Luis Velasco, testified at a court hearing. ''I also heard him
defend and justify torture, recognizing that at times he had been present. When
he referred to an operation, he would say, 'When we did that operation....'''

The most serious of the accusations against Father von Wernich stem from the
execution in 1977 of seven young people, all political prisoners who belonged to
left-wing groups. The killings, it is now charged, were part of a police plan to
extort money from the prisoners' parents, by suggesting that a bribe would free
their children.

Figuring that a priest would naturally inspire trust, agents sent Father von
Wernich to collect $1,500 from the parents of each of the prisoners. As proof
that they were still alive, he delivered letters written by the detainees. Once
the money was collected, the prisoners were taken from a clandestine detention
center and killed. One was pregnant.

According to the testimony of Julio Alberto Emmed, a former police officer who
admitted his involvement in the incident and said he was coming forward as an
act of penance, Father von Wernich himself witnessed at least three of the
killings.

Mr. Emmed said the prisoners had been put in a car and told that they were being
taken to the airport before being released. Instead, they were beaten
unconscious, he said.

''The priest was in the vehicle with me,'' he recalled in sworn testimony,
saying that because one of the prisoners was whipped with a pistol, ''various
wounds resulted, with an abundant flow of blood over the priest, the driver and
the two of us at the prisoner's side.''

Near the airport, the car swerved to an empty field, Mr. Emmed testified. Father
von Wernich watched as the police officers and a police doctor completed their
gruesome task.

''The three subversives were still alive, and their bodies were removed from the
car and thrown onto the grass,'' Mr. Emmed said. ''The doctor injected each one
twice, straight into the heart with a reddish liquid that was poisonous.'' When
one of the victims showed signs of life, she was shot in the head, he said.

Afterward, those involved, including Father von Wernich, went to a celebratory
barbecue ''where we also changed our clothes because they were stained with
blood,'' Mr. Emmed said. Seeing that Mr. Emmed was distraught at what they had
just done, Father von Wernich sought to console him.

''What you have done was necessary for the good of the fatherland,'' Mr. Emmed
said the priest had told him. ''You have no reason to feel badly. You carried
out a patriotic act, and God knows that what we are doing is for the benefit of
the country.''

In Chile, where he served in the seaside resort village of El Quisco, the impact
of his case has been nearly as traumatic as in Argentina. During the long
dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, Cardinal Raul Silva Enriquez of Santiago
played an important role in defending human rights, so the accusations of the
church's complicity in harboring Father von Wernich has come as a shock.

''I'm a Christian, and I cannot judge, because we are all sinners,'' one of his
former parishioners, Isabel Beltran de Avalos, said before a Sunday morning Mass
early in Lent at the St. John the Evangelist church in El Quisco situated on the
Street of the Tranquil Wolves. Learning of the charges against him ''has caused
a revulsion within me so great that I stayed away from Mass for nearly a year
and have only returned now at Lent,'' she said.

Father von Wernich was ''so charming and so charismatic that it was hard to
believe all the things that they were saying about him,'' Mrs. Avalos added. ''I
had neighbors and colleagues from work who were taken away and never seen again
when the military seized power, and I don't want that to happen ever again. We
can't tolerate a thing like that.''

From his jail cell, Father von Wernich is fighting the charges against him and
has asked judges to free him from what he claims is an ''illegal detention.''

At a hearing, the priest acknowledged that he had been a regular visitor at the
clandestine detention centers of the police, but he refused to provide details
of his conversations with prisoners. To do so, he said, would be a breach of his
holy orders, because it would ''violate the secrecy of the confessional.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A protest in 1988 in the home parish of the Rev. Christian von
Wernich, who is now accused of murder and other crimes committed in the 1970's.
(Photo by Perfil Publishing Group Archives)
 Father von Wernich being arrested last September in La Plata after he returned
from Chile, where he was known as Father Gonzalez. (Photo by El Dia)Map of
Argentina highlighting La Plata: The priest maintains he is under ''illegal
detention'' in La Plata.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); MISCONDUCT (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); POLITICS (75%); LIBERALISM (75%); CHURCH &
STATE (74%); MILITARY RULE (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE (63%); MURDER
(57%) Church-State Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Priests; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Kidnapping; Torture; Politics and
Government; Police Brutality and Misconduct

ORGANIZATION: Roman Catholic Church

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (57%) Larry Rohter; Christian (Rev) von Wernich

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (91%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (96%); CHILE (96%); HOLY SEE (79%)

REGION: Argentina; Buenos Aires (Argentina); Chile; Argentina

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             101 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 5, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Damages Denied to Woman Harassed by Police

BYLINE:   By MARC SANTORA

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 4


The state's highest court ruled on Tuesday that New York City cannot be held
liable for punitive damages in sex discrimination and sexual harassment cases
under its human rights law, ruling against a woman who was sexually harassed by
a police supervisor.

The unanimous ruling by the state Court of Appeals was in response to a lawsuit
filed nearly a decade ago by Alli Katt, a secretary in the New York Police
Department who claimed that she was sexually harassed and forced to work in a
hostile environment at the Seventh Precinct on the Lower East Side.

The lawsuit by Ms. Katt named the city and her former supervisor, Lt. Anthony
DiPalma, in 1995, and cited violations of the city's human rights law. She
alleged that improper gestures and comments were directed at her, saying, for
instance, that Lieutenant DiPalma once stood over her desk flipping through a
Victoria's Secret catalog and asking if she would model lingerie for him.

A jury found in her favor, and the city was told to pay $400,000 in compensatory
damages and $1 million in punitive damages. But the judge immediately dismissed
the punitive damages award, and both sides appealed the case until it reached
the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.

Saying the matter involved a significant state public policy concern, the
circuit court sent the matter to the state's Court of Appeals, asking the
question: "Can a person claiming gender-based employment discrimination recover
punitive damages from the City of New York?"

In its unanimous decision, the Court of Appeals found that the two
justifications for awarding punitive damages, deterrence and punishment, are not
served when applied to a governmental agency. Ultimately, the court ruled, the
taxpayers would be penalized.

The city's human rights law was originally adopted in the 1950's, but in 1991,
it was amended to include a provision allowing victims to be awarded punitive
damages. But Judge Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick, who wrote the opinion, said that
while the city's statute did allow employers to be sued for punitive damages, it
did not apply when the employer was the municipality.

A similar anti-discrimination human rights law also shields state government
from punitive damages.

Scott Shorr, the lawyer for the city who argued the case, said, "Punitive
damages don't make a lot of sense when applied to the state."

David A. Kotler, a lawyer for Ms. Katt, said that the decision provided a "road
map" for legislators to follow should they want to change the statute. He said
that with luck, the case would have a lasting impact on how the Police
Department handled sexual harassment issues.

"From Ms. Katt's perspective, this is the end of an incredibly long and
difficult journey," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 8, 2004



CORRECTION: A headline on Wednesday about a New York Court of Appeals ruling in
a sexual harassment case referred imprecisely to the decision. Although the
court indeed denied the plaintiff's request for punitive damages, a jury had
previously awarded her $400,000 in compensatory damages.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DAMAGES (92%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (92%); LITIGATION (91%); PUNITIVE
DAMAGES (91%); APPEALS (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (89%); SEXUAL
HARASSMENT IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); LAWYERS (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); VERDICTS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); EMPLOYMENT (74%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (73%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (73%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

COMPANY: VICTORIA'S SECRET CATALOG (69%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); ALBANY, NY, USA (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Riddle

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 136 words



To the Editor:

When a country like Sudan -- which has engaged in a campaign of murder, rape,
pillage and enslavement against its own ethnic minorities -- is elected to yet
another three-year term on the United Nations' Commission on Human Rights, it
becomes hard not to believe that the world isn't upside down (World Briefing,
May 5).

One would think that in keeping with the United Nations' own charter, countries
that engage in such overtly abusive behavior would be cast as outlaws and
pariahs. It is mind-boggling that in the United Nations (an organization that
claims the right to propound morality for the whole world), a member with such
flagrant human rights violations as Sudan would be trusted to objectively judge
the very same violations by other countries.

JOSHUA I. SCHLENGER
Flushing, Queens, May 5, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
ETHNICITY (72%); ETHNIC GROUPS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. TEAM IS SENT TO DEVELOP CASE IN HUSSEIN TRIAL

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS and DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: WAR
CRIMES

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 6


Following a White House directive, the Justice Department is sending a
high-level team of prosecutors and investigators to Iraq to take charge of
assembling and organizing the evidence to be used in a war crimes trial of
Saddam Hussein, administration and Iraqi officials said in recent days.

The previously undisclosed directive signed by Condoleezza Rice, President
Bush's national security adviser, directs the government to take the initiative
in preparing a case against Mr. Hussein that will ultimately be run by Iraqis.
The order, issued in January, gives the Justice Department the authority to act
as the lead agency in the effort.

The first officials in a delegation of about 50 lawyers, investigators and
prosecutors from the Justice Department are leaving this weekend for Iraq, a
Justice Department official said. The group will be assigned to a new office
called the Regime Crimes Adviser's Office under the American occupation
authority.

The office, which is to include legal officials from other countries, will be
responsible for sorting through tens of thousands of pages of evidence and
preparing a report that will amount to a blueprint for Iraqi prosecutors.
Cartons of documents collected by human rights organizations with evidence of
atrocities by the Hussein government have been airlifted into Iraq in recent
weeks.

For his part, Mr. Hussein, who has been under interrogation by American
officials since his capture on Dec. 14, has revealed little that could be used
in any trial, government officials said in recent days. He has discussed few
specific issues and at times comports himself as a head of state, the officials
said.

The effort to develop a case involves a delicate balancing act for the
administration, which is trying to turn over as complete a brief as possible for
the Iraqis to use against Mr. Hussein without appearing to dominate the process
in a way that could undercut the independence of the Iraqi authorities. ''We're
trying to balance a bunch of interests here,'' said one senior administration
official. ''We intend to bring quite a few resources to the table but not too
many so it looks like a completely American process.''

Any trials of Mr. Hussein and other senior members of his administration could
also carry important political implications in an election year. Administration
officials say they expect the proceedings to provide graphic and substantial
evidence of the horrific nature of Mr. Hussein's government.

Facing wide-scale criticism after no unconventional weapons have been found in
Iraq, administration officials have increasingly turned to the evidence of the
wide-scale atrocities committed by the Hussein government as a justification for
going to war. But inevitable tension between American planners and Iraqis eager
to demonstrate their independence may play a role in the way that issue is
handled as well. Salem Chalabi, the Iraqi lawyer in charge of the war crimes
issue, said in a recent interview that while he understood the administration's
political needs, the trials might not occur until late in the year, after the
American elections, and that Mr. Hussein might not even be the first defendant.

''We need and welcome the Americans' help and role in this,'' Mr. Chalabi,
nephew of Ahmad Chalabi, the leader of the Iraqi National Congress, said in a
telephone interview from Iraq. ''But no one should misunderstand that this will
be an Iraqi process with decisions by Iraqis.''

Administration planners had initially intended to turn their energies to the
issue of war crimes trials after they reaped whatever intelligence they could
from interrogating Mr. Hussein. But officials said the questioning of Mr.
Hussein had been largely unproductive and disappointing.

He has given vague responses to questions about whether his country possessed
illicit weapons, said one official who described the situation on the condition
of anonymity. The official said Mr. Hussein, who is in custody in an undisclosed
location in the Baghdad area, often couched his statements about Iraq's
international relations as if he were still a head of state. In addition to the
realization that Mr. Hussein was not proving a source of information, American
officials became increasingly aware of the implications of the scheduled formal
transfer of governmental authority to Iraqis on June 30. The senior
administration official said the Americans were keenly aware that after that
date their authority would be diminished.

M. Cherif Bassiouni, an Egyptian-born international lawyer who is an authority
on the Arab legal world, said he believed that the United States was interested
in orchestrating a wide-ranging Nuremberg-style war crimes trial against Mr.
Hussein. ''The administration is looking to have a political vindication of why
the U.S. went into Iraq,'' he said. ''With no weapons of mass destruction to be
found, the next best thing is to show how bad Saddam was, how his regime was
like the Nazis'.''

Professor Bassiouni, who has served as a legal consultant for the Americans and
the Iraqis, said such a broad approach could backfire because it might give Mr.
Hussein an opportunity to grandstand in a way that would win favor with Arab
audiences. He recommended a narrower prosecution, with specific offenses and
specific acts to be charged.

Mr. Chalabi, who is in charge of the war crimes portfolio, agrees. ''We'll
tailor the trial procedures in such a way that shows we learned the lessons of
the Milosevic trial,'' he said, referring to how Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Serbian leader and Yugoslav president, has used his war crimes trial as a
platform to justify his actions and to try to put his accusers, the Western
governments, on trial. ''We don't want the tribunal and people like Saddam to be
the principal teller of the history here,'' said Mr. Chalabi, who was educated
at Yale and the Northwestern University Law School. ''We want to bring very
specific charges. And the defendants would only be allowed to bring witnesses
and make their cases in connection with those specific charges.''

Such an approach, he said, would block Mr. Hussein from trying to call witnesses
like Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to testify about the United States'
earlier cooperation with the Hussein government.

Mr. Chalabi also said the Iraqis might choose to try lesser-ranking officials
before Mr. Hussein. ''If you try a smaller-ranking person for a war crime like
the attacks on the Kurds and he is found guilty, then all we have to do with
respect to Saddam Hussein is show the chain of command,'' he said.

Mr. Chalabi said the Iraqi Governing Council had assembled a list of about 45
Iraqi judges as candidates for the war crimes tribunals. The statute setting up
the tribunals calls for three panels of five judges each to try people, and nine
judges to serve on an appellate panel. He said those judges who were believed to
have been sympathetic to the Hussein government were not eligible. Those who
might be prejudiced because they or their families suffered at the hands of the
government could not serve as judges but could only be investigators or
prosecutors.

The case that American officials will draft against Mr. Hussein and his aides
will come from three caches of documents, administration officials said. The
first is from 18 tons of Iraqi government documents seized by Kurds in 1991 when
they overran Baathist Party offices in northern Iraq. Those documents were
brought out of Iraq by Peter W. Galbraith, a former American ambassador to
Croatia.

A second cache of 22 cartons of documents and testimony of atrocities collected
by Indict, a London-based human rights group that is now defunct, was airlifted
to Iraq a few weeks ago by Pierre-Richard Prosper, the State Department's
special ambassador for war crimes.

The third batch is the collection drawn from hundreds of thousands of documents
seized by American forces after Mr. Hussein's ouster.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A defaced portrait of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad, Iraq. (Photo by
Lynsey Addario/Corbis, for The New York Times)(pg. 10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); EVIDENCE (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (83%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
TERRORISM (66%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (60%) United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%) Justice Department

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Neil A
Lewis; David Johnston; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Condoleezza Rice

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             105 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

How to Defend Saddam Hussein (Blame the U.S.)

BYLINE: By JONATHAN D. GLATER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5; The World

LENGTH: 860 words


THESE days, Saddam Hussein is a prisoner of war, under interrogation by
Americans somewhere in Iraq. At some point, though, Mr. Hussein is expected to
be turned over to Iraqi authorities and put on trial.

And so Mr. Hussein now has a lawyer, or at any rate his family apparently
retained one late last month. But should the ex-dictator indeed stand trial one
day, the law may not play as much of a role in the proceeding as politics.

The lawyer, Jacques Verges, has taken on notorious clients before and is known
for using their cases to support his political views. He defended Ilich Ramirez
Sanchez, the terrorist better known as Carlos the Jackal for his role in a
series of attacks and hijackings in Western Europe. Carlos was sentenced to life
in prison in 1997.

Before that Mr. Verges, who is French, defended the Nazi Klaus Barbie, known as
the Butcher of Lyons for his role in the murder of Jews in World War II, against
charges of committing crimes against humanity. Mr. Barbie was convicted in 1987
and died in prison in 1991 at age 77.

At various points in those and other cases Mr. Verges tried to discredit the
proceedings and show that prosecuting governments were guilty of their own
atrocities. Mr. Verges has said in interviews that he hopes to call senior
United States officials as witnesses, presumably so that he can make arguments
about the complicity of the Americans in Mr. Hussein's crimes.

Using evidence of past United States support of his government, Mr. Hussein may
argue ''that anything he's accused of, the U.S. had a hand in it,'' said Harold
Hongju Koh, the assistant secretary of state for human rights in the Clinton
administration and a law professor at Yale.

A defense based on political arguments may be the best available to Mr. Hussein
because it may be hard to make effective legal arguments against some of the
toughest charges likely to be leveled against him.

Establishing that Mr. Hussein committed crimes against humanity -- that is,
systematic murder, enslavement, imprisonment, torture, rape or other crimes
directed against civilians -- may be fairly straightforward, said Ruti G.
Teitel, a professor at New York Law School. The crimes that could be the basis
for such charges are well documented, she said: the violent repression of the
Kurds after the 1991 Gulf War, for example, or attacks on the Shiite Marsh Arabs
of southern Iraq, whom Mr. Hussein's army tried to force from the country.

The Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq created the Iraqi Special Tribunal
for Crimes against Humanity, with jurisdiction over war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity. The Tribunal is a legal hybrid, drawing on the common
law system used in Britain and the United States, and the civil law system of
France, Germany and other countries in Europe.

The special tribunal statute allows for foreign, non-Iraqi experts to advise the
tribunal and gives to investigating judges some of the tasks that, in the United
States, would be handled by state or federal prosecutors. Last month, the
Justice Department sent a high-level team of prosecutors and investigators to
Iraq to assemble and organize the evidence to be used in a war crimes trial.

Mr. Hussein could be charged with such crimes for attacks against Iraqi
civilians as well as for attacks on civilians in another country, like Iran;
other war crimes include the use of poison gas, which was used by the Iraqi
military on the Kurds.

''He has a very hard time getting a factual acquittal, not because of any lack
of objectivity, but because in war crimes trials, there is a theory of criminal
negligence,'' said Ruth Wedgwood, a law professor at Johns Hopkins University in
Washington. Mr. Hussein could be found guilty, she said, if he knew or could
have known that crimes were being committed by his underlings. ''You don't have
to prove he ordered it,'' she said. ''You only have to prove that he failed to
adequately supervise.''

Possibly more difficult would be a charge of genocide, said Fiona McKay,
director of the international justice program at Human Rights First. ''You
actually have to prove intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a group,'' she
said, of people of the same racial, national, religious or ethnic background.

In Rwanda, where people were targeted because of their ethnic background, that
might have been relatively easy, Ms. McKay continued. But the case becomes more
difficult if, for example, people are targeted for their political beliefs.

The defenses available to Mr. Hussein include some claims familiar to anyone who
watches crime dramas on television, including insanity or ignorance of the
crimes committed in his name. But lawyers said that Mr. Hussein's defense
lawyer, will probably have months or years to think of others.

''You can't send judges and defense lawyers and all the rest of it to a
situation where their lives are in imminent danger,'' said Richard J. Goldstone,
chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda from 1994 to 1996. And security in Iraq, he added,
''doesn't seem to be something that's going to happen in the foreseeable
future.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jacques Verges, above right, who says he has been asked to
defend Saddam Hussein, and his former clients, the Nazi Klaus Barbie, above
left, and the terrorist Carlos the Jackal. (Photo by Reuters)
(Photo by Associated Press)
 (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DESERT STORM (78%);
SENTENCING (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LAWYERS (77%); JURISDICTION (77%); LAW SCHOOLS
(77%); WITNESSES (77%); LITIGATION (77%); TERRORISM (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%);
INTERVIEWS (70%); HIJACKING (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Terrorism

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Jacques Verges; Saddam Hussein; Jonathan D Glater;
Klaus (1913-91) Barbie; Carlos the Jackal (Illich Ramirez Sanchez)

CITY: LYON, FRANCE (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (95%); EUROPE (92%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%);
FRANCE (79%); GERMANY (77%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             106 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Chief Missing, Colombia Militias Gain Leverage

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1217 words

DATELINE: SANTAFE DE RALITO, Colombia


The disappearance and possible murder of Carlos Castano, the longtime leader of
Colombia's right-wing paramilitary forces, have increased the bargaining power
of the paramilitaries in disarmament negotiations with the government, Western
diplomats and human rights officials said in a series of interviews.

The talks, considered a cornerstone of President Alvaro Uribe's plan to pacify
Colombia, stalled after the disappearance of Mr. Castano. To get them moving
again, the government in early May granted 10 paramilitary commanders a
142-square-mile safe haven where they could resume negotiations free from threat
of arrest or extradition to the United States on drug-trafficking charges.

But Western diplomats and political analysts questioned the wisdom of embarking
on talks with the fierce drug-trafficking militias, which were formed in the
early 1980's to fight Marxist rebels. ''These are some of the biggest, most
ruthless drug dealers in the world, period,'' a Western diplomat said in early
May. ''They are essentially negotiating with much more organized, much more
dangerous Pablo Escobars,'' the diplomat said, referring to the late cocaine
kingpin. ''Because these guys actually have some clout, and much more
organizational skills than the rebels, they are deadly.''

Indeed, some commanders of the group, a loose coalition of paramilitary factions
calling itself the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, had discussed in
April the assassination of Mr. Uribe as a way of gaining leverage in the
negotiations, the president said in an address.

Critics of the government's bargaining strategy say the paramilitary commanders
have no intention of changing their ways. ''The leaders of these groups are
under the impression that they can keep pressing the state for additional
concessions to ensure that after they pass some sort of bureaucratic procedure
they will continue doing business as usual in Colombia, in terms of trafficking
and enjoying their wealth and the illicit assets they control,'' said Jose
Miguel Vivanco, who directs operations in Latin America for Human Rights Watch.

In the talks with the government that began last fall, Mr. Castano roiled his
fellow commanders by recommending that they accept modest prison terms for their
crimes and to surrender their ill-gotten fortunes, vast tracts of land and
foreign bank accounts. ''He openly expressed that these groups should
demobilize, even if it meant paying a few years of jail time or confinement,''
said someone who sits at the table.

He had already inflamed them by publicly acknowledging the paramilitary group's
role in assassinations and massacres, admitting that 70 percent of its funding
came from the cocaine trade and calling on the commanders to stop trafficking.
Eighteen of those men, including Diego Fernando Murillo, Salvatore Mancuso, Ivan
Roberto Duque and Mr. Castano's older brother, Vicente Castano, were recently
classified as major drug traffickers by the United States Treasury Department.

Diplomats said the paramilitary leaders were prepared to serve time under house
arrest, in their own homes, as long as they could keep their assets. But the
commanders balked at imprisonment and forfeiture, and were adamant about gaining
a guarantee of protection from American extradition requests, which could result
in trial in the United States and long prison terms.

Rivalries, exacerbated by the threat of extradition, touched off an internecine
war in the 15,000-member paramilitary group. That battle ended, officials and
diplomats said, with Mr. Castano's disappearance and the emergence of commanders
who American officials say are major drug traffickers.

Despite Mr. Castano's disappearance, some who sit at the peace table, like the
Roman Catholic bishop Julio Cesar Vidal, said in interviews that they doubted
that the paramilitaries would battle with the state, since the paramilitaries
are likely to get the best deal with Mr. Uribe.

Still, the possibility of blowback has been worrisome throughout the talks
because the paramilitaries, unlike the rebels, are entrenched in Colombia's
institutions, including the military, the police and the attorney general's
office. Its fighters control whole neighborhoods in many Colombian cities, and
the group has been supported in the past by wealthy and influential Colombians.

''They are politically very able, which the rebels are not, and they are more
popular in certain areas,'' the Western diplomat said of the paramilitaries.

In a tour in early May of Cordoba, a state in the north that is the traditional
heart of the paramilitary movement, it was clear that contrary to the
government's assertions, the paramilitaries enjoyed a lock-down control that
made them more influential than the traditional enemies of the state, the
left-wing guerrillas, ever were. Interviewed here in this town in Cordoba where
talks are taking place, a local commander said the organization did everything
from paving roads to paying teachers' salaries to punishing law-breakers, even
summarily executing those who violate paramilitary edicts.

''We are the de-facto state in all areas we occupy -- in health, in education,
in roadwork, everything that the state should offer,'' said the commander, who
goes by the nom de guerre Miguel Antonio. ''We are the law here.''

The Self-Defense Forces also draw strength and financing from their close
alliance with Colombia's most infamous drug cartel, the Norte del Valle group,
which American officials said recently had exported more than 500 metric tons of
cocaine worth $10 billion to the United States since 1990. In an indictment
against nine cartel members unsealed in Washington, American officials accused
the Self-Defense Forces of protecting the cartel's drug routes, laboratories and
members.

The Drug Enforcement Administration, which has extensive operations in Colombia,
said the group was even more involved in drug trafficking than were the
left-wing rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, which in recent
years have lost control of many of the country's drug-producing regions to the
paramilitaries.

''They pale in comparison,'' a D.E.A. official who analyzes Colombia's drug
trade said of the rebels in a recent interview.

On the surface, this verdant region is one of tranquillity and prosperity.
Cattle graze as far as the eye can see, and people here say the economy is
chugging along. Many here claim to live in one of the safest parts of Colombia.

Miguel Antonio, the local commander in Santafe de Ralito, denies that the group
is involved in drug trafficking, or that it would ever battle the government.
But he also made clear that paramilitary commanders were not about to serve jail
terms, not after they embarked on a war against the rebels because of the
government's inability to control its own territory. ''We're illegal,'' he said,
''but we're legitimate.''

Sitting in his rambling house, drinking coffee and taking calls from friends
congratulating him on his 51st birthday, Miguel Antonio pointed to his pet
jaguar, Freckles. ''Would you like me to put you in a cage?'' he asked
rhetorically. ''Neither would my pet jaguar.''

He also stressed that the federation was negotiating from a position of
strength. ''We are not defeated,'' he said. ''We are strong.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A member of a group of paramilitary factions called the United
Self-Defense Forces of Colombia watched as residents of Santafe de Ralito worked
on road repairs. The men said they were doing the job voluntarily.
A cattle ranch in Cordoba State. The landowners have long supported the
paramilitary groups protecting them from leftist guerrillas.
A school in Santafe de Ralito. Commanders of the United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia say they give money to some schools in the area.
 A member of the paramilitary group guarding the house of a local commander,
Miguel Antonio, with the commander's pet jaguar, Freckles. (Photographs by
Carlos Villalon for The New York Times)Map of Colombia highlighting Santafe de
Ralito: Santafe de Ralito is the site of militia and government talks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (94%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (91%); ARMS
CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ILLEGAL DRUGS
(89%); ASSASSINATION (89%); DISARMAMENT (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICS (77%);
JAIL SENTENCING (75%); EXTRADITION (75%); COCAINE (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); MISSING PERSONS (73%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
SUBSTANCE ABUSE (69%); PRISONS (65%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (60%)
Missing Persons  ; Drug Abuse and Traffic

ORGANIZATION: UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF COLOMBIA (82%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (58%) Juan Forero; Carlos Castano

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); LATIN AMERICA (73%)

REGION: Colombia

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turks Free 4 Kurds Whose Jailing Irked European Union

BYLINE: By SUSAN SACHS and SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, June 9


In a decision hailed by human rights advocates, a Turkish appeals court on
Wednesday ordered the release of four Kurdish former members of Parliament who
were convicted 10 years ago of belonging to an outlawed separatist movement.

Among those freed was Leyla Zana, whose campaign for Kurdish rights made
internationally known.

The four were convicted of links to the Kurdish Workers Party; a hearing on
their appeal is set for July 8.

Amnesty International called on Turkey to drop the case altogether, saying the
four Kurds were prosecuted only for their political beliefs.

In an interview with Reuters after the release, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul
predicted that the four would not return to jail.

They have already served all but nine months of their sentences.

In Brussels, Gunter Verheugen, the European Union's commissioner for
enlargement, said: ''Today's decision is a sign that the implementation of
political reforms, which Turkey has been introducing in the past two years, is
gaining ground.''

Since the 1994 convictions, Turkey has made wholesale changes in its
Constitution and laws in an effort to fulfill European Union conditions for
starting accession talks at the end of this year.

The special state security courts created for terrorism and treason cases were
abolished last month. The official ban on playing Kurdish music and teaching the
Kurdish language in schools has been lifted, and on Wednesday, state television
broadcast its first-ever program of news and culture in Kurdish.

As Mrs. Zana and her colleagues emerged from Ulucanlar prison in Ankara, they
were mobbed by a crowd throwing flowers and shouting, ''Turkey is proud of
you!'' Commentators spoke of the beginning of the end of a long national
conflict over state recognition of Kurdish cultural and language rights.

Later, Mrs. Zana said:

''I believe that a new period has started in this country, and a new page is
opened. Today is the day to unite, and today is the day that everyone frees
himself and herself of all prejudices.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); POLITICS (90%); EUROPEAN
UNION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (78%);
EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (78%); TREASON (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); PRISONS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); PUBLIC TELEVISION
(65%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (65%); TERRORISM (51%) Decisions and Verdicts;
Politics and Government; Kurds; Legislatures and Parliaments; Freedom and Human
Rights; Political Prisoners

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); KONGRA-GEL
(57%) Amnesty International; European Union

PERSON: ABDULLAH GUL (78%); GUENTER VERHEUGEN (68%) Susan Sachs; Sebnem Arsu;
Leyla Zana; Abdullah (Min) Gul; Gunter Verheugen

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (92%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); BELGIUM
(79%)

REGION: Turkey; Ankara (Turkey)  ; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             113 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 21, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

IRAQ GOVERNMENT CONSIDERS USING EMERGENCY RULE

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS and SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: SECURITY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1415 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 20


Faced with violent resistance even before it has assumed power, Iraq's newly
appointed government is considering imposing a state of emergency that could
involve curfews and a ban on public demonstrations, Iraqi officials said Sunday.

In his first news briefing here, Prime Minister Iyad Allawi offered no details
of what emergency rule might include, only that a committee of cabinet members
had been appointed to consider the issue.

Dr. Allawi, who worked closely with the Central Intelligence Agency in opposing
Saddam Hussein's government in the 1990's, said he would consider ''human rights
principles and international law,'' but made clear that he intended to act
quickly and forcefully against the insurgency, using extraordinary methods if
necessary.

''We will do all we can to strike against enemy forces aiming at harming our
country, and we will not stand by with our hands tied,'' Dr. Allawi said. ''The
Iraqi people are determined to establish a democratic government that provides
freedom and equal rights for all its citizens. We are prepared to fight and, if
necessary, die for the cause.''

Among the places where such measures could be applied include the city of
Falluja, where United States forces have been battling guerrilla fighters for
several weeks, and Sadr City, the restive eastern slum in Baghdad, where three
Iraqis were killed Sunday in confrontations with the First Infantry Division.

Among the emergency rule provisions being considered are a curfew, a ban on
public demonstrations, checkpoints to control public movement and changes to
search and seizure laws, two cabinet members said in separate interviews on
Sunday evening.

It remains unclear whether such measures would bring significant changes in the
lives of ordinary Iraqis. Under the United States-led occupation, occupation and
Iraqi soldiers and security forces have been allowed to conduct raids without
warrants, make arrests without charges, and hold suspects in detention
indefinitely.

If some sort of emergency rule is imposed, it is possible that this situation
could persist. Iraq's new leaders have yet to work out the exact nature of their
cooperation with the American military in the coming months, particularly on
such issues as offensive operations and house-to-house searches.

However, Iraqi officials have often criticized American forces for the way they
have conducted themselves here over the past 15 months. A frequent complaint of
Iraqi leaders is that the Americans often alienate ordinary Iraqis by searching
the wrong homes and detaining the wrong people.

The Iraqi leaders have said they know far better who the insurgents are. The
restoration of sovereignty here on June 30 may give those leaders an opportunity
to take the counterinsurgency in another direction.

Iraq's national security adviser, Mowaffak al-Rubaie, said the potential
measures were prompted by a tide of attacks by ''global terrorists'' as well as
Hussein loyalists who, as he put it, ''will not let the country go through the
transitional process towards democracy peacefully.''

''They will try to derail the political process,'' Mr. Rubaie said. ''It is our
responsibility to protect our people from these terrorists. If you bear all this
in mind, then some sort of exceptional rules, if you like, need to be adopted to
deal with the exceptional circumstances.''

Interior Minister Falah al-Naqib said he hoped that if emergency rule were
imposed, it would happen only in particularly fractious areas and for no more
than two to three weeks at a time. He also hinted at the delicate political
balance that the interim government must strike, between winning the confidence
of ordinary Iraqis and crushing what has already proven to be a powerful armed
resistance.

''We have disturbances in the whole country, but many areas could be controlled
very easily, and others will be a little more difficult,'' Mr. Naqib said. ''But
also we have to work politically with many groups. We don't want to use force
very much. If we have to use it with certain terrorists like Al Qaeda or anyone
else, then we will not hesitate to use it.''

Neither he nor other officials would say when a decision would be made about
emergency rule.

The head of the Iraqi bar association, Kamal Hamdoon Mulla Allaw, said he hoped
that such measures would be imposed only for a short period. Hamza al-Kafi, of
the Iraqi Human Rights Society, said he too hoped that any such measures would
be limited in scope and time and that they would not be used for political
advantage.

As the transfer of sovereignty approaches, insurgents have stepped up attacks on
interim government officials and security forces.

On Sunday morning, the interior minister's house in Samarra was attacked and
four bodyguards were killed. Last Thursday, a car bomb ripped through an army
recruitment center in Baghdad, killing at least 41 people. Dozens of local
officials and many senior members of the government in Baghdad have been
assassinated.

Prime Minister Allawi also announced a significant expansion of the Iraqi Army
and its rededication toward internal threats. The army, which currently has
about 3,000 soldiers, would take control of more than 37,500 troops who make up
the existing Iraqi Civil Defense Corps as part of a new National Guard.

Together with the new Iraqi antiterrorism force now being trained here, the
armed forces available to combat insurgents could total more than 60,000
soldiers.

The decision to use the army against the insurgency represents a change to
American policy, which had intended the force to be directed against foreign
threats and, most important, to be small. American policy makers had wanted to
ensure that the Iraqi Army, which has played a significant role in shaping the
country's political history, could be kept out of domestic politics.

Dr. Allawi acknowledged that concern but said the extraordinary circumstances
presented by the insurgency demanded a special response. He said that for the
''foreseeable future,'' the army would be fighting insurgents, rather than
guarding borders.

''Our army's priority will continue to be national defense,'' he said.
''However, in these difficult times, substantial elements of the army will have
to assist in the struggle against internal threats against national security.''

The reconstitution of the army amounts to another step away from the American
decision of spring 2003 to dissolve the Iraqi Army. That decision has been
roundly criticized, by Dr. Allawi and others, as having contributed to the
insurgency by pushing thousands of young men with military training into
unemployment.

In response to that criticism, American officials announced last month that they
would begin rehiring higher-level army officers who had earlier been banned from
serving in the armed forces.

''Disbanding the Iraqi Army was a big mistake,'' Dr. Allawi said. ''We are
fixing the mistakes of the Americans, aren't we?''

Together, redirecting the army toward internal threats and possibly imposing
emergency rule illustrated the grim choices Dr. Allawi and his cabinet feel they
have to make in their early days in office.

Dr. Allawi said the United States had agreed ''in principle'' to transfer
custody of Iraqis suspected of involvement in the insurgency and for criminal
acts to the Iraqi government after June 30.

He offered a vigorous vision of combating the guerrilla insurgency, which he
said was ''systematically destroying the country.''

''The enemy we are fighting is truly evil,'' he said. ''They have nothing to
offer the Iraqi people except death and destruction.''

He appealed to foreign countries to help protect the United Nations staff
members who would be working in the country to prepare for elections later this
year or early next.

Meanwhile, Moktada al-Sadr, the young Shiite cleric who led an uprising against
the American occupation, has been invited to attend a national conference that
will select a quasi-legislature to advise the interim government, Agence
France-Press reported Sunday.

The invitation appears to be part of a broader effort to bring Mr. Sadr into the
political mainstream. His insurgent force, the Mahdi Army, took heavy losses
from American forces over the past three months, but Mr. Sadr soared in
popularity, according to recent opinion polls.

The council that will be selected during the national conference will have a
wide array of powers, including authority to approve the national budget and to
question ministers.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iraqi girl yesterday in Buhriz, a village northeast of
Baghdad. The American military has returned security responsibility to local
leaders.
Iraqis with rocket-propelled grenades in front of an image of Ayatollah Muhammad
Sadiq al-Sadr, father of the rebel cleric Moktada al-Sadr. (Photographs by
Associated Press)
 Prime Minister Iyad Allawi made clear yesterday that he intended to act against
the insurgency in Iraq. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATES OF EMERGENCY (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
APPOINTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CURFEW (90%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (89%); ASSET FORFEITURE (89%); TERRORISM
(86%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (76%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); LEGISLATION
(75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); RIOTS (73%); POLITICS (72%);
ARMED FORCES (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); ARRESTS (67%) Politics and
Government; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Freedom and Human Rights; Curfews;
Demonstrations and Riots; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Search and Seizure; Law and Legislation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (78%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (73%) Dexter Filkins; Somini
Sengupta; Iyad (Prime Min) Allawi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Falluja (Iraq); Baghdad (Iraq); Sadr City (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             114 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 23, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Poland: Displaced Win Compensation

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 133 words


The Polish government must compensate about 90,000 of its citizens for property
their families lost when the country's borders shifted westward after World War
II, the European Court of Human Rights ruled. When the Allies redrew Poland's
borders in 1945, it lost land to the Soviet Union -- now in Belarus, Lithuania
and Ukraine -- and was given land from defeated Germany. Polish law entitled the
1.2 million people displaced from its former eastern territories to compensation
in kind, but various laws and procedures since the 1989 fall of Communism have
restricted the pool of available property. The European Court ruled that Poland
violated the rights of Jerzy Broniowski, the grandson of a property owner, and
must change its laws to address his claim and those of tens of thousands like
him.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WORLD WAR II
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (88%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (88%); VERDICTS (88%);
GRANDCHILDREN (73%) World War II (1939-45); Decisions and Verdicts; Reparations;
Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%) European Court of Human
Rights

PERSON: Jerzy Broniowski

COUNTRY: POLAND (97%); EUROPE (96%); BELARUS (92%); LITHUANIA (92%); UKRAINE
(73%); GERMANY (72%)

REGION: Europe; Poland

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             116 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sudan: Genocide Charged

BYLINE: By Marc Lacey (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 113 words


Physicians for Human Rights said a ''genocidal process'' is unfolding in western
Sudan, where armed Arab militias, with the backing of the government, have waged
widespread attacks on black African residents of the Darfur region. ''It is
essential for those who still survive in Darfur, for those who have desperately
sought refuge in Chad, for future populations anywhere on earth, and for the
sustainability of the regime of international norms and law that we collectively
name this crime for what it is and intervene to stop it from succeeding,'' the
Boston-based group said in a report. The government in Khartoum denies that it
has supported the militias.   Marc Lacey (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Blacks; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (93%) Physicians for Human Rights

PERSON: Marc Lacey

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (92%); AFRICA (91%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Diplomatic Goals For 2004

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 92 words


To the Editor:

Re "What We Will Do in 2004," by Colin L. Powell (Op-Ed, Jan. 1):

If the Bush administration is resolved to "expand freedom" in 2004, it might
start by suspending the proposed $13 million in military assistance to
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.

Given that human rights groups and the State Department itself have found little
improvement in these countries' already poor human rights records,the United
States' subsidy to these governments, which torture and repress their own
people, should end.

CHRISTOPHER L. BALL
Des Moines, Jan. 1, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (84%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); UZBEKISTAN (92%); KAZAKHSTAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             118 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-General To Make Run For President Of Indonesia

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Jan. 15


The former chief of the Indonesian military, who has been charged by the United
Nations with crimes against humanity, presented himself here on Thursday as a
candidate for his nation's first direct presidential elections, scheduled for
July.

General Wiranto, an amateur crooner with matinee idol good looks, told a
luncheon of foreign correspondents and diplomats that he could provide
leadership and security for Indonesia after what he called five years of
"turbulence."

The general, who has been campaigning for months to win the nomination of
Golkar, the second-largest party in the Indonesian Parliament and the former
governing party under the authoritarian leadership of President Suharto, appears
to be well-financed in his efforts. Many political analysts believe that General
Wiranto would have the best chance of unseating the incumbent, Megawati
Sukarnoputri, whose popularity has plummeted as economic conditions for ordinary
Indonesians have deteriorated.

The general showed considerable strength in polls of Golkar party members
several months ago. His main rival within the party, the parliamentary speaker,
Akbar Tanjung, has been convicted of corruption and is awaiting a ruling on his
appeal.

General Wiranto, 55, and six other military officials were charged in February
2003 by the East Timor Serious Crimes Unit of the United Nations with crimes
against humanity in connection with violence surrounding the former province's
1999 independence referendum.

General Wiranto has not been called before an Indonesian court. American
officials expressed disappointment that he was not among those charged by a
special human rights court convened in 2002 and 2003 on East Timor, which tried
the cases of 18 soldiers and militiamen. Fewer than half of them were convicted
and sentenced. He appeared nearly two years ago as a witness in one of the
trials, a time when he had just released a CD of love songs called "For You My
Indonesia."

As the politicking for the presidential election has intensified, American
officials have made it known that the nomination of General Wiranto would not be
helpful for Indonesia's relations with Washington. The general has made courtesy
calls to explain his campaign platform to a number of European embassies as well
as the Australian Embassy, but not to the United States Embassy.

The conduct of the Indonesian elections is being watched with interest in
Washington, and a considerable portion of the United States aid package to
Indonesia is going this year to supporting the election process. Two dozen
parties have been certified to take part, but in the end the battle will be
between the two major secular parties: Golkar and Ms. Megawati's Indonesian
Democratic Party for Struggle.

Islamic religious parties, whose platforms call for Indonesia to become an
Islamic state, are expected to win only about 10 to 15 percent of the vote,
according to election experts. About 143 million voters are eligible to
participate in the vote and the turnout could be as high as 80 percent,
according to the National Democratic Institute, a Washington based group working
here.

Despite the interest abroad in the general's indictment by the United Nations
over East Timor, Indonesians themselves have paid little attention to it. Many
regard the loss of East Timor, now an independent country, as a dark chapter in
the country's history.

The general, who was forced out of his military position in 2000, defended his
actions in East Timor. He said he had followed orders to help organize the
referendumin East Timor and had prevented outright civil war at a very difficult
period.

"It is very easy to say that there were gross violations of human rights when we
know that is not the fact," he said. Moreover, he added, as defense minister he
was a policy maker who could not be held responsible for every operation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Wiranto, an ex-military chief of Indonesia, will seek
presidency. (Photo by European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%);
RELIGION (83%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); SENTENCING
(78%); CORRUPTION (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); REFERENDUMS (72%); RECORD
RELEASES (62%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (53%); ECONOMIC NEWS (53%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (73%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); TIMOR-LESTE (92%); AUSTRALIA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             119 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Azerbaijan Represses Dissent, Rights Group Says

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 409 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Friday, Jan. 23


In its first three months in office, the new government of Azerbaijan has
conducted a campaign of repression marked by arbitrary arrests, beatings,
torture and the dismissal of dissenters from government jobs, according to a
report released on Friday by the international rights group Human Rights Watch.

The detailed 55-page report describes a wave of up to 1,000 arrests of
opposition party leaders and members, democracy activists, journalists and
election officials and observers who challenged widespread electoral fraud. It
said that more than 100 detainees remained in custody and that the police were
still harassing opposition supporters.

The crackdown may reflect the relatively weaker political position of the new
president, Ilham Aliyev, who followed his ailing father, Heidar Aliyev, in a
strong-arm election on Oct. 15, according to the author of the report, Peter
Bouckaert.

It was the first dynastic succession in a former Soviet nation, and opponents of
the government were harassed and repressed before, during and after the
election.

The experience has left the opposition and pro-democracy groups broken and
demoralized, Mr. Bouckaert said in a telephone interview from his office in
Johannesburg.

The thorough manipulation of the election, the crushing of opposition protests
that followed it, the current crackdown and the absence of strong condemnation
from Washington have left opponents of the government with few options and
little hope in the near future, he said.

"I think it will be difficult to motivate the people of Azerbaijan to
participate in future elections," he said. "Basically they have lost faith in
the process. They now have all the evidence they need to show that there is no
opportunity for them to peacefully change their government."

He noted that the brief riots that followed the voting -- which were quickly
crushed by the police and the military -- were the first major political
violence in a decade.

The successful crushing of dissent and the muted response from Washington
contrast with the situation in neighboring Georgia, where pro-democracy groups
were fostered with American aid and where a flawed parliamentary election in
November drew criticism from Washington.

On Sunday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will attend the inauguration of
Georgia's new president, Mikhail Saakashvili, who was elected this month after
driving Eduard A. Shevardnadze from office in a peaceful popular uprising.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CIVIL SERVICES (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); POLITICS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); RIOTS (73%); POLITICAL
CORRUPTION (73%); ELECTION FRAUD (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (58%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (55%)

COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); GEORGIA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA
(79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (55%)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             121 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

3 Teenagers Are Released From Guantanamo and Sent Home

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


The United States military released its three youngest prisoners from the
detention center at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba on Thursday, teenagers thought to be
13 to 15 years old.

The teenagers were returned to their home country, which the Pentagon did not
identify. All three were captured in Afghanistan and taken to Guantanamo in
February 2003, said Lt. Col. Pamela Hart, a military spokeswoman at Guantanamo.

Military officials said they had decided the teenagers no longer posed a threat
to the United States and had no further value as interrogation subjects. They
will not be tried by the United States government for any crimes, the military
said.

Hundreds of people suspected of being fighters of Al Qaeda and the Taliban have
been held at Guantanamo since the war in Afghanistan began in the fall of 2001.

Human rights groups have long criticized the detention of the three teenagers.

"The detention of children as 'enemy combatants' and their interrogation without
even the basic safeguards to which they were entitled was a significant
violation of human rights," William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty
International U.S.A., said in a statement. "The release of these children is
long overdue, but does not let the U.S. off the hook for continued violations of
the rights of hundreds of other detainees."

In a statement, the Pentagon said the teenagers' identities were being kept
secret for fear of reprisals against them.

Colonel Hart said one teenager had said he was conscripted into an anti-American
militia. Another said he had been abducted by the Taliban and forced to train
and fight, she said. Colonel Hart said the third teenager had been studying in
an extremist mosque and captured while preparing to obtain weapons.

The Pentagon said it did not know the teenagers' birth dates, but medical tests
had determined that all three were younger than 16. Aid groups will help
resettle them in their home country, the Pentagon said.

In November, officials at Guantanamo said the three were kept apart from the
other prisoners.

Their release means that 87 detainees have been released from the prison. Four
others have been sent to Saudi Arabia for detention there.

About 650 prisoners, from about 40 countries, remain, military officials said
Thursday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); PRISONS (78%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (78%); TERRORISM (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); AL-QAEDA (69%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberia Needs $500 Million, Report Says

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, Feb. 1


Liberia will need nearly $500 million in stabilization aid after 14 years of
nearly relentless war, the United Nations and the World Bank reported last week
in preparation for a donors conference in New York this week.

Advocacy groups have urged that particular attention be paid to disarming and
reintegrating an estimated 50,000 former soldiers, a great many of them
children, with a warning that a failure to invest heavily in peacemaking in
Liberia would bring further bloodshed to West Africa.

The International Reconstruction Conference on Liberia, to be held at United
Nations headquarters in New York on Thursday and Friday, is to bring together
officials from international lending institutions and donor countries to discuss
aid efforts.

Liberia, the West African country founded by Americans in the mid-19th century,
is facing its first chance of genuine peace since 1989, when Charles G. Taylor,
an American-educated rebel leader, plunged his country into war.

Mr. Taylor, who later became its elected president, was himself confronted by
two separate rebel insurrections. Last August, Mr. Taylor left his country for
exile in Nigeria. The country is now run by a transitional government composed
of Mr. Taylor's former loyalists and former enemies. That fragile government is
plagued by rivalries.

A United Nations peacekeeping mission is responsible for restoring order; it is
still 6,000 troops short of its mandate of 15,000 soldiers.

Among the mission's most crucial tasks are ridding the country of armed
factions, reintegrating former combatants into their communities and cobbling
together a national army and a police force. That effort, which began last
December, was delayed when disgruntled fighters rioted in Monrovia, Liberia's
capital.

The assessment of Liberia's needs by the United Nations and World Bank, released
last Thursday, found that Liberia would need $487 million in stabilization aid
during the next two years.

In a report to be released Monday, the New York-based Human Rights Watch called
for United Nations officials and donor countries to focus on rehabilitating
child soldiers, including girls, who have been raped, conscripted as sexual
slaves and enrolled as fighters.

The report urges donors, particularly the United States, to devote "sufficient
funding" to rebuilding schools, paying teachers salary arrears and restoring the
country's battered educational system.

Human Rights Watch is also pressing the United Nations Mission in Liberia to
investigate the recruitment and use of child soldiers by all three of Liberia's
armed factions, in an effort to seek accountability in the future, including
through a war crimes tribunal.

In a separate report published Friday, the International Crisis Group, a
research and advocacy organization, similarly urged donor countries and
international financial institutions to provide enough funding to finance
education and vocational training for the former combatants.

It also urged donor countries to commission an audit of Liberian government
funds said to have been diverted by Mr. Taylor. That proposition is likely to
cause political waves in a country with a fragile transition government.

The United States government has promised roughly $200 million to rebuild
Liberia. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, is expected to attend the meeting
this week, as is his French counterpart, Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CHILD SOLDIERS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); POSTWAR
RECONSTRUCTION (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); EXTERNAL DEBT (89%);
DEVELOPMENT BANKS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%); ARMIES
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); CHILDREN IN ARMED CONFLICT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CHILDREN (76%); PUBLIC
FINANCE (76%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); RIOTS (71%); FOREIGN LENDING (69%);
POLICE FORCES (69%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (66%); EDUCATION FUNDING (65%); EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (65%); VOCATIONAL & TECHNICAL TRAINING (60%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (79%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); NIGERIA
(79%); AFRICA (79%); SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             124 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain, Citing Terrorist Threat, Plans to Expand Its Spy Agency

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
LONDON

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 25


Home Secretary David Blunkett, Britain's top law enforcement minister, announced
a major expansion of the country's domestic espionage agency on Wednesday and
urged a strengthening of antiterrorism laws including those allowing detention
of foreigners without trial.

Mr. Blunkett spoke in Parliament after publishing a 51-page document setting out
the government's belief that Britain -- a close ally of the United States in the
invasion of Iraq and the campaign against terrorism -- faced a ''particularly
high'' threat of terrorist attack ''because of the evidence that terrorist cells
are active'' in this country.

''I am in no doubt that the terrorism threat remains and the need to have the
right legislation in place is greater than ever,'' he told Parliament.

Mr. Blunkett said the country's MI5 internal espionage agency would be expanded
by 50 percent with the recruitment of 1,000 new agents over the next few years,
including desk officers and linguists.

The home secretary also said Britain would spend the equivalent of almost $6
million in improving intelligence gathering by the police Special Branch, which
is supposed to deal with threats to internal security.

In future, Mr. Blunkett said, Britain would have to ponder how it ran trials of
terror suspects to determine whether telephone intercepts by intelligence
agencies could be used as evidence. In recent days he has also indicated he
believes Britain should consider lowering the burden of proof to ensure
convictions of would-be suicide bombers and to hold some terror trials behind
closed doors.

In Parliament on Wednesday, Mr. Blunkett offered a staunch defense of powers
acquired since the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States to detain foreign
terror suspects indefinitely without bringing them to trial.

''I am convinced that the current threat leaves us with no option but to
continue to use these powers,'' he said. But he said it would be a ''grave
step'' to seek legislation empowering the authorities to hold British citizens
indefinitely without trial or charge.

At present Britain is holding 14 foreigners under the terrorism regulations,
which expire in 2006. The 14 men have been in detention for two years, causing
an outcry from human rights organizations.

''I cannot believe I am sitting here today to try and argue as to why it is
wrong to detain a human being indefinitely without trial,'' Shami Chakrabarti,
from the human rights group Liberty, said Wednesday. ''When you create this
symbol of injustice, you provide the greatest ammunition for extremists.''

Gareth Peirce, a lawyer who represents the 14 detainees, was quoted by Britain's
Press Association news agency as saying none of them had ever been questioned,
let alone charged.

Under British rules, the 14 may leave at any time if they can find a country
prepared to accept them.

David Davis, the spokesman on law and order for the opposition Conservatives,
said he was not convinced by the argument that they could always leave the
country.

''On the one hand, to return to some countries might in effect be to return to
their deaths,'' Mr. Davis told Parliament. ''On the other hand, releasing people
we believe to be international terrorists to travel the world seems itself a
peculiar policy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (94%); TERRORISM (93%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR ON TERROR
(77%); BURDENS OF PROOF (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); LAWYERS (75%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); WIRETAPPING (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Intelligence
Services; Espionage; Security and Warning Systems

PERSON: David (Sec) Blunkett; Alan Cowell

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Great Britain; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Haiti, All the Bridges Are Burned

BYLINE: By Lyonel Trouillot.

Lyonel Trouillot, secretary of the Haitian Writers' Association, is the author
of ''The Street of Lost Footsteps,'' a novel.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti


The world is now watching what is going on in Haiti. Everyone has seen how the
population of Cap Haitien, Haiti's second-largest city, welcomed as liberators a
motley group of rebels who now vow to march here to the capital. But that's only
the most obvious sign of a resentment against President Jean-Bertrand Aristide
that has been growing for years. The most popular song of the Carnival that just
ended, for example, was an attack on a government official, ''Madan Gougou,''
and by extension, on Mr. Aristide's Lavalas party. Schoolchildren pass around
unflattering caricatures of the president, and anti-Aristide graffiti have
proliferated in the streets.

That's why Haitians weren't surprised when the democratic opposition, with no
ties to the rebels, this week rejected an American-drafted proposal that would
give it more power but also let President Aristide complete his term in office.
The only solution, the opposition said, was for Mr. Aristide to go.

There is good reason for this. The world has paid little attention to Haiti for
the last few years, but human rights groups here have documented how rapes,
kidnappings, political assassinations, arbitrary arrests, the use of tear gas
and beatings during peaceful demonstrations, the destruction of private
property, and a complete lack of social services have come to characterize
Haitians' daily life. That is why the population is applauding the rebels. And
that is why Haiti will not be at peace until Mr. Aristide is gone, no matter how
much our Caribbean neighbors and the international community talk of the need
for an elected president to finish his term.

For Haitians, that support for Mr. Aristide has only made things worse -- just
as the United States's automatic backing of the Duvalier dictatorship because it
was anti-Communist resulted in terror. The difference is that Francois and
Jean-Claude Duvalier did not pretend to be democratic during their three decades
in power. They controlled their administration and their Tontons Macoute with an
iron fist. Forced to adopt a democratic stance, the Lavalas regime has simply
given greater leeway to its followers to carry out repression. Whether or not
the acts are ordered by the government, these followers are assured of impunity.
As I write this, thugs in Port-au-Prince are looting stores and extorting money
from shopkeepers in the name of protecting the government.

One result of this repression has been the breaking away of disillusioned
intellectuals (never in Haiti has a regime so benefited at its beginnings from
the support of intellectuals; never has a regime been so criticized by
intellectuals at its end), which has forced Mr. Aristide to depend on less
qualified supporters. The appointment of a district attorney who did not go to
law school is the most cited example. The chaos that has followed has largely
contributed to the deterioration of institutions and public administration,
worsening what are already the worst living conditions in the Western
Hemisphere.

It is very difficult for someone like me to answer the question: are you a
member of the opposition? Technically, the answer is no. I do not belong to any
political party and do not defend any particular political ideology. But, as a
Haitian citizen, I share in the demands of the civil society for the respect of
democratic norms.

I still dream of peace, but I think that it is too late to reconcile the Haitian
population with Mr. Aristide's regime. Any proposition with such reconciliation
as its goal will lead only to more violence.

And that seems to be the view of a wide spectrum of Haitians. For the first
time, I am seeing Haitians of all origins united in a common goal. With the
exception of Carnival, demonstrations against Mr. Aristide have been the only
public events joining all ethnicities and all social groups. This constitutes
enormous progress in light of the discrimination that has tarnished our past. I
have seen peasants, workers, bosses, educators, women's organizations, credit
union associations -- all united around the table, expressing their
disagreements and complaints, but also their common hopes and an agreement on
the rights and needs of all.

It would be a shame for the international community to finally pay attention to
what's going on here just so it could thwart these desires by the imposition of
a solution that all reject.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Jordin Isip)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%);
ASSASSINATION (77%); POLITICS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%); CHILDREN (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); EXTORTION (66%); RETAILERS (60%); LAW SCHOOLS (60%)
Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Suspensions, Dismissals and
Resignations; International Relations

PERSON: Lyonel Trouillot; Jean-Bertrand (Pres) Aristide

CITY: PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI (92%)

COUNTRY: HAITI (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: Haiti

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: China: Ripping U.S. On Rights

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 73 words


For the fifth year in a row, Beijing issued a report blasting the United States
for what it termed government crimes and racism at home and ''military
aggression around the world.'' Responding to American criticism of China's human
rights record, the 61-page document complained that Washington acted as ''the
world human rights police'' and distorted conditions in its annual State
Department world survey of human rights, issued last week.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(87%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (94%); ASIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             128 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Announces New Offensive Against Taliban and Al Qaeda

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 434 words

DATELINE: KHOST, Afghanistan, March 13


American military officials announced Saturday that they had mounted a new
military operation against fighters for Al Qaeda and the Taliban in eastern and
southern Afghanistan.

But they played down the significance of the step, saying it was not a sweeping
''spring offensive'' organized to capture the fugitive Qaeda leader Osama bin
Laden.

Lt. Col. Bryan Hilferty, a spokesman for American-led coalition forces in
Afghanistan, said in a telephone interview that the operation had begun on March
7 and that it involved no additional American forces. He said that there were no
plans for a large spring offensive and that the new operation would include
previously used tactics, like increased raids, patrols, village searches and
checkpoints.

''It's just the next in a long line of operations,'' he said. ''It's the next in
the line.''

But defense officials in Washington have said in recent weeks that American
forces are adopting a variety of new tactics in Afghanistan as warm spring
weather approaches. Capturing Mr. bin Laden is believed to be an election-year
priority for the Bush administration. The Qaeda leader is thought to be hiding
somewhere along the mountainous Pakistan-Afghanistan border.

Defense officials in Washington have said elements of Task Force 121, a team of
Central Intelligence Agency officials and Special Operations soldiers involved
in the capture of Saddam Hussein, have been moved to Afghanistan.

At the same time, American troops who carried out short, targeted raids in the
past are now spending days at a time living in remote mountainous areas along
the border, according to military officials. American units have also been
assigned responsibility for specific geographic areas and villages.

Military officials have said the new tactics have generated a sharp increase in
the amount of information that Afghans are giving to American forces. They also
say they expect an increase in Qaeda and Taliban activity as the weather warms
and as an Afghan national election, scheduled for June, approaches.

Colonel Hilferty said the new operation would be carried out across the
country's east, south and southeast. He also said the operations would focus on
certain areas, but he declined to be more specific.

Afghan civilians and international human rights groups, including Human Rights
Watch, have complained that the United States at times relies on faulty
intelligence and uses excessive force in raids. They also said American forces
had mistakenly killed dozens of Afghan civilians and repeatedly detained
innocent people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL-QAEDA (91%); TALIBAN (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); IRAQ WAR (73%); ELECTIONS (71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (91%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%)

CITY: KHOST, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             134 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 25, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Rights Panel Condemns Israel's Killing of Hamas Leader

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE; Fiona Fleck contributed reporting from Geneva for this
article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 24


The United Nations Commission on Human Rights voted Wednesday to condemn
Israel's killing of the Hamas leader, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, but a similar
resolution failed to move forward in the Security Council because of objections
by the United States.

The 53-member rights commission, holding its annual session in Geneva, passed by
a 31-to-2 vote a resolution submitted by Pakistan that scored Israel for
''targeted assassinations, liquidation and murder of political leadership.''
Only the United States and Australia voted against it, and 18 countries,
including the European Union states, abstained.

The United States said the resolution, which is nonbinding, lacked balance
because it made no mention of Palestinian terror attacks. Yaakov Levy, the
Israeli envoy, dismissed it as ''Israel bashing.''

At the United Nations headquarters in New York, Algeria, the Arab nation
currently on the Security Council, submitted a redrafted resolution on Wednesday
evening after an earlier attempt to obtain a statement against Israel from the
15-member Council failed to win support. The United States ambassador, John D.
Negroponte, said the United States had opposed it because it made no mention of
''terrorism conducted by Hamas.''

The new draft, which condemns ''the most recent extrajudicial execution
committed by Israel,'' adds a paragraph condemning ''also all terrorist attacks
against any civilians as well as all acts of violence and destruction.'' The
document will probably be discussed in the Council on Thursday, but Mr.
Negroponte indicated that the American objection to not singling out Hamas would
continue.

''If the Security Council is going to pronounce itself on this question,'' he
said, ''it must recognize the reality that Hamas has been responsible for
numerous, extensive and very recent terrorist activities.''

Earlier Wednesday, Israel's foreign minister, Silvan Shalom, met with Secretary
General Kofi Annan, who on Tuesday had condemned the killing of Sheik Yassin.
Mr. Shalom said he explained Israel's reasons for taking its action and appealed
to the United Nations to ''push all the moderates in our region to abandon those
extremists and don't give them an umbrella to move forward with violence against
innocent Israelis.''

On Tuesday, 41 countries and regional groups debated in the Security Council
what the panel's response ought to be to Sheik Yassin's killing.

Nasser al-Kidwa, the Palestinian observer to the United Nations, said that Sheik
Yassin was a revered spiritual leader and that his killing was a ''mad and
brutal assassination'' for which Israel was legally and politically responsible.

Dan Gillerman, the Israeli ambassador, responded that ''to characterize him as a
spiritual leader is to attempt to characterize Osama bin Laden as a Mother
Teresa.'' He said it would be the ''ultimate hypocrisy'' if the Council were
seen to be defending ''the godfather of terrorism.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); TERRORISM (91%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%) United States International
Relations; Terrorism; Palestinians

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
(93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN
UNION (57%) United Nations; United Nations Commission on Human Rights; Hamas
(Palestinian Group); Security Council (Un)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (53%) Warren Hoge; Fiona Fleck;
Ahmed (Sheik) Yassin; Silvan (Min) Shalom; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); PAKISTAN (92%); SWITZERLAND (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: Israel; Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             135 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 25, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Dutch Court Puts Former Congo Officer on Trial in Torture Case

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: ROTTERDAM, the Netherlands, March 24


For almost four years, Sebastien Nzapali, a former military officer from Congo,
was hoping for political asylum in the Netherlands.

But Mr. Nzapali, who asserted that he had been persecuted, appeared in a Dutch
court on Wednesday to answer charges that he himself was a persecutor. He is
charged with torture and rape committed in 1996 during the rule of former
President Mobuto Sese Seko in the country then known as Zaire.

As he faced Mr. Nzapali, a slightly built man, the prosecutor cited a long list
of abuses and said, ''Many people knew him by his notorious nickname as 'The
King of the Beasts.' ''

The prosecution said Mr. Nzapali earned that name because he treated people like
animals, abused his authority, locked up people at will and brutalized and raped
prisoners.

In the unusual trial that opened Wednesday, Mr. Nzapali, 51, is being prosecuted
in a Dutch court for violating the 1984 United Nations Convention Against
Torture. His trial is considered an important test case for the Netherlands and
other countries that are parties to the convention but have rarely or never
applied the laws flowing from it. Lawyers said the case against Mr. Nzapali was
an example of the gradual widening of international laws that allow courts in
one country to judge human rights crimes committed in another regardless of the
person's nationality.

Until now, human rights trials in European national courts have been prosecuted
as war crimes or genocide cases, but the torture convention is not known to have
been used in a conviction, lawyers said. In 1998, Britain arrested Chile's
former president, Augusto Pinochet, at the request of Spain, because both
countries were parties to the torture convention, but he was later released
because of ill health. Other countries, including France and Switzerland, have
arrested foreigners on charges of committing torture elsewhere, but the accused
were either released or they fled.

Court officials said that Mr. Nzapali, who arrived in the Netherlands in 1998
and requested political asylum, was denounced to the police by fellow countrymen
who said they recognized him. Dutch investigators traveled to Congo to look into
the charges, and last September Dutch police arrested him. Since then, court
officials have also visited Congo to take sworn statements from witnesses and
supposed victims.

Mr. Nzapali's case is being heard by a panel of three judges, but no jury. The
president judge quoted at length from the testimony on Wednesday. One woman
testified that she had been kept locked up by Mr. Nzapali for two weeks. Another
witness said he had been stripped and beaten three times a day on orders of Mr.
Nzapali. The prosecution said that as a colonel in the civil guard and commander
in charge of the province of Matadi, the defendant acted with impunity.

Mr. Nzapali denied all the charges. ''All this information is completely
wrong,'' he told the judges on Wednesday. ''I am not an animal.''

After the hearing, which lasted one day, court officials said they expected a
verdict in two weeks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 31, 2004



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Sebastien
Nzapali, a former military officer from Congo on trial in the Netherlands on
charges of torture and rape committed in his home country, referred incorrectly
to the prosecutor who read the list of accusations against him. The prosecutor,
T. Polescuk, is a woman.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); WITNESSES
(89%); TESTIMONY (89%); ARRESTS (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); LAWYERS (77%); EVIDENCE
(77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); GENOCIDE (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (67%) Torture; Asylum (Political); Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Sebastien Nzapali; Mobutu Sese Seko (1930-97)

CITY: ROTTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (95%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (94%); SPAIN
(79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); CHILE (79%); FRANCE (69%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire); Netherlands; Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             137 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The 'Crimes' of the Jailed Cuban Librarians

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 161 words



To the Editor:

We hope that librarians everywhere read ''Mr. Castro's Prisoners'' (editorial,
March 26) and write the United Nations Human Rights Commission not only to ask
that the United Nations condemn the human rights abuses in Cuba but also
explicitly to call for the immediate release of the 75 dissidents rounded up in
the March 2003 crackdown.

The roundup included at least 10 independent librarians, whose only crimes were
maintaining private book collections and sharing these books with others --
innocuous activity that in many countries, including our own, is encouraged.

We in America's libraries have a long, proud tradition of upholding free speech.
It appalls us to think that librarians anywhere are sent to jail for actions
that librarians in the free world will be praising in April during National
Library Week.

KAREN G. SCHNEIDER
Richmond, Calif., March 26, 2004

The letter was also signed by nine other members of the American Library
Association.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LIBRARIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); LIBRARIANS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (72%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (56%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (56%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (92%); UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             143 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 5, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing United Nations: Sudan Regains Human Rights Seat

BYLINE:  By Daniel B. Schneider (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 102 words


Sudan was elected to another three-year term on the United Nations' Commission
on Human Rights, but the United States delegation, citing allegations of ethnic
cleansing in Sudan's western Darfur region, walked out of the meeting before the
vote.

The deputy representative of Sudan, Omar Bashir Manis, accused the United States
of "shedding crocodile tears," and said American forces had committed atrocities
against prisoners and civilians in Iraq. Sudan ran uncontested, as one of four
nations chosen by the African Regional Group to fill four allotted vacancies on
the commission.   Daniel B. Schneider (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             145 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush's Words Do Little to Ease Horror at Prison Deeds

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
REACTION

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 6


One day after President George W. Bush condemned the ''abhorrent'' treatment of
prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, his words seemed to have done little to
stem a chorus of complaints across the globe that challenged his moral authority
and unsettled his allies.

President Bush chose Arabic-language television stations to deliver his message,
but he seemed to win few converts in the Arab world.

''We do not think that a single Arab will believe President George Bush when he
says that the torture, abuse and sexual violations committed by his soldiers in
Iraq do not represent the United States, or that they are individual actions,''
wrote Abdelbari Atwan in Al Quds al Arabi, a London-based Arabic daily. ''The
torture is not the work of a few American soldiers. It is the result of an
official American culture that deliberately insults and humiliates Muslims.''

In newspaper editorials and interviews from Tokyo to Berlin and London, the
argument emerged that the onus was now firmly on the United States to convince
friend and foe alike that it had not resorted to practices once associated with
the government of Saddam Hussein.

''In the world the United States has a moral and political leadership,'' said
Alioune Tine, a human rights activist in Dakar, Senegal. ''If we see torture and
ill-treatment by the United States, we think it can give an example to some
dictators in developing countries.''

Some European politicians said President Bush erred by initially failing to
apologize personally for the abuse documented in photographs showing naked and
hooded Iraqi men in demeaning positions.

In several places from Madrid to London, politicians dwelt on the notion that,
in the words of the Spanish foreign minister, Miguel Angel Moratinos, the
photographs showed ''a series of acts which were supposed to have been brought
to an end through the ousting of the Saddam Hussein regime.''

In Munich, the Suddeutsche Zeitung argued in an editorial that the White House
''is creating an atmosphere of lawlessness in which excesses a la Abu Ghraib can
flourish,'' adding, ''The price is high: America is not just losing authority
and credibility, but also its values.''

The disclosures have left Washington's allies caught between revulsion among
their electorates and the realpolitik of their commitment to the United States.

At a joint news conference on Thursday, Poland's president, Aleksander
Kwasniewski, whose country has 2,500 troops in Iraq, and Prime Minister Tony
Blair of Britain gave no indication that the disclosures of abuse would weaken
their commitment to the alliance.

Indeed, British newspapers reported widely on Thursday that Britain planned to
send a further 800 commandos to fight Shiite Muslim militiamen in the holy city
of Najaf. By contrast, news reports in Seoul on Thursday said South Korea would
delay the deployment of some 3,600 troops to Iraq.

Mr. Blair finds himself in perhaps the most awkward position among European
leaders. It is not just that a British tabloid published photographs -- possibly
faked -- showing British soldiers abusing an Iraqi detainee. He has been the
staunchest ally of Mr. Bush and is caught in a delicate balance between
supporting the American president while distancing himself from the actions of
some Americans.

The crisis threatening Mr. Blair deepened late on Thursday when the Defense
Ministry confirmed that the military police were questioning a soldier who had
given further details of alleged abuse of prisoners by British soldiers to The
Daily Mirror, the same newspaper that published the photographs last Saturday.
The allegations relate to the Queen's Lancashire Regiment, the unit that was
implicated in the earlier Daily Mirror reports, the Defense Ministry said.

''The abuse of prisoners, the torture of prisoners, degrading treatment of
people in the custody of coalition forces, these things are completely and
totally unacceptable,'' Mr. Blair said at the joint news conference with Mr.
Kwasniewski.

''We went to Iraq to stop that kind of thing, not to do it ourselves,'' he said.

The Daily Telegraph printed a column by a flamboyant Conservative legislator,
Boris Johnson, who questioned his own previous support for the invasion of Iraq.
Mr. Johnson referred to female American soldiers photographed at Abu Ghraib as
''smirking jezebels from the Appalachians'' and went on to ask, ''How could the
American army have been so crass, so arrogant, so brutal as to behave in this
way?''

Elsewhere the reaction was more muted. Government officials in France withheld
formal criticism, as did German ministers. Russia, which has bristled at
American criticism of its record on human rights, reacted strongly, with Kremlin
officials bluntly calling the treatment of the Iraqis prisoners torture.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aleksander Kwasniewski, the Polish president, who is visiting
Britain, and Prime Minister Tony Blair leaving 10 Downing Street yesterday.
(Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LANGUAGE &
LANGUAGES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); POLITICS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); PRIME MINISTERS (87%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); IRAQ WAR
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (69%);
RELIGION (68%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (64%); TERRORISM (60%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(60%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (60%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (57%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; Public Opinion;
Terrorism; Arabic Language

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); TONY BLAIR (50%) Alan Cowell;
George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(77%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); KOREA, REPUBLIC
OF (92%); POLAND (90%); GERMANY (79%); SENEGAL (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             146 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chechen Leader's Killing Leaves Putin With Few Options

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 10


The assassination of the Russian-backed president of Chechnya on Sunday has left
the Kremlin with few good options in pursuing a brutal and thankless war that
has continued on and off for almost a decade.

The president, Akhmad Kadyrov, 52, was buried Monday in his home village in
southeastern Chechnya just seven months after being elected in a stage-managed
vote that was intended to demonstrate that the war had become a manageable,
localized conflict.

As Moscow's surrogate, he had consolidated government functions and armed power,
leaving the Kremlin with no obvious alternative. A new election is to be held by
Sept. 9.

''The danger is that things could turn chaotic and you might see Chechnya being
plunged into a new war or a war of personal feuds and retributions,'' said
Dmitri Trenin, an expert on Chechnya with the Moscow Center of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.

Although major combat had already ended when Mr. Kadyrov was elected in October,
terrorist attacks have continued both in Chechnya and in other parts of Russia.
Mr. Kadyrov was killed by a bomb that had been planted under the seats of the
central stadium, where he was attending a World War II anniversary celebration
in the capital, Grozny.

The number of people who were killed with him varies from one official report to
another. In telephone interviews on Sunday, two officials said the overall toll
was at least 14.

After a decade of war, Chechnya is filled with crosscurrents of feuds and
violence, and experts said they could only guess at who might have placed the
bomb. As of late Monday, no one had claimed responsibility.

Russian and Chechen officials blamed rebel bands for the killing. The most
prominent rebel leader, Aslan Maskhadov, denied any involvement in an interview
with a rebel news agency, Chechenpress.

A few days before he was killed, Mr. Kadyrov told the Russian news agency
Itar-Tass, ''I know the terrorists are trying to hunt me down.''

Mr. Kadyrov's credentials as the Kremlin's man in Chechnya included a past as a
Muslim religious leader and an anti-Moscow rebel. This background gave him a
measure of credibility among some Chechens, but also many enemies.

Since his election, the surface of life in Chechnya had become quieter, and the
occupying Russian military had removed some roadblocks in Grozny. But beneath
this calm, Mr. Kadyrov's private army of 2,000 to 3,000 fighters was maintaining
its grip through a campaign of kidnappings and terror, according to local
residents and human rights groups.

Russian troops have also been implicated in kidnappings and killings.

Particularly worrying in the short run, said Tanya Lokshina, a human rights
worker who was in Grozny on Sunday, is that Mr. Kadyrov's private army is now
leaderless and more dangerous than ever.

The fighters, who include a number of rebel defectors, may now feel at risk and
could stage a new wave of violence in an attempt to eliminate rivals, she said.

The fighters, known as Kadyrovtsy, are under the command of Mr. Kadyrov's son,
Ramzan. On Monday, the Kremlin appointed him deputy head of the regional
government, under a Russian envoy, Sergei Abramov, who is widely seen as a
temporary place holder.

But the younger Mr. Kadyrov is not expected to succeed his father. He is only in
his 20's, with a reputation for violence and without the political weight to
maintain power.

''Kadyrov's death has left a political vacuum in Chechnya,'' said Ramazan
Abdulatipov, a Russian member of Parliament. ''It turns out that there is no one
to pick up his banner.''

Some officials in Moscow called on President Vladimir V. Putin to take direct
control of Chechnya, a move that some experts said could provoke more civil war.

Mr. Trenin of the Carnegie Endowment suggested that Mr. Putin might seek to put
together a coalition leadership in Chechnya, although that would be difficult
given the antagonisms among leading figures there.

There is unlikely to be a solution to the Chechen conflict unless major steps
are taken to improve the economy and find jobs for the young men who are now
joining one or another of the various armed bands, said Leonid Dobrokhotov, a
political expert in Moscow.

''For me, in the current economic and social conditions in Russia, this conflict
looks to me to be unresolvable,'' he said.

Chechnya's vulnerability under the personalized leadership of Mr. Kadyrov echoes
the larger political picture in Russia, where Mr. Putin -- to a lesser extent --
has centralized power as he enters his second term.

The Chechen war is seen as his war, escalated at his initiative in 1999 when he
was prime minister under President Boris N. Yeltsin. Mr. Kadyrov's killing came
just two days after Mr. Putin was inaugurated as president for a second
four-year term, with a declaration that peace had finally returned to Chechnya.

On Monday, two Russian soldiers were killed in an ambush in the town of Shali,
the Interfax news agency reported.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ramzan Kadyrov at his assassinated father's funeral yesterday.
(Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSASSINATION (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); ARMIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (86%); ELECTIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%);
WORLD WAR II (73%); ANNIVERSARIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
STADIUMS & ARENAS (68%); RELIGION (60%); ARMED FORCES (60%) Bombs and
Explosives; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations; Elections; Civil War
and Guerrilla Warfare; Terrorism; Politics and Government

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Akhmad (Pres) Kadyrov; Vladimir V (Pres) Putin

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia); Russia

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             149 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Dissident's Mother Jailed For Six Years

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 113 words


The mother of a Muslim dissident killed in prison was sentenced to six years in
prison in what the British ambassador called an ''appalling'' abuse of human
rights. The woman, Fatima Mukadyrova, 62, had accused the prison authorities of
torturing her son to death and showed diplomats and foreign journalists
post-mortem photos of his scalded and disfigured body. Prison officials said he
died in a fight with other inmates who threw hot tea on him. A court found the
woman guilty of fomenting racial hatred and ''infringement of the constitutional
order'' because of banned Muslim pamphlets found in her apartment. Rights
activists said her sentence was to silence her protests.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%);
TORTURE (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (87%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (86%); JOURNALISM (84%); WRITERS (84%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (52%) Torture; Sentences (Criminal); Freedom and Human
Rights; News and News Media; Political Prisoners

PERSON: Fatima Mukadyrova

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             150 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the AIDS War, a Call to Arms

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 171 words



To the Editor:

Richard Holbrooke and Richard Furman (''A Global Battle's Missing Weapon,''
Op-Ed, Feb. 10) are correct that testing is a crucial element of a comprehensive
AIDS strategy. But their diagnosis of the problem in Uganda is incomplete.

A few weeks ago, I visited Ugandan health clinics. Despite government support
for testing, many clinics in both rural and urban areas have no voluntary
testing kits, often for months; elsewhere, health workers must travel many miles
to be tested, at their expense, following needle stick injuries. And even when
testing is available, people tested gain little in return except discrimination,
much of it virulent.

This is not a clash between civil liberties and public health. Until the health
system is strengthened, the promise of counseling and treatment becomes real and
the government does more to end discrimination against people who are
H.I.V.-positive, testing will not succeed.

LEONARD S. RUBENSTEIN
Executive Director
Physicians for Human Rights
Washington, Feb. 10, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AIDS & HIV (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CLINICS &
OUTPATIENT SERVICES (70%) Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; Tests and
Testing; Discrimination

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (82%) Physicians for Human Rights
(Orgn)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (91%) Leonard S (Dr) Rubenstein; Richard C Holbrooke;
Richard Furman

COUNTRY: UGANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Uganda

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             154 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Genocide in Sudan, And Our Silence

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 161 words



To the Editor:

Thanks to Nicholas D. Kristof (''Will We Say 'Never Again' Yet Again?,'' column,
March 27) for highlighting the horrible situation in the Darfur region of Sudan,
and asking the world to do something about it.

Although he rightly points out that the United States is not the only party that
can and should respond, certainly given the human rights justification for the
invasion of Iraq, we should be able to expect some reaction on President Bush's
part to this horrible human rights catastrophe.

But I'm not holding my breath. During the 2000 presidential debate, George W.
Bush said he supported the United States' decision not to intervene in Rwanda.
Instead, he called for ''early warning.''

Well, we have our early warning. How is this supposed human-rights-supporting
president going to respond to genocide?

KURT MILLS
Gettysburg, Pa., March 27, 2004

The writer is a visiting assistant professor of international relations at
Gettysburg College.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); POLITICAL DEBATES (53%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) Kurt Mills

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ (74%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             157 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Tells of U.S. Abuse, From Ridicule to Rape Threat

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PRISONER

LENGTH: 1497 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 13


The rough road to confession began with the ridicule of the naked and hooded
prisoner's name: Saddam.

The now-former prisoner, Saddam Saleh Aboud, 29, said that escalated into a
threat of rape by an American soldier named Ivan in the 1-A block of Abu Ghraib
prison. Then, he said, he was chained in a sitting position to the bars of a
cell for 23 hours in a day. Loud music thumped, he said. He urinated where he
sat.

Every few days, he said, he was uncuffed for other treatments: douses of cold
water, barking dogs, something called ''the scorpion,'' in which his arms were
cuffed to his legs, behind his back.

Fellow prisoners, he said, told him later it lasted 18 days. He said he did not
know, and that it did not matter. He was ready to talk.

''They began talking to me,'' Mr. Aboud said. ''They asked, 'Do you know the
Islamic opposition?' I said, 'Yes.' '' They asked, 'Do you know Zarqawi?'''
referring to a Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian militant with ties to Al Qaeda.
''I told them, 'I am his driver, I swear to God.' ''

''They asked me about Osama bin Laden,'' he said. ''I said, 'I am Osama bin
Laden but I am disguised.' ''

He said he meant every word. ''I was only afraid that they would take me back to
the torture room,'' he said. ''I would prefer to be dead.''

Mr. Aboud spoke, reluctantly at first, for several hours on Thursday after a
chance encounter with a reporter at the office of a human rights group here in
Baghdad, where he had gone to register what he said was torture during four
months at Abu Ghraib.

Despite his anger and shame at what he said the Americans had done to him, he
even told of some kind behavior by soldiers.

''I just want to clarify one thing,'' he said at one point. ''Most of the
American soldiers were not bad.''

As with other accounts by Iraqis of abuse, it was impossible to verify his
claims -- and the job gets ever harder amid the widespread rage, the possible
desire for compensation and the sheer volume of detailed coverage of the case.

It is possible, however, to weigh his account with the growing record from the
military and other witnesses.

His name and prisoner number, 200144, is not included in a damning military
investigation of the abuse. But the dates he gave matched those of the worst
abuse, and he mentioned several cellmates with names similar to those in the
report.

With no prompting, he also provided first names of several important figures in
the report and accurately described some of their roles: a sergeant named Ivan;
a woman named ''Lynn or Lynnie,'' he said, and whom he recognized in the
pictures released two weeks ago; a civilian named Steven, who he said seemed in
charge of interrogations.

Condemned in the report by Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba were Staff Sergeant Ivan
L. Frederick II, of the 372nd Military Police Company; Pfc. Lynndie England,
identified as the woman holding a leash tied around the neck of one prisoner in
a photo; and Steven Stefanowicz, a civilian interrogator who General Taguba said
in his report instructed military police officers to elicit confessions using
unapproved methods.

Mr. Aboud's allegations of the methods of abuse largely squared with those in
General Taguba's report. He also mentioned, again with no prompting, a central
allegation of the report: his belief that the orders for torture came from
superiors.

''I think this was carried out under orders,'' he said. He offered as evidence
that the man named Steven appeared to be the one directing the soldiers and that
several higher-up officers regularly visited the cellblock -- at times, he
claimed, during actual mistreatment.

He said he asked one of the interrogators, '' 'Why do you torture us?' '' and
that the man replied, '' 'It's not in our control.' ''

He also said that the soldiers themselves, as a group, seemed conflicted about
what they were doing.

While some seemed to enjoy it, he said, one soldier unchained him for several
hours, only to rush back and chain him again when his superiors were coming.

At one point, one female soldier, whom he identified as ''Mrs. Lise,'' yelled at
a man who punched him during questioning.

Mr. Aboud, a trader and Sunni Muslim from near the northern border with Syria,
said he was arrested on Nov. 29, 2003, when he reported to the Iraqi police a
car on Saddoun Street in downtown Baghdad that he believed was wired with a
bomb. He was blunt that he did not do this out of concern for American soldiers,
whom he views as occupiers who must leave Iraq.

''If this car would have exploded at an American site, I would support that,''
he said. ''But this would have killed innocent people.''

The Iraqi police, he said, handed him over to American soldiers. After spending
five days at two small United States bases, he said he was sent to Abu Ghraib,
to Cell Block 1-A, known as the ''hard site'' for the worst prisoners. He had
seen the prison before: He said he had spent three years in Abu Ghraib as a
political prisoner and was released in a general amnesty that Saddam Hussein
declared in October 2002.

He said he was settled into cell No. 42 and was given an orange prison outfit.
Soon after, he said, he was hooded, taken to a hallway in the block and ordered
to strip naked. Then he was told to stand on a box, with his hands laced over
his head. One interrogator began to mock his first name, Saddam. He said that he
heard the click of cameras but that he did not recognize himself in any of the
released pictures of the abuse.

''Then they started to beat me,'' he said. He said he was struck with a
broomstick, first on his hands, then on his arms, his shoulders and his stomach.
Then he fell to the ground. One soldier, who prisoners called ''the crazy
soldier'' because he seemed unbalanced, urinated on him, he claimed. Then they
threw cold water on him. He was taken back to his cell.

The next day, he said, he was taken to a room where he said the sergeant named
Ivan was sitting in a plastic chair. ''He told me his famous sentence, which has
always stayed in my ears,'' said Mr. Aboud, who understands some English and
speaks it a little. ''He said, 'If you do not confess, I will have my soldiers
rape you.' ''

''That is not a man,'' Mr. Aboud said, switching from Arabic into broken
English. ''No. 1, animal. No. 2, crazy. Not an American.''

He was not interrogated, however, but taken to a cell where his feet were
slipped through cell bars and his hands cuffed just above them. He said he was
forced to sit like that, naked, for 23 hours out of 24, with loud music blasting
from a stereo. ''If they would have played for me good music, maybe I could have
slept -- boom, boom, boom!'' he said.

Every few days, he said, he was uncuffed and taken for some other abuse, but
never asked any questions. At least four times, he was placed in the
''scorpion'' position and kicked while lying on the ground, he said. Twice, he
said, soldiers brought him naked before two snarling dogs. Days blurred into
each other, relieved only once by the kind soldier who uncuffed him and
whispered, ''Go and get some rest.''

After what his prison mates said were 18 days -- he believed it was on Dec. 23
-- he was taken back to his cell. On the next day, he said, the interrogation
began. There were three soldiers, he said, and two civilians who he believed
were from military intelligence. The man named Steven, in his 30's with a
goatee, stood silent. The soldiers, he said, deferred to Steven.

''Steven was responsible for everything,'' he said. ''He was the one who told
them what to do. He did not do any torturing himself.''

He said the interrogators did not have to work hard: For the next few days, he
said, he confessed to anything they asked. He admitted to belonging to the
insurgency, of knowing top terrorists, of being Mr. bin Laden, of being a member
of a militant Shiite Muslim group, even though he is a Sunni. He said he made up
stories about where the resistance was hiding in the western desert.

But, he said, they never asked him about the car bomb that he said he reported
to the Iraqi police. And after the interrogations began, he said, he was never
tortured again.

If his account his true, this time coincides with the beginning of the military
investigations into the abuse. Several of the most abusive soldiers, he said,
disappeared from the block. He said he was finally released in March, after one
month out of 1-A, in a tent in the prison yard.

He said he was innocent, but suggested that he might not remain so, at least by
American standards. An amateur photographer, he said he filmed the fighting in
Falluja last month. He will not smoke American cigarettes. He said he now hates
the colors red, white and blue. He said he is not a fighter, but pitched back to
a reporter the question of whether he would become one.

''You can analyze your own question,'' he said. ''What would you do if I
occupied your country, tortured people and violated all the laws of your
country? Would you resist me?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saddam Saleh Aboud said Americans tortured him at Abu Ghraib
prison in Baghdad, including chaining him to the bars of his cell. (Photo by
Michael Kamber for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); TERRORISM (71%);
RELIGION (67%); MILITARY WEAPONS (65%); ARMED FORCES (65%); INVESTIGATIONS
(64%); GENOCIDE (62%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%) Ian Fisher; Saddam Saleh Aboud

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's Wrong With Torturing a Qaeda Higher-Up?

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4; The World: A Dangerous
Calculus

LENGTH: 1007 words


IN 1995, the police in the Philippines tortured Abdul Hakim Murad after finding
a bomb-making factory in his apartment in Manila. They broke his ribs, burned
him with cigarettes, forced water down his throat, then threatened to turn him
over to the Israelis. Finally, from this withered and broken man came secrets of
a terror plot to blow up 11 airliners, crash another into the headquarters of
the Central Intelligence Agency and to assassinate the pope.

''It worked,'' said Alan M. Dershowitz, a professor of law at Harvard who has
written about the potential necessity of torture in the post-9/11 world. ''It
took what is called 'torture lite' and nonlethal torture to break him down and
reveal truthful information that may have saved many lives.''

Few Americans will say they support torture. But what if, as in the case of Mr.
Murad, or if authorities had captured one of those engaged in planning the
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, there was reason to believe that torture could
produce information that would save many lives? Under those circumstance, does
torture become necessary, if perhaps regrettable?

The search for an effective way to combat the very real threat of terrorism has
forced Americans to confront such uncomfortable questions and the gap that at
times exists between the nation's expressed values and its practices.

Federal investigators, for example, have used coercive methods against a select
group of high-level terrorist leaders and operatives. They tried to extract
information from Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a high-level Al Qaeda prisoner, by
strapping him down and pushing him under water until he felt he would drown.
Investigators called this ''water boarding'' and insisted that it stopped short
of torture.

In the face of a dangerous, implacable enemy, such methods, and perhaps others
still more extreme, may easily come to seem more acceptable. As Richard A.
Posner, a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit,
wrote in The New Republic in September 2002, in a review of Mr. Dershowitz's
book, ''Why Terrorism Works: Understanding the Threat, Responding to the
Challenge'': ''If torture is the only means of obtaining the information
necessary to prevent the detonation of a nuclear bomb in Times Square, torture
should be used -- and will be used -- to obtain the information.''

The debate about torture runs along two tracks. The first centers on morality,
on the question of whether it can ever be right for a society openly to endorse
such practices. But the other aspect of the debate has to do with effectiveness.
Does torture work? In many ways, that debate mirrors the death penalty debate;
critics say there is no empirical evidence to support the idea that the ultimate
sanction deters crime, while supporters often claim that it does.

Darius Rejali, an associate professor of political science and the author of the
book ''Torture and Modernity: Self, Society and State in Modern Iran,'' said his
studies show that torture is ineffective as a tool for gathering information.
''My position is there is no empirical evidence to suggest that this works, at
least in the way that people claim that it does in the war against terrorism,''
Mr. Rejali said.

Take the case of Mr. Murad, whom Mr. Dershowitz pointed to as proof that torture
is a useful tool. Mr. Rejali said that it took more than a month to break Mr.
Murad and extract information -- a delay that would have made it impossible to
head off an imminent threat.

Mr. Rejali said he has studied Algeria's violent struggle in the late 1950's for
independence from France. He said he pored through the archives and found no
evidence that the French were able to harvest a significant amount of valuable
intelligence through their use of torture. He said he came to the same
conclusion after studying the Nazis' use of torture throughout Europe.

''The Gestapo wasn't getting a whole hell of a lot when it tortured resistance
people,'' he said.

Indeed, a study by Human Rights Watch found that torture of criminal suspects
often produces inaccurate information. In 1999, Diederik Lohman, a senior
researcher for the group, issued a report, ''Confessions at Any Cost: Police
Torture in Russia,'' which documented widespread use of torture among the
Russian police.

The report quoted Boris Botvinnik, a university student in Moscow who confessed
in 1996 to a murder and robbery after his vision was severely damaged from
repeated bouts of near asphyxiation.

''I wanted to save what was left of me,'' Mr. Botvinnik said.

Mr. Lohman said, ''That is the problem: If you torture me, I am going to tell
you whatever you want to get you to stop.

In Iraq, a man named Saddam Saleh Aboud told The New York Times that after being
hooded and handcuffed naked, doused with water, threatened with rape and forced
to sit in his own urine over 18 days at Abu Ghraib prison, he was ready to
confess to anything.

''They asked, 'Do you know the Islamic opposition?''' Mr. Aboud recalled in an
interview in Baghdad. ''I said yes.'' At one point, Mr. Aboud said: ''They asked
me about Osama bin Laden. I said, 'I am Osama bin Laden. I am disguised.'''

But if torture doesn't work, why is it so widely employed? The answer, Mr.
Rijali and others say, is that it does work as a tool of intimidation, if not
intelligence gathering. In authoritarian countries around the world, where
leaders struggle to assert their authority, the threat of torture is often
enough to keep some kind of social order and inspire informers to come to the
government with information -- as it did in the Iraq of Saddam Hussein.

But that same intimidation effect, experts said, could undermine the efforts of
an occupying power, with waning international support, to win the hearts and
minds of a people.

''You know if you are strong and if you have a strong logic you can convince
people by your ideas,'' said the Egyptian writer Nawal Sadawi by phone from her
home in Cairo. ''Torture means your logic is very weak, so you need power to
impose it on others.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by MK Mabry)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); TORTURE (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (86%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); BONE FRACTURES (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); AL-QAEDA (76%); HIJACKING (76%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); ASSASSINATION
(71%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (69%); APPEALS COURTS (50%) Terrorism; Torture; World
Trade Center (NYC); Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (57%) Human Rights Watch; Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Michael Slackman

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); PHILIPPINES (94%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture, Terror And the Law

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 186 words



To the Editor:

Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, argues against applying the Geneva
Conventions to Al Qaeda and the Taliban (Op-Ed, May 15), but doesn't acknowledge
the parallel protection due all detainees under the United Nations' Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

By the terms of American ratification -- reiterated a year ago by President Bush
-- the Convention Against Torture prohibits at least the same coercive
interrogation practices as the United States Constitution. But the techniques
authorized by the Bush administration -- like stripping detainees naked and
subjecting them to prolonged hooding, sleep deprivation and painful positioning
-- are clearly unconstitutional.

These interrogation methods make a mockery of Mr. Gonzales's vow of ''humane''
treatment. The precedent endangers Americans and others in custody. It also
encourages the excesses of Abu Ghraib, undermines international cooperation in
fighting terrorism and provides a boon to terrorist recruiters.

KENNETH ROTH
Exec. Dir., Human Rights Watch
New York, May 17, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
AL-QAEDA (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (88%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (88%); TALIBAN (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             163 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 20, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Losing Its Nonchalance, France Feuds Over Gay Vows

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO; Ariane Bernard contributed reporting for this
article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Paris Journal; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 19


Until recently, the French assumed they had solved the issue of gays and
marriage in a most civilized manner.

The raw political debates and the spectacle of same-sex weddings in the United
States were little more than a source of bemusement, what a Frenchman might call
''a tempest in a glass of water.''

After all, the French were the inventors of the Civil Solidarity Pact, a
creative legal mechanism introduced in 1999 that gives all adult couples --
regardless of gender or sexual orientation -- many of the same fiscal and social
rights as those who are formally wedded.

But that was before Noel Mamere, the leader of France's tiny leftist Green Party
and a member of Parliament, announced last month that he would defy tradition
(and some would say the law) by officiating at the country's first gay wedding
ceremony.

Like many French politicians, Mr. Mamere holds multiple offices. So he is using
his perch as mayor of an obscure southwest town named Begles to conduct his
social experiment, joining two thirty-something men, a supermarket clerk and a
health-care worker, in marriage on June 5.

''France is a hypocritical country,'' said Mr. Mamere in explaining his
decision. ''Marriage here is traditionally considered a Judeo-Christian value, a
very strong symbol organized around heterosexuality. For many, the validity of
marriage is procreation. It's an extremely archaic vision in my opinion, an idea
encased in glass. The Americans are much more advanced in the fight against
discrimination despite their puritanical and their slightly Protestant bent.''

Mr. Mamere argues that nothing in the Napoleonic Code, the vast compilation of
civil laws that has governed since 1804, specifies that marriage has to be
between a man and a woman. He has also threatened to take any challenge of his
action to the European Court of Human Rights, a European Union court based in
Strasbourg..

His crusade has enraged the center-right French government, riven the Socialist
Party and touched off a fierce intellectual battle in newspaper opinion columns
and television talk shows over the rights of homosexuals in France.

''Marions-Nous'' (''Marry Us''), screamed the cover headline of the most recent
issue of Le Monde's glossy weekly magazine, illustrated with the faces of two
smiling men apparently lying on flowered pillows.

Justice Minister Dominique Perben has served notice that Mr. Mamere's gay
marriage will be null and void in the eyes of the French state. ''To argue that
sexual difference between spouses is not written into the civil code is to
lie,'' Mr. Perben told the right-leaning daily Le Figaro.

Discrimination against gays in France was enshrined in French law until the
Socialists came to power in 1981. The age of consent for heterosexual couples
was 15, but 18 for homosexual couples until 1982, when the law was changed to
allow all 15-year-olds the right to consensual sex.

''Police kept surveillance files on people who had sex with someone of the same
gender,'' wrote Frederic Martel, a French sociologist in his book on
homosexuality in France, ''The Pink and the Black.'' ''Laws required civil
servants and tenants to behave like 'good family men.' And films and books were
censored.''

Today, for the majority of the French, even homosexual marriage is no big deal.
According to a poll released this week by the Ipsos polling agency, 57 percent
of all Frenchmen and 75 percent of those under 35 believe that gay couples
should be allowed to marry. That compares with only 24 percent in the United
States, other polls show.

Still, France is more conservative than much of the rest of Europe, far behind
Denmark (82 percent) and the Netherlands (80 percent), for example, as well as
Luxembourg, Sweden, Spain, Belgium. Norway, Switzerland and Germany.

The Civil Solidarity Pact initative gives couples housing rights, health and
welfare benefits, the right to file a joint tax return and to inheritance.

But proponents of gay marriage insist that it is marriage-lite, an unsatisfying
compromise that does not go far enough. It does not allow couples to adopt
children, for example. Couples have to wait three years before they can file
joint tax returns. It is sometimes difficult for a non-French partner in a civil
pact to receive a residence permit or French citizenship, especially for
foreigners from places like North Africa.

Lynne Petrovic, a 38-year-old American therapist, and Segolene Rubin, a
36-year-old Frenchwoman, were joined by a civil solidary pact at the French
consulate in San Francisco in 2001 and married on Valentine's Day at San
Francisco's city hall. But they want to be married under French law largely so
that they can share custody over Ms. Rubin's biological son.

''It's not gay marriage in the end that worries the French,'' says Ms. Rubin.
''It's homosexuals raising kids.'' But, she adds: ''We're not militants. We're
talking about a little family unit. It's our reality.''

If reality is the guide, Mr. Mamere's gay marriage project is unlikely to go
very far. Still, it has created odd fissures, particularly in the Socialist
Party, which championed the civil solidarity pact in the first place.

The Socialist -- and openly gay -- mayor of Paris, Bertrand Delanoe, for
example, has not fully embraced the idea, calling same-sex marriages ''a little
bit less urgent than the question of parenting.''

The former prime minister and former Socialist Party leader, Lionel Jospin, has
declared his opposition, writing in Le Journal du Dimanche last Sunday that that
marriage is the union of a man and a woman ''first and foremost'' because the
''duality of the sexes characterizes our existence and is the condition for
procreation.''

Francois Hollande, meanwhile, the current head of the Socialist Party, has
suggested that it might be advisable to eventually change the law to allow gay
marriage. ''Every society should be organized on the principle of equal rights
and respect,'' he said. ''As a result, marriage should be open to everybody.''
He called Mr. Jospin ''a free man'' to ''express his own opinions.''

Mr. Hollande has an unusual marital arrangement himself. He and Segolene Royal,
a Socialist deputy in Parliament and the mother of his four children, have never
married. Ms. Royal has only addressed the issue of gay adoption, which she
opposes. As for Mr. Mamere, he seems delighted by the fuss he has stirred up.
''If a provocateur is someone who advances the cause of society, then I am a
provocateur,'' he says. ''I prefer to call myself a man of courage.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 28, 2004



CORRECTION: A picture caption on Thursday about the fight over legalizing gay
marriage in France referred incompletely to the child of a gay couple. Both
Segolene Rubin and Lynne Petrovic are legally his parents in the United States;
at present, France recognizes only Ms. Rubin, his biological mother, as his
parent.

The Paris Journal article on May 20, about a plan by a town mayor, Noel Mamere,
to conduct the country's first gay wedding, misstated the affiliation of the
European Court of Human Rights, to which he said he would appeal if his plan was
challenged. It is a body of the Council of Europe, not the European Union. The
article also mistranslated a headline about the issue in Le Monde's weekly
magazine. ''Marions-Nous'' means ''Let's Get Married,'' not ''Marry Us.''


GRAPHIC: Photos: Noel Mamere promises to officiate at France's first gay
wedding. (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)
 Lynne Petrovic, left, and Segolene Rubin, with Segolene's son, Theo. The couple
married in San Francisco and moved to France this year. (Photo by Jean-Claude
Coutausse/Rapho, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (92%); GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); POLITICS (90%);
SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); MARRIAGE (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); EUROPEAN UNION
(78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); LIBERALISM (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (74%); DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS (73%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); MAYORS (72%); CITY GOVERNMENT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%);
PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (70%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (67%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (61%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (60%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%);
TELEVISION TALK SHOWS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (78%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             165 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Islamist in Germany Facing Extradition

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: MUNSTER, Germany, May 26


A German court ruled Wednesday that the leader of a radical Islamist group can
be extradited to Turkey, saying he did not face human rights abuses in his home
country, court officials said.

Metin Kaplan, head of a Cologne-based group known as the Kalifstaat (Caliphate
state), is wanted in Turkey for plotting in 1998 to crash an aircraft loaded
with explosives into the mausoleum of Kemal Ataturk, the founder of the modern,
secular Turkish state.

The court ruling came after the German government appealed against a ban on
extraditing Kaplan, known as the ''Caliph of Cologne.''

Previous courts had prevented Kaplan's expulsion due to concern over whether he
would receive a fair trial in Turkey, where he is wanted for treason.

Mr. Kaplan has been fighting extradition since his group was ruled
unconstitutional and a threat to democracy in 2001. His lawyer had filed an
injunction seeking to block extradition and produced a report that Mr. Kaplan
had cancer and was unfit to travel. The lawyer said earlier that Kaplan would
appeal any decision allowing his expulsion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (97%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TREASON (90%); LAWYERS
(88%); INJUNCTIONS (88%); TERRORISM (70%) Extradition; Terrorism; Bombs and
Explosives; Freedom and Human Rights; Treason

PERSON: Metin Kaplan; Kemal (1881-1938) Ataturk

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%); GERMANY (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%)

REGION: Turkey; Germany; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             169 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Complaint Seeks Data on Prisoners

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 221 words


The American Civil Liberties Union, the Center for Constitutional Rights and
three other organizations filed a federal civil complaint yesterday against the
Pentagon and other government agencies, alleging that they illegally withheld
information about the condition of prisoners in Iraq and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The complaint, filed in federal court in Manhattan, claims the agencies violated
the Freedom of Information Act by failing to respond to a request for documents
that the groups filed in October.

They sought information about the treatment of prisoners in military custody and
reports of prisoners' deaths in Iraq.

According to the complaint, the Army replied in March that it had no documents
relevant to the groups' request. The State Department said no ''substantial
humanitarian concerns would be harmed'' if it did not expedite the request.

The complaint, which seeks an injunction forcing the immediate release of the
information, was spurred by the news about abuse of prisoners in Abu Ghraib.
''They could have put policies in place to prevent the abuse'' if the civil
liberties groups had been able to draw attention to the military's detention
practices, said Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union.
The Pentagon did not return a telephone call seeking comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARMIES (88%); WAR
& CONFLICT (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES (77%); LAWYERS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (73%); NAVIES (73%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (72%); INJUNCTIONS (71%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (94%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) American Civil Liberties Union; Center for
Constitutional Rights

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); CUBA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             175 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Attack by Colombia Rebels Threatens Fragile Talks

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO; Monica Trujillo contributed reporting from Bogota for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, June 16


The massacre of 34 coca farmers in northeastern Colombia on Tuesday by leftist
rebels may be a sign that the guerrillas are intent on regaining territory they
have lost to a right-wing paramilitary group, political analysts said Wednesday.

The paramilitaries have been engaged in informal disarmament talks with the
government of President Alvaro Uribe in the last year, and had recently pulled
back some of their forces from the area where the violence occurred, the
analysts said.

Fighters from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, a Marxist insurgency
known as FARC, entered San Martin, a hamlet in the Norte de Santander province,
on Tuesday morning, tied up coca farmers employed by the paramilitaries and shot
them dead, said survivors, army commanders and local government officials. It
was the worst mass killing in Colombia since Mr. Uribe won office two years ago.

The farmers raised coca, the prime ingredient in cocaine, for paramilitary
groups that have been battling the rebels across Colombia for control of vast
fields of coca.

The attack came on the same day representatives of Mr. Uribe's government met
with paramilitary leaders and announced that formal talks with the group would
begin July 1. But political analysts said Mr. Uribe's negotiations with the
paramilitaries could lead to increased violence as the FARC tries to recover
territory lost to paramilitary groups.

''You can do all the negotiating you want with the paramilitaries, but as long
as the guerrillas and narco-trafficking are there, you're going to have violence
like this,'' said Daniel Garcia-Pena, a former government disarmament negotiator
who now runs a left-leaning peace group.

Alfredo Rangel, a security analyst and former adviser to the Defense Ministry,
said the massacre could mark a new stage in which the rebels embark on a brutal
counteroffensive. ''This massacre announced that the withdrawal of
paramilitaries from some zones will lead to intense efforts by the guerrillas to
bring those zones under their control,'' he said.

The paramilitaries, though long tied to the drug trade, began disarmament talks
with the government after American officials indicted three top leaders on drug
trafficking charges and sought their extradition in 2002.

But while the paramilitaries talk peace, human rights groups and foreign
diplomats say, they have not completely abandoned the most important
drug-producing regions, like the isolated swath of jungle near the Venezuelan
border where Tuesday's attack took place.

''There is no cease-fire on the part of the paramilitaries,'' said Diana
Sanchez, who investigates abuses for Minga, a local rights group in Bogota. In
April a paramilitary group killed 12 Wayuu Indians in Guajira province, and in
May another team of paramilitaries killed 11 peasants in Arauca province. Still,
there has been a drop in recent months of such mass killings.

But the guerrillas have increasingly carried out mass killings aimed at
terrorizing villagers who have supported the paramilitaries.

''The paramilitaries used massacre with intensity in their fight for territory
the guerrillas controlled,'' said Mr. Rangel. ''Now there's an inverse of that
in some areas. It's the guerrillas who come in where the paramilitaries are and
use this instrument, the massacre, as a way to recover the territory.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Colombia highlighting Norte de Santander: Leftist rebels killed
34 farmers in the Norte de Santander province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (94%); COCAINE (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); NARCOTERRORISM
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT
(89%); DISARMAMENT (89%); GENOCIDE (88%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (88%); PEACE PROCESS
(88%); CIVIL WAR (78%); POLITICS (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%);
ARMED FORCES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); ARMIES (72%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%); SHOOTINGS (71%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (70%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (68%); INVESTIGATIONS (62%); EXTRADITION
(62%); INDICTMENTS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) Cocaine and Crack Cocaine; Drug
Abuse and Traffic; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Coca (Plant)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (79%) Juan Forero; Alvaro (Pres) Uribe

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Colombia; San Martin (Colombia); Colombia

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             177 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan Rebukes U.S. for Move to Give Its Troops Immunity

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: JUSTICE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 17


Secretary General Kofi Annan harshly criticized the United States on Thursday
for seeking immunity for its peacekeeping troops from the International Criminal
Court.

He said the Security Council should resist the American move, which he said was
''of dubious judicial value'' and particularly deplorable this year ''given the
prisoner abuse in Iraq.''

''I think in this circumstance it would be unwise to press for an exemption, and
it would be even more unwise on the part of the Security Council to grant it,''
Mr. Annan told reporters. ''It would discredit the Council and the United
Nations that stands for rule of law and the primacy of the rule of law.''

The Bush administration has argued that people could use the court to bring
politically motivated actions against Americans abroad. When the court was
established two years ago, Washington threatened to end its participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations if its troops were not promised such
protection.

Last month, the United States introduced a resolution to the Security Council
that would continue an exemption first granted in 2002 and renewed a year ago,
exempting American personnel in United Nations-authorized operations like that
contemplated in Iraq from prosecution in the international court. Mr. Annan has
opposed such action both years, but not with such a forthright statement.

''While today's statement is more explicit than the secretary general has made
before, it has even greater resonance since in the current environment the idea
of exempting people from the rule of law because of their nationality is
obviously less defensible than ever,'' said Richard Dicker, director for
international justice at Human Rights Watch.

In the vote last year, three nations abstained, and diplomats said that as many
as 7 of the 15 Security Council members were thinking of abstaining this year.
If they do so, the United States could not get the nine votes it needs for
passage.

Late last month, China obtained a postponement of the debate, saying that the
events at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq had changed its thinking, and it could no
longer rule out a veto. At the Chinese Mission to the United Nations on
Thursday, a spokeswoman said, ''Our capital is still studying this issue, and
the mission does not have instructions yet.''

Richard A. Grenell, the spokesman for the American Mission, said the United
States intended to press for a vote before June 30 and saw no reason why the
resolution should not pass. ''We still think that it should be a technical
rollover,'' he said.

The court is the first permanent tribunal to try cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, but it has no jurisdiction in Iraq because
neither the United States nor Iraq were signatories to the 1998 Rome treaty
establishing it.

The United Nations role will grow in Iraq once power is transferred on June 30
from the American-led occupying forces to the Iraqis, but Mr. Annan said
Thursday that he was still unwilling to send international staff back to Iraq
because of poor security.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%);
PEACEKEEPING (90%); RULE OF LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); IMMUNITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); JURISDICTION (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (62%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War;
Immunity From Prosecution

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) International
Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             178 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 21, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Housing and Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 159 words



To the Editor:

I was surprised by negative remarks about the New York City Commission on Human
Rights (''Fair-Housing Groups Say New York City Is Falling Behind,'' news
article, June 14).

Under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's leadership, the commission has eliminated its
20-year backlog of more than 5,000 cases and recovered $2 million for
complainants.

As a result of the commission's aggressive efforts, more than 200 modifications
were made for individuals with disabilities, providing them with access to
housing, offices and businesses.

The commission has hired retired detectives, who have been proactively testing
in the area of housing discrimination, resulting in complaints against real
estate brokers brought by the commission.

Based upon current agreements, the commission is expected to recover fines in
excess of $40,000 to resolve these matters.

PATRICIA L. GATLING
Commissioner and Chairwoman
Commission on Human Rights
New York, June 16, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); REAL ESTATE (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (73%); DISABLED PERSONS (68%)
Housing

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (73%) Patricia L (Chairwoman) Gatling; Michael R
(Mayor) Bloomberg

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             179 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Legal Scholars Criticize Memos on Torture

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: PENAL LAW; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1020 words


Legal scholars asked to assess the recently released Justice Department
memorandums concerning torture all but unanimously agreed that the quality of
the legal work in them is poor.

It is unsurprising that law professors, who are generally liberal, should differ
with the conclusions reached in the memos, which take a broad view of
presidential power. But their attack on the professional quality of the memos
was unusually sharp.

Harold Hongju Koh, dean of the Yale Law School, called the memorandums
''embarrassing'' and ''abominable.''

Martin Flaherty, an expert in international human rights law at Fordham
University, said, ''The scholarship is very clever and original but also
extreme, one-sided and poorly supported by the legal authority relied on.''

Cass Sunstein, a law professor at the University of Chicago, said: ''It's
egregiously bad. It's very low level, it's very weak, embarrassingly weak, just
short of reckless.''

John Yoo, a Berkeley law professor who worked in the Office of Legal Counsel,
the Justice Department unit that prepared the memorandums, said much of such
criticism was political rather than legal.

''Some critics of the Justice Department's work seem to assume that it is
politically incorrect to ask the meaning of a publicly enacted law,'' he said,
referring to a federal law banning torture. That law defines torture as the
infliction of ''severe physical or mental pain or suffering.''

In one memorandum, dated August 2002, Jay S. Bybee, who is now a federal appeals
court judge, concluded that only physical pain as intense as that accompanying
organ failure or death qualified as torture. The Bush administration has
disavowed that memorandum.

Dean Koh said the August 2002 memorandum's analysis of what constitutes torture
was ''utterly unjustifiable.''

''They took the narrowest definition,'' he said. ''It would be as if I said that
murder constitutes only serial killing.''

Other scholars defended the memorandums as at worst unpolished.

''At various points the analysis seems to require the reader to draw a
qualification in one part and apply it to a proposition in another part,'' said
Douglas W. Kmiec, a law professor at Pepperdine University.

But Professor Kmiec, who was in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel in the
administrations of President Ronald Reagan and the first President Bush, said
exploration of the question of what constituted torture was appropriate and
important.

''One of the most important functions of the O.L.C. is to be candid, to explore
the worst case scenario, to assume we are facing the worst case scenario and to
ask the question of what authority the president has to confront the
situation.''

Charles Fried, a law professor at Harvard and the solicitor general in the
Reagan administration, said it was important to analyze legal questions fully
and dispassionately. ''There's nothing wrong with exploring any topic to find
out what the legal requirements are,'' he said.

Others were less kind.

The section of the August 2002 memorandum specifically disavowed by the White
House, concerning the president's power as commander in chief to ignore laws
against torture, drew particular scorn.

''If the president has commander-in-chief power to commit torture,'' Dean Koh
said, ''he has the power to commit genocide, to sanction slavery, to promote
apartheid, to license summary execution.''

Several scholars criticized individual memorandums as incomplete.

The section of the August 2002 memorandum discussing the commander-in-chief
power, for instance, failed to discuss or even cite the leading Supreme Court
decision on the subject, several scholars said. That decision, rejecting the
argument that President Harry S. Truman had inherent constitutional authority to
seize private steel mills, is known as Youngstown.

''You just don't begin a discussion of presidential power without mentioning
Youngstown,'' said Jack Balkin, a professor at Yale Law School.

Douglass Cassel, a law professor at Northwestern, went further. ''That's not
just poor judgment,'' he said. ''That's incompetence.''

A memorandum on Jan. 9, 2002, from Justice Department lawyers to William J.
Haynes, the general counsel of the Defense Department, addressed ''the effect of
international treaties and federal laws on the treatment of individuals detained
by the U.S. Armed Forces during the conflict in Afghanistan.'' But it failed to
discuss a treaty and a federal law concerning torture.

''The failure to analyze two critical sources of law -- namely the convention
against torture and the torture statute -- is incompetence,'' said Stephen
Gillers, a law professor at New York University.

A former Justice Department lawyer said that not every topic could be discussed
in every memorandum. The torture law not covered in the January 2002 memorandum,
for instance, was discussed at length in the August 2002 memorandum.

The later memorandum evaluated potential defenses to criminal prosecutions for
torture.

''Its sweeping, expansive view of necessity and self-defense would curl the hair
of people in the criminal division'' of the Justice Department, said Professor
Dellinger, who was in charge of the legal counsel's office in the Clinton
administration.

Scott Horton, an expert in human rights law at Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler
in New York, said the memorandums would have a practical effect in the
prosecution of civilians who engaged in abuses in Iraq and Afghanistan.

''Defense lawyers are going to have a field day,'' he said. ''These memoranda
will directly undermine the enforcement of the law.''

Professor Kmiec said it would be important to know why the disavowed memo was
prepared at all.

''Part of the premise of the memo is that there are defenses to extreme methods
of interrogation,'' he said. ''The memo explains issues of necessity,
self-defense and the meaning and applicability of treaties. All of that is
thorough in the O.L.C. sense. But notice that it starts with a premise that
extreme methods of interrogation are needed. 'Why would you start with that
premise?' I would ask, if I were still head of the O.L.C.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harold Hongju Koh, dean of the Yale Law School. (Photo by Thomas
McDonald for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); LAW SCHOOLS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LIBERALISM (77%);
TERRORISM (76%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%); HOMICIDE (68%); MURDER (50%); JUDGES (50%);
APPEALS COURTS (50%) Terrorism; Torture  ; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FORDHAM UNIVERSITY (57%); UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (56%); US
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (55%) Justice Department

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%) Adam Liptak

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (76%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             180 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Powell Plans to Travel to Sudan In Effort to Stop Militia Attacks

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will travel next week to Sudan, including the
western Darfur region where government-backed militias have killed thousands of
people and driven more than a million from their homes, the State Department
announced Thursday.

Mr. Powell has been an outspoken critic of the Sudanese government, which he has
accused of ethnic cleansing for having supported attacks against black Africans
in the region, creating one of the world's worst calamities.

The Bush administration is currently studying whether the onslaught should be
branded a ''genocide,'' which under existing conventions would require
aggressive action by the United States and other nations, and American diplomats
are seeking further action from the United Nations.

Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, will be in Sudan at the time
of Mr. Powell's two-day visit, which will include a tour of the ravaged Darfur
region and meetings in the capital.

''The secretary's visit to Sudan is intended to continue to call attention to
the dire humanitarian situation in Darfur, to do whatever we can to stop the
violence there and to make sure that the needy people of that region are
receiving whatever supplies we can get to them,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the
State Department spokesman.

The Bush administration has repeatedly accused the Sudanese government of
supporting Arab militias, called Janjaweed, of systematically attacking hundreds
of villages with aerial bombardments and gunships. According to Mr. Boucher, the
militias have destroyed 301 villages in Darfur and damaged 76 others. The
attacks have also destroyed crops and irrigation systems, he said.

In addition, the Sudanese authorities have responded to a mounting crisis by
placing obstacles in the paths of relief workers, he said. Currently, there are
about a dozen Americans in Darfur, as well as representatives of the United
Nations, the World Food Program and other relief groups. John Heffernan, a
spokesman for Physicians for Human Rights, who recently returned from a research
trip in the region, said, ''I think there are clear signs that this is genocide
unfolding and by waiting any longer, we risk the lives of tens of thousands,
perhaps hundreds of thousands of people.''

The Sudanese president, Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, pledged earlier this week
to disarm militias, Mr. Boucher said, but so far, ''We haven't seen follow
through on that.''

The trouble in Darfur contrasts with progress toward a peace deal to end a
two-decade-long war with rebels in the South. Peace talks in Kenya have yielded
significant accords. Mr. Powell is expected to press for progress on a final
deal there and to seek Sudan's continued support in identifying and capturing
anti-Western terrorists.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (91%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); GENOCIDE
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); TERRORISM (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (74%); FOOD CHARITIES
(71%); PEACE PROCESS (68%) United States International Relations; Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Christopher Marquis; Colin L (Sec) Powell; Omar Hassan Al- (Pres)
Bashir; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFRICA (92%); KENYA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             184 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 7, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Opinion Is Fragmented On Tighter Security for Visitors

BYLINE:  By ELAINE SCIOLINO; Matthew Wald in Washington, Lizette Alvarez in
London and Greg Myre in Jerusalem contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 6


No one would dare to seem soft on terrorism these days. But the new security
measures imposed on travel to the United States have sparked strong and starkly
different reactions around the world, veering from loud cheering to swift
retaliation.

In a sense, the response provides a fresh global analysis of the trauma of Sept.
11, 2001, as countries and airline companies, unions and associations frame
their views according to their perceptions of their own vulnerability to
terrorism and of the likelihood that a plane could be transformed into a guided
missile against the United States.

Rather than one deep divide, in which players line up either with or against the
United States, several fissures have been exposed.

Biometrically coded identification like fingerprinting is either the only
reliable way to track passengers or a racist act that violates human rights as
it singles out citizens of certain countries. A plan to install armed marshals
on some airplanes entering the United States is accepted by countries like
Israel, which has long used the practice, but is opposed by countries like
Portugal, Sweden, Denmark, South Africa and Thailand, which view it as
potentially chaotic and dangerous.

Some critics of the new measures are suspicious that they are part of a crass
political campaign by the Bush administration to keep Americans on guard at
least through November's presidential election.

There is widespread agreement, however, that coming to the United States will
not be more enjoyable because of what William Gaillard, head of communications
at the International Air Transportation Association, calls "the hassle factor."

"People are not afraid of flying, but all these security measures take the fun
out of flying; it's as simple as that," Mr. Gaillard said in Geneva, where the
trade group that represents most international air carriers has its European
headquarters. "Is the Bush administration trying to make a point in an election
year?"

Michel Ayral, an air transport director for the European Union in Brussels,
described the carrying out of the new security measures in a telephone interview
as "unilateralist and impetuous."

Part of the difficulty in analyzing the new American security measures is
figuring out just what they are. One component is the new procedure that went
into effect on Monday that requires the fingerprinting and photographing of
visitors from most countries around the world. Citizens of 27 countries,
including Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore and most European nations,
are exempt on tourist visits less than 90 days.

The other component is emergency measures linked to intelligence that terrorists
had plotted to commandeer planes. Those included the cancellation or delay of
about a dozen flights since Dec. 24 and a requirement that certain flights to
the United States carry armed marshals.

In some countries, the fingerprinting requirement has tapped into deeply rooted
resentments of the United States. A Brazilian judge was so furious that
Brazilians would have to be fingerprinted and photographed that he took revenge.

"I consider the act absolutely brutal, threatening human rights, violating human
dignity, xenophobic and worthy of the worst horrors committed by the Nazis," the
judge, Julier Sebastiao da Silva, said last week in a court order subjecting all
Americans entering Brazil to the same practice.

At a State Department briefing on Tuesday, a spokesman, Richard Boucher, said
the United States had officially complained about the order.

On the other end of the spectrum are countries like France, which has long
fought its own battle against terrorism. For Nicolas Sarkozy, the French
interior minister, who owes much of his popularity to a tough approach to crime
and terrorism, the American measures do not go far enough. "We share the
analysis of the American services that we live in a very tense period and what
is required is increased vigilance," Mr. Sarkozy said last Friday. "I prefer
that we are reproached for having too many security measures than too few."

A senior official in Mr. Sarkozy's office said the State Department had rejected
a French proposal last summer to require fingerprints not only on visa requests,
but also in all passports. Last November, France adopted a law that foreigners
needing visas be fingerprinted and photographed at French consulates.

The most contentious part of the new security scheme is the use of armed
marshals. The United States first deployed them some 30 years ago in response to
hijackings to Cuba. The number was increased sharply after Sept. 11, 2001.

Germany began to use air marshals on flights to the United States and elsewhere
soon after Sept. 11, a spokeswoman for Lufthansa said. Britain and France, by
contrast, deployed their first air marshals in the last few weeks.

Switzerland has been using air marshals since 1970, when specially trained
undercover police and army recruits began to board random international flights.
"The best measures are when you know tough measures exist, but you don't tell
the potential terrorist what to expect," said Christian Frauenfelder, a
spokesman for the pilots' union Aeropers.

Some countries and airlines have announced that they will ground their planes
rather than succumb to American demands that they put armed marshals aboard
them.

"We don't need additional security in the sky," said Rich Mkhondo, a spokesman
for South African Airways, the national carrier, which has 28 round-trip flights
a week to Atlanta and New York. Thailand's prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra,
told reporters on Tuesday that he would not allow armed guards on his country's
national carrier, Thai Airways. "We don't need to go that far since we always
conduct proper checks from our end and our planes stop at one destination," he
said.

Most police officers in Britain patrol unarmed, yet the government is defending
the American demand that flights into the United States carry armed sky
marshals. British Airways objected strongly and the pilots' union initially
opposed the directive, but the union is now trying for concessions. The
government has already said that pilots will be informed when a marshal is on
board and that marshals will not outrank the flight crew. The union wants
assurances that pilots and crews be given the choice not to fly on planes that
have air marshals.

In Israel, citizens are used to heavy security and rarely complain about it.
Strict security in Israel and on El Al flights mean that "terrorists have long
since moved on to other airlines," said Boaz Ganor, head of the International
Policy Institute for Counterterrorism in Israel.

After a rash of airline hijackings involving Israel, or planes flying through
Israel, the national carrier, El Al, began putting sky marshals on flights in
the early 1970's. Shortly afterward, an air marshal prevented an attempted
hijacking.

Aviation experts emphasize that it is crucial to balance security with prudence
and common sense.

"There are two goals in aviation security: one is to make sure no act of
terrorism can occur; the other is to make sure the flow of aviation commerce is
maintained," said Frank Costello, a lawyer who specializes in aviation at the
Washington law firm Zuckert, Scoutt & Rasenberger. "It is difficult to reconcile
the two. If terrorists can shut down the system, it probably does more to
furthering their goals than doing harm to an aircraft."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American in Sao Paulo, Brazil, was photographed by the police
Monday. All American visitors are now subject to the practice. (Photo by
Associated Press)(pg. A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
AIRLINES (89%); FINGERPRINTING (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); ELECTIONS
(78%); BIOMETRICS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); MARSHALS (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (68%); INTERVIEWS (67%); POLITICS (66%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (65%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%); SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); BRAZIL (94%); AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND (92%);
EUROPE (92%); JAPAN (79%); NEW ZEALAND (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%); BELGIUM (79%);
DENMARK (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (75%); PORTUGAL (75%); NORDIC
COUNTRIES (55%); THAILAND (55%)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             189 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

CUBA DETENTIONS MAY LAST YEARS

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


Senior Defense Department officials said Thursday that they were planning to
keep a large portion of the detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, there for many
years, perhaps indefinitely.

The officials said they would soon set up a panel to review those long-term
prisoners' cases annually to determine whether the men remained a threat to the
United States or could be released.

The officials described the panel as a ''quasi-parole board'' that would
comprise three members before whom prisoners could personally plead their case
for release. At the same time, the officials said, in the coming months they
will continue to release to the home governments many other prisoners deemed not
to be a continuing danger.

The officials spoke as part of a Pentagon effort to counter sharp criticism by
members of human rights groups and foreign governments about the situation at
Guantanamo, where some 650 people, most of them captured in Afghanistan, are
being held under maximum security, some as long as two years without being
charged with any offense. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld is scheduled to
discuss the matter in a speech Friday in Miami.

One senior Defense Department official who spoke on condition of anonymity said
critics in the United States and abroad had greatly misunderstood the situation
at Guantanamo and the need to detain so many people without charging them.

''We feel very much like we are in an active war,'' said the official, asserting
that the civilian law enforcement model in which people are prosecuted for
crimes or set free did not apply. ''What we're doing at Guantanamo is more
understandable in the war context,'' the official said.

The official said that while some critics worried about the rights of the
detainees, the Pentagon was more concerned with ''the rights of the soldiers
having these people not going back to the battlefield'' and the rights of the
soldiers' families not to have their relatives face the same men in combat.

Many of the prisoners, a senior military official said, remain committed to
indiscriminately killing American civilians and soldiers and would be too
dangerous to release.

The argument that the detentions should be seen in a wartime context is,
however, unlikely to satisfy many critics. Michael Ratner, the president of the
Center for Constitutional Rights, said that ''the idea that you could
theoretically keep someone locked up forever under these circumstances is
reprehensible.'' Mr. Ratner, whose New York-based organization has challenged
the Guantanamo detentions, said he was taken aback by what he called the
administration's brazenness.

''It's nothing to do with law as any person should understand it, at least since
the Magna Carta,'' he said. ''How do you know without a trial that these people
are even dangerous? It all depends on the military's word.''

But the United States officials insisted many prisoners at Guantanamo were ''the
worst of the worst.'' They said that over the course of many months of
interrogation and intelligence work, they had come to believe that many of the
people being held were senior operatives of Al Qaeda who had been involved in
active plots against Americans.

Although they are impossible to verify independently, one defense official
described several individual cases including one man described as a bodyguard
for Osama bin Laden, another who had been involved in planning attacks on
tankers in the Persian Gulf, another who officials said was involved in attacks
against United States embassies in Africa in 1998 and two others who were
involved in financing Qaeda operations.

The intelligence effort was painstaking, defense officials said, noting that one
prisoner had 13 aliases.

Those believed to be involved with Al Qaeda, the officials said, could be
brought before military tribunals for which elaborate rules have been
established but which have not yet been put into effect.

''But whether a person is to be charged before a military commission is not the
reason we're holding them,'' said the senior defense official. The official said
it was possible that an individual could be convicted by a tribunal and serve a
five-year sentence and then not be released if he were judged to remain a
danger.

The panel that would evaluate long-term prisoners' fitness to be released could
hear not only from the detainee, but also from the prisoner's home government,
the officials said. The panel's decisions would eventually be reviewed by the
secretary of defense.

The officials said there was no decision yet on who would serve on the panel or
whether they would be in the military or civilians.

One administration official described the plan for dealing with Guantanamo as
having increasingly large transfers of less dangerous prisoners to their home
governments for possible prosecution, thus winnowing down the population to a
hard-core group.

The senior defense official who spoke Thursday said the category of those who
could eventually be repatriated could include anywhere from 100 to 300
prisoners.

The military has released more than 80 Guantanamo prisoners to their home
governments so far, saying they were deemed not to be a threat or of further
intelligence use. The administration official said that scores more would be
transferred in the next few months.

The administration has been in intense negotiations with several governments who
might agree to accept the return of their citizens.

Military authorities are building a hard-walled traditional prison alongside the
corrugated metal units that have housed detainees for nearly two years at the
Guantanamo naval base on the southeastern tip of Cuba. The prison, which is
expected to be ready this summer, will be able to house about 100 people,
military officials have said.

Although the rules for military tribunals include the possibility of capital
punishment, officials said there were no plans to build an execution chamber in
the new prison.

The government has argued that the detainees are not entitled to American
constitutional protections because the Guantanamo base is outside United States
territory. Two courts have supported that view and the Supreme Court is
scheduled to hear arguments in April.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (85%); TERRORISM (85%);
ARMED FORCES (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); PAROLE (77%);
AL-QAEDA (74%); NAVIES (73%); MEN (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); WAR & CONFLICT
(71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (69%) Guantanamo
Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis; Eric Schmitt

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             191 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Uzbekistan Frees Woman Who Protested Son's Death in Prison

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: TASHKENT, Uzbekistan, Feb. 25


An Uzbek woman detained after publicly accusing the prison authorities of
torturing her son said Wednesday that she hoped conditions in Uzbekistan's jails
would improve under international scrutiny.

Fatima Mukadirova, 62, was released from prison on Tuesday after international
criticism that her conviction this month for anti-constitutional activity was
motivated by her speaking out about the death of her son, Muzafar Avazov, in
2002.

''I wish the death of my son would be the last death of young Muslims in this
country,'' Mrs. Mukadirova told The Associated Press at her home here in the
capital. ''I wish it would be a lesson for the authorities.''

A United Nations report said torture was ''systematic'' in Uzbekistan's prisons
and cited an independent expert's finding that Mr. Avazov was tortured in
boiling water before his death. Authorities said he died in a prison fight and
was scalded when a teapot was thrown at him.

Mrs. Mukadirova was arrested in October and sentenced to six years for
anti-constitutional activity and possessing banned leaflets, but a Tashkent
court reduced the sentence on Tuesday to a $283 fine and ordered her released
because of her age and sex.

Her release came the same day Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld was in
Tashkent to meet President Islam Karimov. Mr. Rumsfeld said the United States
welcomed the release, and he praised Uzbekistan for its role as an ally in the
United States campaign against terror in neighboring Afghanistan.

Surrounded by relatives, Mrs. Mukadirova said she was treated well in prison but
was verbally abused by the police when she was arrested. She said that the
leaflets found in her home had been planted and that she was innocent. She
acknowledged sympathies with the Islamic group Hizb ut-Tahrir without admitting
membership.

The Uzbek foreign minister, Sadyk Safayev, told The Associated Press in an
interview on Saturday that Mrs. Mukadirova was an ''active'' member of the
group, which Uzbek officials say breeds potential terrorists. Thousands of Hizb
ut-Tahrir members and other independent Muslims have been jailed in a crackdown
that has been widely condemned by international human rights groups.

Hizb ut-Tahrir has drawn increasing support across Central Asia since the
collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. The group seeks to create an Islamic state
in Central Asia but has not been linked to any terrorist attacks in Uzbekistan.

Mrs. Mukadirova said she would not appeal her conviction -- her second on
similar charges -- but she was unsure where to get money to pay the $283 fine.
She said she would go on with her job selling herbs as the only breadwinner in
her extended family, which includes her son's five children and the family of
another son jailed for extremist activity.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fatima Mukadirova, 62, was released from prison on Tuesday.
(Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (86%); GRANDCHILDREN (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (72%); FINES & PENALTIES (72%); INTERVIEWS (70%); WAR ON TERROR (69%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (65%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%); FAMILY (62%); APPEALS (50%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Torture

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: Fatima Mukadirova

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (88%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (78%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             194 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Across A Great Divide

BYLINE: By PETER SCHNEIDER.

Peter Schneider is a German novelist and essayist. This article was translated
from the German by Victor Homola of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7; ESSAY

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, March 12


The war in Iraq has made the Atlantic seem wider. But really it has had the
effect of a magnifying glass, bringing older and more fundamental differences
between Europe and the United States into focus.

These growing divisions -- over war, peace, religion, sex, life and death --
amount to a philosophical dispute about the common origins of European and
American civilization. Both children of the Enlightenment, the United States and
Europe clearly differ about the nature of this inheritance and about who is its
better custodian.

Start with religion. The United States is experiencing a revival of the
Christian faith in many areas of civic and political life, while in Europe the
process of secularization continues unabated. Today the United States is the
most religious-minded society of the Western democracies. In a 2003 Harris poll
79 percent of Americans said they believed in God, and more than a third said
they attended a religious service once a month or more. Numerous polls have
shown that these figures are much lower in Western Europe. In the United States
a majority of respondents in recent years told pollsters that they believed in
angels, while in Europe the issue was apparently considered so preposterous that
no one even asked the question.

When American commentators warn about a new fundamentalism, they generally
mention only the Islamic one. European intellectuals include two other kinds:
the Jewish and Christian variants.

Terms that President Bush has used, like ''crusade'' and ''axis of evil,'' and
Manichaean exclusions like his observation that anyone who is not on our side is
on the side of the terrorists, reveal the assumption of a religious mantle by a
secular power, which in Europe has become unthinkable. Was it not, perhaps, this
same sense of religious infallibility that seduced senior members of the Bush
administration into leading their country into a war with Iraq on the basis of
information that has turned out to be false?

Another reason for Europe's alienation from the United States is harder to
define, but for want of a better term, I call it American narcissism.

When American troops in Iraq mistakenly shoot an Arab journalist or reduce half
of a village to rubble in response to the explosion of a roadside bomb, there
will inevitably be a backlash. Only a fool would maintain that an occupying
power could afford many such mistakes, even if it is under constant threat of
suicide attacks. The success of an occupation policy -- however temporary it is
meant to be -- depends on the occupier's ability to convince the population, by
means of symbolic and material gestures, that it is prepared to admit to
mistakes.

In its use of the language of power the Bush administration has created the
opposite impression, and not just in Iraq. The United States apparently cannot
be wrong about anything, nor does it have to apologize to anybody. In many parts
of the world people have come to believe, fairly or not, that Americans regard
the life of their countrymen as infinitely more valuable than the lives of any
other of the earth's inhabitants.

Of course, even in Europe only a pacifist minority denies the existence of
necessary, unavoidable, justified wars. The interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo and
Afghanistan were supported by many European nations, even if some took a long
time to make up their minds. European soldiers took part in those wars and
continue to play a part in the peacekeeping aftermath.

What arouses European suspicion, though, is the doctrine of just, preemptive
wars President Bush has outlined. Anyone who claims to be waging a preventive
war in the cause of justice is confusing either a particular or a partisan
interest with the interests of humanity. A president who makes such a claim
would be arrogating the right to be the ultimate arbiter of war and peace and to
stand in judgment over the world. From there it is but a short step to
dismissing a basic insight of the Enlightenment, namely that human judgment and
decisions are fallible by their very nature. This fallibility cannot be annulled
or ameliorated by any political, legal or religious authority. The same argument
goes for the death penalty.

Animosity isn't the only feature of the trans-Atlantic relationship. Europe is
rightly envious of America's multicultural society. There can be no doubt that
the United States has produced the world's most varied and integrative culture,
and it is no accident that it is the only one to have a worldwide appeal.

But the American multicultural model also generates an illusion. Since Americans
really have come from all over the world, in the United States it is easy to
believe that you can know and understand the world without ever leaving the
country. Those who were born and brought up in America forget that these people
''from all over the world'' first had to become Americans -- a condition that
new immigrants generally accept with enthusiasm -- before they could celebrate
their cultural otherness.

This is why it is always an American version of otherness that is encountered in
the United States. You will not necessarily learn anything about the culture and
history of Vietnam by working alongside a Vietnamese doctor in the teaching
hospital at Stanford. You can sit next to an Indian in the same dot.com company
in Los Angeles for years without learning much about the manners and customs of
India. And going to a French restaurant in Atlanta is no guarantee that you will
be served French cuisine.

Foreign films account for less than 1 percent of the American film market, and
the figures are similarly low for books and news from abroad.

The impressive integrative power of American society seems to generate a kind of
obliviousness to the world, a multicultural unilateralism. The result is a
paradox: a fantastically tolerant and flexible society that has absorbed the
whole world, yet has difficulty comprehending the world beyond its borders.

These differences and irritations add up to a substantial disagreement on the
joint origins of American and European civilization. Europeans think that
Americans are on their way to betraying some of the elementary tenets of the
Enlightenment, establishing a new principle in which they are ''first among
unequals.''

And Washington accuses Europe of shirking its international responsibilities,
and thus its own human rights inheritance.

After all, what is the point of international law if it prevents intervening in
the affairs of a brutal regime to stay the hand of a tyrant? Who is the true
advocate of human rights: the one who cites international law to justify
standing by while genocide is being committed or the one who puts an end to the
genocide, even if it means violating international law?

Unfortunately, we cannot expect the news media in the United States or Europe to
present a nuanced view of this dispute. In 20 years of traveling back and forth
between Germany and America I have become convinced that news broadcasts usually
confirm their audiences' views: in Europe, about America, the ''cowboy nation,''
and in the United States, about Europe, the ''axis of weasels.''

These disagreements will be influenced but cannot be resolved by the the
American presidential election in November. The divisions are too deep, and
Europe cannot meet the United States halfway on too many issues -- the
separation between church and state, the separation of powers, respect for
international law, the abolition of the death penalty -- without surrendering
its version of its Enlightenment inheritance.

On other contentious issues the United States feels as strongly: the
universality of human rights and the need to intervene -- if the United Nations
is unable to act -- when there is genocide or ethnic cleansing, or when states
are failing.

So are we standing on the threshold of a new understanding or a new historic
divide, comparable to the evolutionary split that occurred when a group of
pioneer hominids thousands of years ago turned their backs forever on their
African homeland?

So far it has usually been the Americans who have had to remind the Europeans of
these common origins, which the Europeans, in turn, have so often betrayed.
Maybe this time it is up to the Europeans to remind the Americans of the
promises of the Enlightenment that the United States seems to have forgotten.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cowboys vs. Weasels: On its March 4 cover, Der Spiegel posed
the question ''Will America Become Democratic Again?,'' stating that it is ''5
minutes to 12 for George W. Bush,''
 The New York Post ran this picture on Feb. 14, 2003. (pg. B9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(90%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
TERRORISM (87%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%); TRENDS (77%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (71%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (63%) Biological and Chemical Warfare; Atomic
Weapons; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Social Conditions and
Trends

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Peter Schneider

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (95%); IRAQ (94%); GERMANY (79%); WESTERN
EUROPE (78%)

REGION: Iraq; Europe

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

6 G.I.'s in Iraq Are Charged With Abuse Of Prisoners

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
MILITARY

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, March 20


The American military brought charges on Saturday of assault, cruelty, indecent
acts and maltreatment of detainees against six soldiers in connection with
alleged abuse of prisoners in Iraq.

Eleven other soldiers remain suspended from duty while the investigation
continues into possible mistreatment of detainees at the Abu Ghraib prison, west
of Baghdad.

Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, deputy director of operations for the joint task force
here, announced the charges against the six members of a military police
battalion.

The military also said that American troops might not have been responsible for
killing two journalists for an Arabic-language station at a checkpoint this week
but that the investigation was continuing. In the tense area near Falluja on
Saturday, an American marine was killed by guerrillas, the military said.

General Kimmitt, making his announcement of the charges, said: ''The coalition
takes all reports of detainee abuse seriously, and all allegations of
mistreatment are investigated. We are committed to treating all persons under
coalition control with dignity, respect and humanity.''

Even so, the announcement will doubtless be cited by human rights groups, as
well as former Iraqi detainees, as further evidence to bolster their claims that
the American military has treated prisoners harshly or abused them in certain
cases.

Besides the criminal investigation, an equally significant inquiry is under way,
a possibly far-reaching administrative review of commanders' policies regarding
detainees and of internal procedures in use at all of the prisons in Iraq that
are controlled by occupation forces.

The American-led multinational force is holding about 9,500 suspected insurgents
and criminals, a military spokesman said Saturday. Just under 1,500 are at Abu
Ghraib, a prison that was notorious under Saddam Hussein for overcrowded cells
and torture chambers.

The current investigation into possible abuse involves the treatment of about 20
of those prisoners in November and December of last year.

No specifics about the alleged mistreatment have been released. The names, ranks
and even branch of service of the six military police battalion members charged
with the crimes also have not been released.

Under the Uniform Code of Military Justice that governs members of the armed
services, the six now face a hearing to determine whether the case will go
forward to trial.

All 17 of the soldiers being scrutinized in the case remain in Iraq, and the 11
suspended from duty remain under investigation and are performing administrative
tasks.

Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, the senior military officer in Iraq, ordered an
investigation on Jan. 14 after allegations of abuse surfaced.

But complaints go far beyond specific allegations of harsh treatment and abuse.
The families of many of those held by the military have complained to commanders
that they cannot find their relatives within the detention system, and are
demanding that the detainees be charged with crimes or freed.

The Abu Ghraib case is not the only set of accusations against soldiers for
abuse of detainees.

In early January, three Army reservists were discharged for abusing prisoners at
a detention center near Basra, in southern Iraq. Their commander determined that
the three soldiers had kicked and punched prisoners or encouraged others to do
so.

Late last year, Lt. Col. Allen B. West, a battalion commander in the Fourth
Infantry Division, resigned from the Army after it was disclosed that he fired a
pistol near a detainee during an interrogation, apparently in an effort to
frighten the man into disclosing information about impending attacks. Colonel
West defended his actions as necessary to protect his troops.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); ARMED FORCES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (87%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE (78%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (73%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             196 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

History Reappears in Argentina

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 355 words


Thousands of Argentines were kidnapped, tortured and killed by military death
squads during the 1970's and early 1980's -- most of them innocent casualties of
a dirty war against leftist dissenters and guerrillas. The governments of that
era offered no information about the fates of these victims. Relatives and
friends were merely told that their loved ones had disappeared. When democratic
rule returned in 1983, there was an initial attempt to render a public
accounting. Then, intimidated by a succession of military protests and revolts,
Argentine governments backed off, hoping the issue itself would fade away, to
become the ultimate ''desaparecido.''

It couldn't, of course, and now President Nestor Kirchner is courageously trying
to make amends to the victims and survivors. This week, Mr. Kirchner marked the
28th anniversary of the military coup that ushered in these horrors by asking
for forgiveness for nearly two decades of governmental failure to confront these
issues forthrightly.

To make sure that the state terrorism of those years is never again airbrushed
from history, he dedicated a future ''museum of memory'' on the site of the Navy
Mechanics School in Buenos Aires, the most infamous of clandestine torture
chambers once run by the military. Human rights groups estimate that some 5,000
people were secretly detained at the Navy Mechanics School over the course of
seven years of military rule, and that only about 100 of them survived. Babies
born there were given out for adoption to military families, and their mothers
were killed. In a separate ceremony, the current army commander removed the
portraits of two military junta leaders from a hall of honor at the National
Military College.

Passions still run high in Argentina over these issues. Four generals resigned
over the removal of the portraits. Despite the objections, Mr. Kirchner, who
comes from the generation most deeply scarred by the dirty war, is clearly on
the right course. By having the courage to face up to the government crimes of
that era, he helps inoculate Argentina against the possibility of their ever
being repeated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RULE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMIES (78%); COUPS
(78%); MARTIAL LAW (78%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (78%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); ANNIVERSARIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); THIS DAY IN
HISTORY (77%); MILITARY DEPENDENTS (73%); TERRORISM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
CHILDREN (71%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (67%); FAMILY (64%); INFANTS & TODDLERS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (74%)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (73%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Refuses to Halt Suit Against ChevronTexaco Unit

BYLINE: By Bloomberg News

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 294 words


A federal judge has refused to throw out claims that the ChevronTexaco
Corporation might be liable for human rights abuses at a Nigerian oil platform
operated by a subsidiary.

The judge, Susan Illston of Federal District Court in San Francisco, said
Nigerians suing the company presented enough evidence to proceed to trial on
claims ChevronTexaco is liable for its Nigerian unit's handling of incidents at
the oil project.

She ruled that there was no proof the company directed the actions of the
Nigerian military, which attacked villagers at the site.

ChevronTexaco is accused in the lawsuit of sanctioning fatal attacks by the
military, which had been hired to provide security for Chevron Nigeria in 1998
and 1999. The Unocal Corporation and the Exxon Mobil Corporation face similar
suits saying that they are liable for human rights abuses by parties in other
countries.

The plaintiffs ''presented facts, which, if accepted by a jury, could warrant
finding defendants liable'' for Chevron Nigeria's actions because the Nigerian
unit was acting as an arm of ChevronTexaco, Judge Illston said in a ruling
yesterday.

ChevronTexaco said that the judge was correct in dismissing some of the claims.

''We agree with the court's determination that there is no evidence that
ChevronTexaco or ChevronTexaco Overseas Petroleum can be held directly liable,''
Chevron said. ''Nigerians who unlawfully occupied an offshore drilling platform
and held some 200 Nigerian and expatriate workers hostage for three days have no
basis in fact or in law to claim that their rights were violated when the
Nigerian military restored order.''

Chevron Nigeria operated a joint venture with the Nigerian Petroleum Company,
the Nigerian state oil company.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS
EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (89%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (89%); CRUDE OIL
& NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); BUSINESS TORTS (78%); STATE
OWNED BUSINESSES (73%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); PETROLEUM & COAL PRODUCTS MFG (65%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: CHEVRON CORP (93%); CHEVRON NIGERIA LTD (92%); EXXON MOBIL CORP (83%);
CHEVRONTEXACO OVERSEAS PETROLEUM CO (55%)

TICKER: CVX (NYSE) (93%); XOM (NYSE) (83%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (93%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (93%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (93%); SIC1311 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (93%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (83%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (99%); UNITED STATES (88%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             198 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentina Convicts 2 For Theft of Babies

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, March 29


A court sentenced two police officials on Monday to seven years each for
stealing babies from murdered political detainees during the 1976-83 so-called
Dirty War and handing them over for adoption.

It is the first time that an Argentine court has convicted senior officials
under the military dictatorship for stealing babies in a case that could set a
precedent for rights groups seeking to bring officials to trial.

Jorge Berges, a police doctor, and Miguel Etchecolatz, the provincial police
chief, were found guilty of arranging the theft of a baby from imprisoned
Uruguayan parents in 1977. The parents were later ''disappeared'' -- almost
certainly murdered -- by the military dictatorship.

''It serves as an important precedent, but we're not happy with the number of
years they were condemned for,'' Lucas Miguel, an advocate with the Permanent
Assembly of Human Rights, said of the sentence. Mr. Etchecolatz was sentenced to
23 years in prison in the 1980's for kidnapping and torture during the
dictatorship, but was released under an amnesty law.

Rights organizations say dozens of babies were stolen from prisoners who were
forced to give birth in dingy cells.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); LARCENY & THEFT (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); PRISONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); TORTURE (78%);
MILITARY RULE (76%); MISCONDUCT (74%); AMNESTY (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
MURDER (58%) Freedom and Human Rights; Sentences (Criminal); Police Brutality
and Misconduct; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (92%)

REGION: Argentina

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             199 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Legal Actions Over Foreign Misdeeds

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 421 words


The Supreme Court hears arguments today in a case that may determine how open
American courts are to lawsuits filed by foreign victims of human rights abuses.
It tests the scope of the Alien Tort Claims Act, a 1789 law that is increasingly
being used to hold American companies accountable for their abusive actions
outside this country. Companies doing business abroad have tried to block these
suits, and the Bush administration has now joined in, arguing that such lawsuits
could interfere with the war on terrorism. The Supreme Court should follow the
lead of the appeals court that heard the case and recognize that the act
provides victims of American misconduct abroad with a right to be heard.

The Alien Tort Claims Act authorizes federal courts to hear suits by foreigners
when their rights under ''the law of nations or a treaty of the United States''
have been violated by individuals, companies or government agents. It was rarely
used for two centuries, but in 1980, a federal court upheld a suit brought by
Paraguayan citizens for torture and murder committed in Paraguay by a Paraguayan
police official, and other cases followed. One of the highest-profile cases is
unfolding in California, where a federal judge has just ordered ChevronTexaco to
stand trial on charges that a subsidiary abetted the Nigerian military in
killing villagers who protested its operations.

Today's case is an unusual one, with the federal government as the defendant. It
was brought by a Mexican doctor who was abducted by the Drug Enforcement
Administration and tried in California on charges of participating in the murder
of a federal drug agent. After his acquittal, he filed a false-arrest suit. A
group of American companies is arguing that a broad reading of the act will
encourage lawsuits against them and discourage them from investing abroad. The
Bush administration contends that a broad reading will impede its ability to go
after terrorism suspects outside the country.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, based in San
Francisco, upheld the doctor's suit, ruling that his case was just the sort
covered by the act. There is no reason American businesses cannot conduct
foreign operations without violating ''the law of nations or a treaty of the
United States.'' As for terrorism, the appeals court expressly stated that it
was not deciding how the act would apply if the military were being sued, or if
national security were at stake. The Supreme Court should affirm this
well-reasoned ruling.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); LITIGATION (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTS (90%); APPEALS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (89%); APPEALS
COURTS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); TORTURE
(78%); MISCONDUCT (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); ACQUITTAL (73%); JUDGES (73%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT
(73%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (69%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (66%); MURDER (58%); POLICE FORCES
(52%) Freedom and Human Rights; Editorials; Treaties; Suits and Litigation; Law
and Legislation; Corporations

COMPANY: CHEVRON CORP (55%)

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

TICKER: CVX (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (55%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (55%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (55%); SIC1311 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (55%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PARAGUAY (93%); NIGERIA (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             201 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Russian Court Gives Scientist 15-Year Sentence for Spying for U.S.

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 7


A Moscow court sentenced a Russian scientist on Wednesday to 15 years at hard
labor for spying for the United States in a case that rights groups said harked
back to Soviet-style repression.

Igor Sutyagin, 39, an arms control expert, was found guilty of espionage on
Monday for selling information to a foreign company that he and fellow
scientists said was unclassified and open to the public.

The sentencing is the latest in a string of cases that appear to reflect
concerns within the Russian security services about contacts between Russian and
foreign scientists.

The F.S.B. -- the successor to the K.G.B. -- has stepped up investigations and
prosecutions of scientists since the election in 2000 of President Vladimir V.
Putin, who formerly headed the agency.

Scientists said the cases would discourage interaction with their foreign
counterparts, which would be a setback for research here.

Mr. Sutyagin was affiliated with the prestigious U.S.A. and Canada Institute
when he was arrested in October 1999. He has been in custody ever since, as his
case has made its way through a legal labyrinth.

He was accused of collecting and selling material on nuclear submarines and
missile warning systems to a British company that prosecutors said was a cover
for the Central Intelligence Agency.

Since the fall of the Soviet Union and the shrinking of state subsidies for
science, many scientists have found work in research and other activities for
foreign companies.

When the judge instructed the jury, she made no reference to the question of
whether the material was classified, said Boris Kuznetsov, one of Mr. Sutyagin's
lawyers.

After his sentencing, Mr. Sutyagin repeated his defense that he had only
analyzed material that was publicly available.

''The only thing I am guilty of is that I had contacts with foreigners,'' he
said.

''In fact only newspapers, magazines and books, mostly published abroad, were
the sources of my work.''

The jury trial is an innovation that has been used only once before in an
espionage trial, which ended in acquittal last year for Valentin Danilov, a
scientist accused of selling secrets to China.

''We're returning to a time when science was considered a dangerous
profession,'' Mr. Danilov told reporters after his acquittal.

Another scientist who was acquitted in a similar trial involving unclassified
material, Anatoly Nikitin, told the radio station Ekho Moskvy: ''A man has been
jailed for 15 years for carrying out scientific activity. Even terrorists get
less.''

Lyudmila Alekseyeva, who heads the Moscow Helsinki Group, a leading human rights
organization, said she doubted the independence of the jury in Mr. Sutyagin's
case.

''I believe he is innocent, and I do believe that the judge and prosecutor and
jury knew he was innocent,'' she said.

In January four international rights groups said Mr. Satyugin was ''the target
of politically motivated treason charges'' and protested to the Council of
Europe.

On Tuesday the State Department issued a statement that criticized the trial for
its ''lack of transparency and due process.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 9, 2004



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about the sentencing of a Russian arms control
expert for selling what he said was unclassified information to a British
company misstated the given name of another Russian scientist, who was acquitted
in a trial involving unclassified information. He is Aleksandr Nikitin, not
Anatoly.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); ESPIONAGE (92%); SCIENCE NEWS (90%); SCIENCE &
TECHNOLOGY (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); ACQUITTAL (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%);
ARRESTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (72%); NAVAL VESSELS (66%); MISSILE DEFENSE
SYSTEMS (66%); GOVERNMENT GRANTS & SUBSIDIES (65%); TERRORISM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (82%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (78%) Seth Mydans; Igor (Dr) Sutyagin; Vladimir V (Pres)
Putin

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CANADA (79%); UNITED
KINGDOM (78%); CHINA (77%)

REGION: Russia; Great Britain; Russia

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             211 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1021 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-11

Rumsfeld Accepts Blame For Abusive Soldiers
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld offered an unambiguous apology to Iraqis
abused by their American military jailers. He accepted full responsibility for
the misdeeds of soldiers on his watch, and also took responsibility for failing
to notify the President and Congress about the developing scandal.   A1

Mr. Rumsfeld testified before the Senate and then the House of Representatives.
He offered his ''deepest apology'' for the abuse scandal, but left the door open
on whether he would resign, saying he was wrestling with whether his
effectiveness had been diminished.   A9

Abuse of prisoners similar to what has been uncovered in Iraq takes place in
American prisons with little public concern, according to corrections officials,
inmates and human rights advocates.   A11

Clashes Continue in Iraq
American soldiers battled insurgents led by the rebel Shiite cleric Moktada
al-Sadr, killing scores of Iraqis, as the cleric delivered a sermon that
dismissed President Bush's apologies for the abuse of Iraqi prisoners.
Militiamen walked the streets of Karbala as hundreds of supporters cheered Mr.
Sadr.   A1

Contractors involved in the rebuilding of Iraq have begun returning to the
country, but their numbers are still down by about a third of what they were
before the insurgency caused many to flee.   A10

Clash on Israel-Lebanon Border
Israeli troops and Hezbollah guerrillas traded artillery fire across the
Israeli-Lebanese border for several hours. Hezbollah said it opened fire when
Israeli troops tried to enter Lebanese territory. One soldier was killed, and
five were hurt, two of them seriously.   A6

The Bush administration, less than a week after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
own party members rejected a plan to disengage from Palestinian areas, is waging
a worldwide campaign to persuade skeptics that the plan remains the only path
toward peace in the Middle East.   A6

NATIONAL   A12-14, 18

Investigation of Lawyer In Bombing Was Cut Short
The authorities arrested a Portland lawyer in the Madrid railway bombings before
they had a clear idea about the strength of their case and they cut short a
planned covert surveillance of him because of concerns that information was
leaking out to the news media, law enforcement officials said.   A12

Warm Welcome on the Road
President Bush received a warm welcome in Dubuque, Iowa -- the visit was part of
a strategy that has won him super localized and fairly favorable coverage for
weeks in cities and towns far from the national news media.   A1

Kerry's Economy Speech Cools
Senator John Kerry has been tinkering with his message as he makes the
transition from a primary contender to a presidential candidate, dropping some
heated notes of outrage and adding cooler ones about economic opportunity,
empowerment and shared responsibility.   A14

Nuclear Security Reassessed
Spencer Abraham, the secretary of energy, said he was considering the creation
of a federal police force to replace the private guards used by the nuclear
weapons program for decades. He also said the department would reduce the number
of places where weapons fuel is stored.   A13

Church to Remain Unified
Delegates at the United Methodist convention in Pittsburgh voted overwhelmingly
to remain unified, a day after conservatives proposed a split over
homosexuality.   A18

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-15

Priceless Cello Is Stolen
A 320-year-old Stradivarius cello belonging to the Los Angeles Philharmonic was
last seen two weeks ago with a thief on a bicycle.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Dispute Over Location Of an Olympic Stadium
David Oats, head of the Queens Olympic Committee, has called for an Olympic
stadium to be built in Queens. Others, including the Bloomberg administration
and the Jets, support a site in Manhattan.   B1

Union Forgoes Part of Raise
New York City's largest health-care union and an association representing 94
hospitals and nursing homes reached a tentative contract in which the union will
forgo part of a promised raise to help the hospitals handle the soaring cost of
health insurance for their workers.   B1

Religion Journal   B6

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Mad Cow Claims Rejected
Health officials from New Jersey and the federal government, rejecting the
contentions of a dogged amateur researcher, said there was no evidence that mad
cow disease had killed 17 patrons and employees of a South Jersey racetrack in
the late 1980's and early 90's.   B2

Official Ignored Advice
Dr. Steven Galson, acting director of the Food and Drug Administration's center
for drug evaluation and research, said he rejected the judgment of a federal
advisory panel and the recommendations of his staff when he refused to allow a
morning-after pill to be sold over the counter.   A13

OBITUARIES   A15

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

Pistons Win Game 2
Detroit beat the New Jersey Nets, 95-80, taking a 2-0 lead in their second round
N.B.A. playoff series.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Jobs Rise While Stocks Fall
The nation's employers added 288,000 jobs in April, the Labor Department
reported. But unemployment edged down only slightly, to 5.6 percent from 5.7
percent in March.   A1

Interest rates rose and stocks fell as investors balanced their fears of the
impact of rising rates against signs of a recovery.   C1

Fears High for Oil Producers
Security has become the central preoccupation of Mideast oil producers, with
high demand and tight supplies pushing oil prices to a 13-year high of $40 a
barrel after two deadly attacks on oil installations in Saudi Arabia and Iraq
within a week.   C1

Airbus Unveils a New Jet
Airbus inaugurated a cavernous factory in France, offering a first look at its
colossal new double-deck jet.   C1

Krispy Kreme Profits Down
Shares of Krispy Kreme Doughnut have lost more than half their value since last
August, possibly because of the popularity of low-carbohydrate diets, the
company says.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Mr. Rumsfeld's defense; blueprints for healthier oceans; more mad
cow mischief; this is not a pipe.

Columns: David Brooks, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Bridge   B13
TV Listings   B15
Crossword   B12
Weather   B16


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS (90%);
NEWS BRIEFS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); HEZBOLLAH (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
BOMBINGS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
SCANDALS (76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (68%); US
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (67%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (66%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(66%); ESPIONAGE (60%); ARRESTS (50%); PRIME MINISTERS (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%)

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (54%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (77%)

STATE: IOWA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (94%); LEBANON (93%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); SPAIN (77%)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inviting All Democrats

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


I'd like to invite Richard Gephardt and the other Democratic candidates to come
here to Cambodia and discuss trade policy with scavengers like Nhep Chanda, who
spends her days rooting through filth in the city dump.

One of the most unfortunate trends in the Democratic presidential race has been
the way nearly all of the candidates, including Howard Dean, the front-runner,
have been flirting with anti-trade positions by putting the emphasis on labor,
environmental and human rights standards in international agreements.

While Mr. Gephardt calls for an international minimum wage, Mr. Dean was quoted
in USA Today in October as saying, "I believe that trade also requires human
rights and labor standards and environmental standards that are concurrent
around the world."

Perhaps the candidates are simply pandering to unions, or bashing President
Bush. But my guess is that they sincerely believe that such trade policies would
help poor people abroad -- and that's why they should all traipse through a
Cambodian garbage dump to see how economically naive these schemes would be.

Nhep Chanda is a 17-year-old girl who is one of hundreds of Cambodians who toil
all day, every day, picking through the dump for plastic bags, metal cans and
bits of food. The stench clogs the nostrils, and parts of the dump are burning,
producing acrid smoke that blinds the eyes.

The scavengers are chased by swarms of flies and biting insects, their hands are
caked with filth, and those who are barefoot cut their feet on glass. Some are
small children.

Nhep Chanda averages 75 cents a day for her efforts. For her, the idea of being
exploited in a garment factory -- working only six days a week, inside instead
of in the broiling sun, for up to $2 a day -- is a dream.

"I'd like to work in a factory, but I don't have any ID card, and you need one
to show that you're old enough," she said wistfully. (Since the candidates are
unlikely to find the time to travel to the third world anytime soon, I put an
audio slide show of the Cambodian realities on the Web for them at
www.nytimes.com/kristof.)

All the complaints about third world sweatshops are true and then some:
factories sometimes dump effluent into rivers or otherwise ravage the
environment. But they have raised the standard of living in Singapore, South
Korea and southern China, and they offer a leg up for people in countries like
Cambodia.

"I want to work in a factory, but I'm in poor health and always feel dizzy,"
said Lay Eng, a 23-year-old woman. And no wonder: she has been picking through
the filth, seven days a week, for six years. She has never been to a doctor.

Here in Cambodia factory jobs are in such demand that workers usually have to
bribe a factory insider with a month's salary just to get hired.

Along the Bassac River, construction workers told me they wanted factory jobs
because the work would be so much safer than clambering up scaffolding without
safety harnesses. Some also said sweatshop jobs would be preferable because they
would mean a lot less sweat. (Westerners call them "sweatshops," but they offer
one of the few third world jobsthat doesn't involve constant sweat.)

In Asia, moreover, the factories tend to hire mostly girls and young women with
few other job opportunities. The result has been to begin to give girls and
women some status and power, some hint of social equality, some alternative to
the sex industry.

Cambodia has a fair trade system and promotes itself as an enlightened garment
producer. That's great. But if the U.S. tries to ban products from countries
that don't meet international standards, jobs will be shifted from the most
wretched areas to better-off nations like Malaysia or Mexico. Already there are
very few factories in Africa or the poor countries of Asia, and if we raise the
bar higher, there will be even fewer.

The Democratic Party has been pro-trade since Franklin Roosevelt, and President
Bill Clinton in particular tugged the party to embrace the realities of trade.
Now the party may be retreating toward protectionism under the guise of labor
standards.

That would hurt American consumers. But it would be particularly devastating for
laborers in the poorest parts of the world. For the fundamental problem in the
poor countries of Africa and Asia is not that sweatshops exploit too many
workers; it's that they don't exploit enough.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LANDFILLS (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (89%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); SWEATSHOPS (89%); PROTECTIONISM (78%); US
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); TRENDS (77%); ENVIRONMENTAL
LAW (76%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (76%); LIVING STANDARDS (75%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(74%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (72%); MINIMUM WAGE (71%); WAGES & SALARIES
(71%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%);
STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (70%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (65%); INSECTS & ARACHNIDS
(64%); APPAREL MFG (63%); CHILDREN (50%) Labor; Protectionism (Trade); Third
World and Developing Countries; Economic Conditions and Trends; Sweatshops;
Factories and Industrial Plants; Labor; International Trade and World Market

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (56%) Nicholas D Kristof

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (58%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (97%); CHINA (92%); SINGAPORE (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Cambodia; Singapore; South Korea; China

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             214 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Ghana: Rights Panel Summons Ex-President

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 38 words


A commission charged with investigating rights abuses in Ghana has summoned
former President Jerry Rawlings and his security chief to testify about the 1982
murders of three judges and a retired army officer, officials said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); ARMIES (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%);
WAR & CONFLICT (85%); POLITICS (84%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (83%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and
Government; Security and Warning Systems

PERSON: Jerry J (Pres) Rawlings

COUNTRY: GHANA (94%); AFRICA (87%)

REGION: Ghana

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             215 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Guatemala: Jail For Colonel In 1990 Murder

BYLINE:  By Larry Rohter (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 97 words


In a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court has sentenced a former army colonel,
Juan Valencia Osorio, to 30 years in prison for ordering the 1990 murder of
Myrna Mack, an anthropologist who was researching military rights abuses
committed against the country's Maya Indians.

Colonel Valencia, a former head of the presidential security unit, was found
guilty in 2002, the first time a military officer had been convicted of a war
crime during the country's long civil war, but was released on appeal until Ms.
Mack's family won a ruling overturning that decision.   Larry Rohter (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ARMIES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); APPEALS (88%); VERDICTS (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); SUPREME COURTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(85%); ARCHAEOLOGY (59%) Sentences (Criminal); Indians, American; Mayans;
Freedom and Human Rights; Armament, Defense and Military Forces; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Archaeology and Anthropology; Research

PERSON: Larry Rohter; Juan Valencia (Col) Osorio; Myrna Mack

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Guatemala; Guatemala

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Armenian Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 206 words


To the Editor:

"Movie on Armenians Rekindles Flame Over Turkish Past" (Arts pages, Jan. 20)
says "Turkish and Armenian historians have given widely differing accounts of
what happened in 1915."

But that is not a matter of ethnic perspective. The extermination of the
Armenians is recognized as genocide by the consensus of scholars of genocide and
Holocaust worldwide. The failure to acknowledge this trivializes a human rights
crime of enormous magnitude.

The Ottoman Turkish government's meticulously planned extermination of its
Christian Armenian citizens took the lives of more than a million Armenians in
1915 and 1916. Another million Armenians survived the death marches but were
permanently exiled from their homeland of 2,500 years. It is denigrating to
refer to these facts as Armenians being "chased from their ancestral homelands."

It is ironic as well, because in 1915 The New York Times published 145 articles
about the Armenian genocide and regularly used the words "systematic,"
"government planned" and "race extermination."

PETER BALAKIAN
SAMANTHA POWER
Hamilton, N.Y., Jan. 20, 2004

The writers are, respectively, a professor of humanities at Colgate University
and a lecturer at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%);
HISTORY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)
Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: COLGATE UNIVERSITY (55%)

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (73%) Peter Balakian; Samantha Power

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (94%); TURKEY (92%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             220 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Uganda: War Crimes Inquiry

BYLINE:  By Marc Lacey (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 54 words


Luis Moreno-Ocampo, chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, said
the court was considering an inquiry into rights abuses by the Lord's Resistance
Army, the rebel group that has terrorized northern communities since 1987.
President Yoweri Museveni asked for the war crimes investigation.   Marc Lacey
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(86%); CIVIL WAR (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (82%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) Lord's Resistance Army

PERSON: Marc Lacey; Luis Moreno Ocampo; Yoweri (Pres) Museveni

COUNTRY: UGANDA (93%); AFRICA (74%)

REGION: Uganda

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             226 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Girls Next Door

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 68 words


I was deeply disturbed by your report on sex slavery and have been able to think
of little else since reading it.

What can we as concerned citizens and proponents of human rights do about this
atrocity? There must be something!

Please extend my deepest thanks to Peter Landesman for bringing this issue to
the forefront. I believe that this kind of reporting can empower us.

Megan Tropea
Long Island City, N.Y.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PROSTITUTION (88%);
SLAVERY (88%) Prostitution; Smuggling

PERSON: Doris Betz; Peter Landesman

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             227 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New York: Garden City: Report Alleges Housing Bias

BYLINE: By Patrick Healy (NYT); Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 139 words


An advocacy group for families with low incomes released a report yesterday
detailing what the group called patterns of housing discrimination on Long
Island. The state may investigate.

The group, the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, said that
suburban real estate agents were more likely to show apartments to white people
than to members of minorities, and were often dismissive of black and Hispanic
customers. State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, above, endorsed the findings of the
report at a news conference yesterday morning. ''There is now evidence that a
number of these real estate agencies have behaved in an illegal fashion and an
immoral fashion,'' he said. Mr. Hevesi said he would urge the Human Rights
Commission to investigate practices at the agencies the report criticized.
Patrick Healy (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REAL
ESTATE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HISPANIC AMERICANS
(88%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (88%); RACE & RACISM (88%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (87%);
PUBLIC FINANCE (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LOW INCOME PERSONS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (72%) Housing;
Discrimination; Minorities; Blacks; Hispanic-Americans

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS FOR REFORM NOW (91%) Assn
of Community Organizations for Reform Now

PERSON: Patrick Healy

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Long Island (NY)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             228 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Algeria Shows Willingness to Abandon Its Violent Past

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: ALGIERS, Feb. 11


Little of note happened at OPEC's gathering here this week, other than an
announced cut in oil production. There were no explosions. No kidnappings. No
assassinations.

That was exactly what the tough-minded military-backed government would have
demanded, after a decade of fighting Islamic insurgents, a battle that has left
an estimated 120,000 people dead.

The government's next big test will come in presidential elections, set for
April 8, elections in which some parties are not taking part, to protest the
state of emergency still in effect.

In the meantime, there are signs that the country is returning bit by bit to the
fold of diplomacy and international commerce.

A few days before ministers from the 11 members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries began arriving at an airport patrolled by commandos armed
with submachine guns, the Chinese president, Hu Jintao, led a state visit that
produced agreements allowing China to explore for oil and gas in Algeria's rich
southern Saharan fields.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell came here briefly in December during a trip
to North Africa to applaud Algeria's ''exceptional cooperation in the war on
terrorism.'' He called for fair presidential elections.

In March, the French president, Jacques Chirac, accompanied by executives from
France's largest companies, dropped by in a display of cordial relations between
Algeria and its colonial ruler until 1962. The eight-year war of independence
cost a million lives.

The host of the OPEC meeting, the Algerian oil minister, Chakib Khelil, spoke of
strengthening ties with other nations, illustrated by the decision of Air France
and British Airways to operate flights to Algiers for the first time in years.

The area around the capital is relatively safe, but attacks are breaking out
farther away. ''The security situation appears to have improved in some places
but the Algerian military and government are still on a knife edge,'' said
George Joffe, an expert on Algeria at Cambridge University. ''As much as the
army would like to declare otherwise, the war in Algeria is not over.''

Just this week, Islamic fighters killed seven paramilitary police officers in an
ambush at a coastal city east of Algiers, Bejaia, the official APS news agency
reported.

In Algiers, where plainclothes and uniformed police officers keep watch,
consumer trappings are becoming visible, like the Peugeots and Renaults on the
streets, Korean cellphones and satellite dishes perched on balconies of crowded
tenements.

The government has begun a heavily publicized campaign to raise awareness of
traffic safety and road accidents, adding to the impression that Algeria may
finally be ready to address issues other than terrorism. The police advertise
the slogan ''Speed Equals Death.''

''The police are supposed to be fining motorists for not wearing seat belts
instead of hunting people down,'' said Mostefa Bouchachi, a lawyer and president
of the human rights commission of the Algiers Bar Association. ''Traveling
safely around the city or even between cities, something unthinkable not long
ago, is one of those subtle achievements.''

The meeting in Algiers was only OPEC's second in Algeria in the organization's
44-year history. Nearly three decades ago, Ilich Ramirez-Sanchez, the Venezuelan
terrorist known as Carlos the Jackal, fled to Algiers with 11 of OPEC's
ministers who had been kidnapped from a luxury hotel in Vienna.

The military has assumed great powers since 1992, when the army halted elections
that Islamic opponents seemed about to win, an action that began the civil war.
In a later election, in 1999, the military's candidate won the presidency only
after six rivals dropped out, claiming fraud.

Fully rekindling the economy, which is heavily dependent on oil and natural gas
exports, is another matter. But government officials insist that the nation is
on its way to attaining stability that could soon allow it to join groups like
the World Trade Organization.

''This country passed through a very difficult period in the 90's, but it is
recovering fast,'' Abdellatif Benachenhou, Algeria's French-trained finance
minister, said in an interview. He cited economic growth that was reported to be
more than 6 percent last year, largely because of high oil prices.

Mr. Benachenhou said he expected the economy of this nation of 32 million people
to grow 6 percent again this year.

Such prospects are tied chiefly to oil and natural gas sales to Europe and the
United States. Once shunned by all but a handful of American and European energy
companies, the nation is expected to soon become the largest supplier of gas to
Spain and one of the largest to France and Italy.

Still, even Mr. Benachenhou admits that robust exports cannot easily repair the
damage from a decade of civil war or bridge the hard divisions between the
French-speaking elite and the mostly underemployed and underpaid masses, many of
whom still receive benefits dating from the nation's once rigid socialist past.

Tension over how to share the nation's oil bounty has spilled over the campaign
before the presidential elections in April. Despite the state of emergency, the
city's French-  and Arabic-language newspapers carry fierce critiques of the
administration of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who was elected in 1999 with
the blessing of the army amid widespread accusations of vote rigging. Under his
presidency, thousands of Islamic militants have been pardoned.

''Algeria and the Algerians deserve better from the present debate,'' La
Tribune, a French-language paper, said in an editorial this week. It accused Mr.
Bouteflika of using oil and gas revenues to finance social programs to win
electoral support.

Facing pressure to guarantee fair elections, Mr. Bouteflika has asked the United
Nations, Arab League, African Union and European Union to send observers in
April. The lack of strong opposition candidates has many convinced that he is
likely to be re-elected, though he has not yet officially announced his
candidacy.

Mr. Bouteflika's government has yet to account for 7,000 or more people who,
according to Human Rights Watch, disappeared at the hands of security forces in
the 1990's.

As if to change the topic, the government has unflinchingly endorsed the Bush
administration's campaign against terrorism; it did not permit protests against
the war in Iraq.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vendors waiting for customers this month in Algiers. Algerian
officials say the country's economy has grown. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); OIL &
GAS INDUSTRY (90%); OIL EXTRACTION (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); RELIGION
(89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); ARMIES (78%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); MILITARY RULE (77%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); POLITICS (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (74%); EXPORT TRADE (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (73%); AIRPORTS (73%); OIL
EXPLORATION (73%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION (73%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (65%);
ROAD TRANSPORTATION SAFETY (64%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (60%); MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY
EQUIPMENT (60%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%) Politics and Government;
Elections; Islam; Terrorism; United States International Relations

COMPANY: BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC (56%); AIR FRANCE-KLM SA (53%)

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (94%)
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

TICKER: AF (PAR) (53%); AF (AMS) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (56%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (56%)

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (72%); HU JINTAO (67%) Simon Romero; Colin L (Sec)
Powell; Jacques (Pres) Chirac

CITY: ALGIERS, ALGERIA (94%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (99%); FRANCE (93%); CHINA (92%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); AFRICA
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Algeria; France; Algeria

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             229 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 1, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The 'Right of Return'

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 159 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Who Is to Blame for the Creation of Palestinian Refugees?,'' by Ethan
Bronner (Editorial Observer, Feb. 20), about the views of the Israeli historian
Benny Morris:

As the descendant of Palestinians who fled the violence of Haifa for the safety
of Cairo in 1948 only to find themselves refugees forever banished from their
homeland, I find attempts to excuse Israel's refusal to permit Palestinians to
return to their homes shocking.

So what if research uncovers evidence that Palestinian leaders may have
encouraged the most vulnerable to seek shelter from the violence? That neither
excuses the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians detailed and apparently endorsed by
Mr. Morris nor justifies Israel's refusal to comply with international law and
recognize the refugees' fundamental human right to return home.

MONICA E. TARAZI
Brooklyn, Feb. 25, 2004

The writer is the New York director of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination
Committee.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HISTORY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); ARAB AMERICANS (67%); DISCRIMINATION (67%) Palestinians

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE (56%)

PERSON: Monica E Tarazi

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (70%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (51%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (51%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (91%); EGYPT (70%);
UNITED STATES (51%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             230 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fighting the Evil Called Genocide

BYLINE: By DR. MERYL AIN.

Dr. Meryl Ain, a Dix Hills resident, is assistant to the superintendent of the
Smithtown Central School District.

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 11; SOAPBOX

LENGTH: 578 words


AT a time when public schools are being bombarded with the demands of the No
Child Left Behind Act and other mandates, their work in another area --
promoting respect and tolerance -- is sometimes overlooked.

Such an effort was on display at Smithtown High School in late February when
some 700 sophomores listened, spellbound, to two survivors of genocide.
Jacqueline Murakatete, a survivor of the Rwandan genocide, and David Gewirtzman,
a survivor of the Holocaust, told the students how their comfortable and happy
childhoods had been shattered by government-sponsored mass murder.

Ms. Murakatete, 19, now a freshman at the State University of New York at Stony
Brook, has lived in the United States since October 1995. She was adopted by an
uncle in Queens after her parents, six siblings and grandmother were killed,
among 800,000 people believed to have been slaughtered by members of the Hutu
majority in Rwanda during a 100-day massacre in 1994; her family belonged to the
Tutsi minority. Before reaching the United States, she survived in an orphanage
run by Italian priests.

''First, I thought it was a nightmare,'' she told the students, who are only a
few years younger than she is. ''It didn't make any sense to me, but then I
realized it was reality. I had been a child going to school with hopes and
dreams and goals, and then I was an orphan.''

While attending Martin Van Buren High School in Queens, Ms. Murakatete heard Mr.
Gewirtzman, of Great Neck, speak to the students about his life in Nazi-occupied
Poland during World War II. She wrote him a letter about how his talk had
resonated with her.

Mr. Gewirtzman, who had been speaking about the Holocaust for nine years, told
Dr. Regina White, educational director of the Holocaust Center and Museum of
Nassau County, about the letter. She suggested that they speak to student groups
together.

Mr. Gewirtzman's life in Poland was changed irrevocably after the Nazi
occupation in 1939. He and his family faced progressively worse scapegoating,
discrimination, denial of basic human rights and life-threatening violence
because they were Jewish. His relatives and neighbors were sent to the Treblinka
concentration camp, where some 850,000 Jews were gassed and burned. He lost 47
relatives, he said, but he and his immediate family survived because a farmer
allowed them to live in a hole under a pig sty.

The message of the program came at the end, when Mr. Gewirtzman asked the
students to join them ''in a war against prejudice, hatred, racism,
anti-Semitism and intolerance.''

''Purge your own hearts from prejudice and hatred,'' he implored them. ''Spread
what you have learned. May all of our voices be joined in a chorus of decent
people, so that the Holocaust and genocides be relegated to the pages of
history.''

Like Smithtown High School, many schools are already committed to the mission of
developing good citizens. Since the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, it has
become even more urgent to produce young people who are not blinded by hatred
and prejudice, but who instead respect and celebrate differences.

The fine work that our schools do to promote civility, values and understanding
is not necessarily reflected in test scores. But our schools' efforts to promote
caring and respect impacts our children's lives not only today, but will
determine the quality of life in our communities and our country for years to
come.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); EDUCATION LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); SCHOOL PERFORMANCE
(90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ORPHANS (90%);
HOLOCAUST (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS
(89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (78%); US NO CHILD LEFT
BEHIND ACT (78%); DISCRIMINATION (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (76%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (73%); RACE & RACISM (72%); RELIGION
(67%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (50%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Meryl (Dr) Ain; jacqueline murakatete; David Gewirtzman

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); POLAND (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE (54%)

REGION: Smithtown (NY); Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             233 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Allows Peek Into Challenge to Antiterrorism Law

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 631 words


In a ruling Wednesday, a federal judge in Manhattan widened the public's glimpse
into a lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union challenging some terms of
the antiterrorism law known as the USA Patriot Act, after the government sought
to keep virtually every detail of the case under a court seal, or secrecy order.

The A.C.L.U. is contesting a provision of the law that allows the Federal Bureau
of Investigation to require telephone, Internet and other communications
companies to provide basic information about their customers, including
addresses and call records. The F.B.I. sends a subpoena, known as a national
security letter, which includes an order barring the company from informing the
customer of the investigation or discussing it with anyone.

The F.B.I. can acquire data on customers even if they are not suspected of
terrorist activity.

In a switch that A.C.L.U. lawyers described as an awkward change from their
usual practice and philosophy, they filed the suit April 6 under seal,
concluding that otherwise they would be in violation of the law the case was
devised to contest. The group then quickly asked the judge to lift the seal from
the whole case.

The suit is brought by the civil liberties group and another plaintiff described
only as a recipient of an antiterrorism letter. The A.C.L.U. said it was barred
from providing any other information about the other plaintiff.

''It isn't even clear that a recipient can speak to a lawyer,'' said Ann Beeson,
the associate legal director at the A.C.L.U. who is handling the case.

Justice Department officials have argued that the national security letters are
vital in the search for terror suspects, providing information that can help
trace their movements and identify where their phone calls and e-mail messages
are going. The subpoenas do not allow the government to listen to phone
conversations or read e-mail messages.

In his decision, Judge Victor Marrero of Federal District Court in Manhattan
declined to unseal the case, but set some guidelines for the two sides to agree
on editing the case documents so that ''nonsensitive information'' could be
released. Material in the documents that relates directly to terrorism
investigations will be blacked out. Judge Marrero made it clear that his ruling
had no bearing on how he might rule later on the larger issues in the case.

In recent days, President Bush and Attorney General John Ashcroft have
vigorously defended the antiterrorism law, which was enacted in October 2001.

Almost nothing is known about the F.B.I.'s use of the subpoenas. The bureau has
not said how many letters it sent or what the results were.

The A.C.L.U. argues that the F.B.I. letters are unconstitutional because they
violate the due process rights of the businesses and people who receive them,
and because the order prohibiting discussion of the investigation violates free
expression rights. The group contends that the government should be required to
seek approval from a judge before issuing a letter and recipients should have a
way to question the order.

One flashpoint came after the A.C.L.U. put out a press release on April 28
describing the case in general terms and including details of the schedule set
by the judge for hearing the case. The group was ordered by the government to
remove the schedule information from the release on its Web site.

Meredith B. Kotler, an assistant United States attorney, told the judge that
even though the scheduling information was not sensitive, it should not be
published because the entire case had been officially sealed.

After the judge issued an order releasing some documents on May 7, the A.C.L.U.
restored the paragraph to its press release saying that the judge would probably
hear the case at the end of the summer.











URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); JUDGES
(91%); LITIGATION (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US PATRIOT ACT
(90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); SUBPOENAS (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); INTERNET & WWW (76%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Decisions and
Verdicts; Suits and Litigation; Telephones and Telecommunications; Computers and
the Internet; Terrorism; Privacy; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (91%) American Civil Liberties Union; Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) Julia Preston; Victor (Judge) Marrero

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             234 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

LAWMAKERS VIEW IMAGES FROM IRAQ

BYLINE: By CARL HULSE and SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
CONGRESS

LENGTH: 1340 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


Lawmakers who viewed hundreds of images of mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners said
Wednesday that the photographs were even more graphic than they had expected,
and included pictures of forced sexual acts between male detainees, a soldier
posing with the body of a dead prisoner, and consensual sex between American
soldiers.

All afternoon, a parade of solemn Senate and House members filed into secure
rooms in the Capitol and in the House Rayburn Office Building to view about
1,800 images, many of them duplicates, along with some video clips. The
lawmakers emerged shaken and aghast, even though they had already seen some of
the images in news photographs.

''What we saw is appalling,'' the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist of
Tennessee, told reporters.

Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, said, ''It's a sad day
when Congress is called to see these photos.''

Uniformed military officials presided over the viewings, flashing the images
onto a large screen for about two seconds at a time, lawmakers said. But the
officials declined to answer questions or provide a narrative to explain the
pictures. Lawmakers were instead given a document reminding them that the images
were collected as part of a military investigation and were considered ''active
evidence.''

Some of the pictures were dark and grainy, and the lawmakers said they were
sometimes confused about what they were seeing. Among the most shocking images,
several said, was a video of a male detainee repeatedly banging into a cell
door, until he collapsed. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut,
said it appeared that the man had a rope lashed around his waist and that
someone was pulling him toward the door.

''It just deepens the conclusion that this was a cellblock that had gone wild,''
Mr. Lieberman said.

Representative Trent Franks, Republican of Arizona and a member of the House
Armed Services Committee, said he was particularly offended by a photograph in
which ''a prisoner was sodomizing himself,'' with a banana. ''My conclusion is
that that was probably coerced somehow,'' Mr. Franks said.

Lawmakers said they could not tell where the pictures were taken, but the images
of mistreatment appeared to be confined to the Abu Ghraib prison. ''It was of
the same prison and the same people we had before,'' said Senator John Cornyn,
Republican of Texas. ''It did not suggest anything broader or deeper.''

Meanwhile, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, appearing at a Senate
Appropriations hearing, defended the interrogation techniques used in Iraq.

''Any instructions that have been issued or anything that's been authorized by
the department was checked by the lawyers in your shop, in the department, in
the office of the secretary of defense, and deemed to be consistent with the
Geneva Conventions,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

But Richard Durbin, an Illinois Democrat, countered, ''I don't believe what you
have issued is consistent with the Geneva Convention.''

Mr. Rumsfeld said that half a dozen military investigations were completed or
under way into the abuses. ''With respect to what took place at Abu Ghraib, we
will get to the bottom of it,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

The explicit nature of the photographs left the lawmakers deeply conflicted over
whether the images should be made public. Some who previously favored a public
release said they had changed their minds and were swayed by remarks from
military personnel that to do so would violate the prisoners' right to privacy
and protection from humiliation under international law.

''When I walked into the room my view was they ought to be made public; I always
lean toward full disclosure,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New
York. ''But when the military explained to us that to release them would violate
their privacy and the Geneva accord, I agreed with their assessment.''

Others, both Democrat and Republican, said the images renewed their
determination that the abuse had to be fully investigated, and some said the
pictures made them doubt that the mistreatment was limited to a handful of
low-level soldiers.

''Some of it is clearly individuals acting in a rogue manner,'' said Senator
Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina. ''Some of it has an elaborate
nature to it that makes me very suspicious of whether or not others were
directing or encouraging.''

Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, agreed, saying, ''It is
impossible that this could have been carried out without the knowledge of
higher-ups.''

But on a day when the story of the beheading of Nicholas Berg, an American
civilian in Baghdad was also in the news, other lawmakers said the public should
not lose sight of the brutality of terrorists. ''The way he was beheaded once
again makes graphically clear that the other side knows no mercy,'' said Senator
Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, who called the pictures she viewed
disgusting.

In the Senate, the pictures were available for three hours, from 2 p.m. to 5
p.m., in a tightly controlled room on the fourth floor of the Capitol, where the
public elevators go only to the third floor. Senator John W. Warner, the
Virginia Republican and chairman of the Armed Services Committee who worked with
the Pentagon to arrange the viewing in Congress, took to the Senate floor
earlier in the afternoon to urge his colleagues to see the photographs.

But he said they should be careful in describing them, particularly in light of
the murder of Mr. Berg in an incident that Islamic militants have said was a
response to the prison abuse. Lawmakers, Mr. Warner said, must ''not incite in
any way anger against our forces or others working in the cause of freedom.''

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said he had not seen the
pictures and saw no need to. Senator Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi, said
he felt the same way.

''I've already seen enough,'' Mr. Lott said. ''Why would I want to go see a
bunch of perverted pictures?''

Still unanswered is the question of why the photographs were taken. ''I got the
idea they were sort of taken in the nature of souvenirs,'' Mr. Cornyn said,
''because they were all taken from personal cameras. They did not appear to be
organized.''

The images included a picture of an American military woman posing with a dead
body, and many sexually explicit photographs, said Senator Ben Nighthorse
Campbell, Republican of Colorado. He said the photographs also showed dogs
snarling at cowering prisoners; other lawmakers said some prisoners appeared to
have dog bite wounds and abrasions.

''It is totally vulgar behavior,'' said Mr. Campbell, who served in a police
unit in the Air Force. ''It just really bothered me that it could be our
military people doing that.''

                             --------------------


Army Shows Intelligence Training
By The New York Times

 FORT HUACHUCA, Ariz., May 12 -- Military officials here at the Army
Intelligence Center, where field interrogators are trained, insisted Wednesday
that they never condoned the use of force during questioning.

''We don't deal in any of that stuff,'' said Maj. Gen. James A. Marks, the
commander here, who spent three months in Iraq in 2003 as chief intelligence
officer. He opened the base to reporters to try to show what he said was the
professionalism of the center's training methods.

''What you saw in those pictures is anathema to me,'' General Marks said. ''I
can't fathom someone doing that. It's against everything the Army stands for.''

His immediate concern, he said, was to dispel the notion that military
intelligence officers had ordered the military police at Abu Ghraib to ''soften
up'' Iraqi prisoners.

''If we don't shape this, we're going to be at the end of the whip,'' he said,
referring to the growing impression of an abusive free-for-all that was
dominated by the need for ''actionable intelligence.''

''We don't soften up prisoners,'' he said. ''It's not a technique we use.''

Last year, 257 soldiers graduated from the human intelligence collector program.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 14, 2004



CORRECTION: A front-page picture caption yesterday about a congressional viewing
of images of the abuse of Iraqi prisoners gave an incorrect title in some copies
for Daniel Stanley, a Pentagon official who carried the pictures to the session.
He is a deputy assistant secretary of defense for legislative affairs, not a
deputy secretary of defense. A picture caption with the continuation
misidentified the senator who left the session with Senator Kay Bailey
Hutchison. He was John Cornyn, not Saxby Chambliss.


A front-page picture caption yesterday about a congressional viewing of images
of the abuse of Iraqi prisoners gave an incorrect title in some copies for
Daniel Stanley, a Pentagon official who carried the pictures to the session. He
is a deputy assistant secretary of defense for legislative affairs, not a deputy
secretary of defense. A picture caption with the continuation misidentified the
senator who left the session with Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison. He was John
Cornyn, not Saxby Chambliss.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senators Saxby Chambliss and Kay Bailey Hutchison left a room
in the Capitol yesterday after seeing images showing the abuse of Iraqi
prisoners. (Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)(pg. A10)
 Daniel Stanley, a Pentagon official, and an officer carried images of the abuse
of Iraqi prisoners to a viewing session for senators. (Photo by Jay
Westcott)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); PHOTOJOURNALISM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); APPROPRIATIONS
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); GENOCIDE (60%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Photography; Recordings (Video);
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Geneva Conventions; Privacy; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: JOHN CORNYN (59%); TRENT FRANKS (59%); KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON (56%); SAXBY
CHAMBLISS (56%); JOE LIEBERMAN (56%); NANCY PELOSI (53%) Carl Hulse; Sheryl Gay
Stolberg; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Richard (Sen) Durbin; Charles E (Sen) Schumer

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             236 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2004 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Once Tortured, Now Tormented By Images of Brutality From Iraq

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1282 words


The moment the television in his small Bronx apartment began to flash pictures
of naked prisoners and grinning guards, Jean Pierre Kamwa switched it off and
went to bed. But like many immigrants who sought American asylum from torture,
Mr. Kamwa, who fled Cameroon in 1999, said the photographs unleashed a storm of
fear and memory that would not let him sleep.

In the dark, he said, he relived his days as a student activist in Cameroon,
when soldiers from the ruling party imposed martial law. Mr. Kamwa, 34, was
repeatedly detained without trial, threatened with death, and tortured with
beatings that damaged his body and seared his mind. After settling in New York,
he chose to help victims like himself as a social service caseworker.

In daylight, he said, he found himself coping with a spike in anguished calls
from his caseload of refugees who had suffered similar abuse at the hands of
jailers -- the weeping Bulgarian woman in Brooklyn, the frightened Tibetan man
in Queens. Many of them said the images from Iraq awoke old traumas from distant
penal systems, scars that never healed and that flash easily into pain. For
some, the Abu Ghraib stories even ignited fears for their own safety from an
American government suddenly cast in a harsh new light.

''They don't feel secure anymore,'' Mr. Kamwa told doctors at the
Bellevue/N.Y.U. Program for Survivors of Torture, where he himself was treated.
''They ask, 'Where to go, how can they be safe in the world?'''

There are an estimated 400,000 survivors of foreign torture living in the United
States, and those who work with survivors say about a quarter of them live in
the New York area. While others may debate the fine points of interrogation and
the reach of international law, these survivors are now encountering a new
dimension of fear, according to doctors and counselors in the network of
specialized torture treatment centers across the country.

''There was a sense of horror and disbelief,'' said Dr. Allen S. Keller, the
director of the program at Bellevue Hospital Center, which treated more than 600
people from 70 countries last year, and gets 5 to 10 new referrals a week.
''These are individuals who came to this country seeking safety. We owe it to
the torture survivors living in our country not to condone or practice it.''

Rachel Tschida, a spokeswoman for the Center for the Victims of Torture in
Minneapolis, the first such center in the world when it opened in 1985, said the
assumptions of torture victims about America have suddenly been thrown into
question. ''The overwhelming feeling, frankly, is heartbreak,'' she said.

No city has a higher concentration of torture survivors than New York, where
Sept. 11, 2001, and its aftermath already undermined confidence in the United
States as a safe harbor in a violent world. Many, like Mr. Kamwa, went through
additional trauma during months in a detention center near Kennedy Airport
before winning political asylum.

But it has been much the same this week in Fridley, Minn., for Richard Oketch, a
53-year-old public school teacher who said he suddenly found his suburban house
no refuge from fresh flashbacks to torture chambers in Idi Amin's Uganda.

''It brought me back to where I was -- the bodies on the floor, the naked
bodies,'' said Mr. Oketch, a former patient and current board member of the
torture victims center in Minneapolis. ''It's difficult to comprehend that that
can be done by the United States, because it represents the values that people
are looking for -- human rights, safety, security. The first reaction is, it
cannot be.''

He has been awake until 4 a.m. night after night, he said, reading stacks of his
children's picture books to battle the tormenting images from his past. But a
single glance at his subscription copy of Time magazine, which showed a sketch
of a hooded prisoner on its cover, sent him spiraling back to his own ordeal.
Besides being hooded, beaten and bayoneted, Mr. Oketch, whose family was
prominent in opposition to the Ugandan dictatorship, said he was forced to clean
away dead bodies and mop blood from torture rooms where others were mutilated.

''I got lost,'' said Mr. Oketch, whose testimony before Congress in the
mid-1990's helped win passage of federal grants for torture treatment centers
like the one in Minneapolis he credits with winning back his life. ''I didn't
expect it at all. It took me a few days to come back and realize, maybe it's
just like where I was, a few people involved, it's not the entire United
States.''

The nation's 23 torture treatment centers received $10 million in federal funds
last year, and Congress has authorized -- though not yet appropriated -- an
increase to $25 million. Additional money goes to the United Nations for similar
centers it helps finance abroad. But some veterans in the field are now haunted
by the prospect that survivors of torture at American hands could one day be
among their clients.

''You don't get a lot of second chances to build trust with this population,''
said Paul Stein, executive director of the Rocky Mountain Survivors Center in
Denver, where the Abu Ghraib revelations changed the course of a women's support
group on family issues, veering the discussion into anguished accounts of
violence and humiliation. ''The country that they trusted to offer them safety
and to help explain torture is now the country that is perpetrating torture.''

Some reject that conclusion. ''I don't feel like the standard of the U.S.
government has changed,'' said a Tibetan artist in New York who is still
awaiting a decision on his application for asylum and asked that only his first
name, Samten, be published.

Yes, he said through a translator, he had been deeply disturbed by the picture
of a pile of naked prisoners and an Iraqi on a leash. ''I felt sorry for them,''
he said. ''I was shocked. I never thought prisoners of war would be treated like
that.''

But then he decided it was the work of a few and tried to put it out of his
mind, he said, holding out his hands to reveal scarred and pocked palms. Chinese
soldiers burned them in an oven, he explained; doctors at Bellevue, America's
oldest public hospital, saved them with surgery.

The scars still burn sometimes, Samten said. The nightmares still come. ''But I
am making art again,'' he said. ''And I still believe in America.''

So do some whose faith takes different tack. In a French-speaking group therapy
session run by Hawthorne E. Smith, co-director of clinical services at the
Bellevue program, several West African men voiced the hope that the full truth
will come out in the United States in ways that it never could in their own
lands.

Many doctors who treat torture victims have warned for months that the United
States was dangerously disregarding the hard-won international conventions
against torture. They were distressed, they said, that government officials have
asserted that interrogation techniques like ''water boarding'' -- immersing a
detainee in water and making him believe he is going to drown -- stops short of
torture.

''Make no mistake, that's torture,'' Dr. Keller said, recalling the patient from
the Ivory Coast who had suffered just such treatment at the hands of a military
faction. Years later, just taking a shower or being caught in the rain, he would
panic and gasp for breath.

Sitting beside him, Mr. Kamwa, an alumnus of the program, closed his eyes as
though in pain, and rubbed the furrows on his brow. ''My skin crawls when I just
talk about it,'' he said softly in French.

''I come here to have a safe place, to be out of these tortures,'' Mr. Kamwa
said. ''But it is still in my heart in America to speak for human rights.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 19, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on Saturday about immigrants who were refugees from
torture overseas, and their reactions to photographs of Iraqi prisoners being
abused by American soldiers, attributed a distinction incorrectly to the Center
for Victims of Torture, in Minneapolis. Established in 1985, it is the oldest
center in the United States for victims of torture. The world's oldest is the
Rehabilitation and Research Center for Torture Victims, founded in Copenhagen in
1982.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jean Pierre Kamwa, who fled Cameroon because he had been
tortured, was granted asylum in the United States. Now he assists other victims
of brutality. (Photo by Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)(pg. B1)
Adeyinka M.A. Akinsulure-Smith works with torture victims.
 Jean Pierre Kamwa, center, with Hawthorne E. Smith, left, and Dr. Allen S.
Keller, who run a New York program for torture victims. (Photographs by Marilynn
K. Yee/The New York Times)(pg. B6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); REFUGEES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
POLITICAL ASYLUM (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); PRISONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); MARTIAL LAW (75%) Prisoners of War; Political
Prisoners; Immigration and Refugees; Torture; United States Armament and
Defense; Asylum (Political)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Nina Bernstein

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Memos Explained How to Skip Prisoner Rights

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS; Douglas Jehl contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: GENEVA
CONVENTIONS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


A series of Justice Department memorandums written in late 2001 and the first
few months of 2002 were crucial in building a legal framework for United States
officials to avoid complying with international laws and treaties on handling
prisoners, lawyers and former officials say.

The confidential memorandums, several of which were written or co-written by
John C. Yoo, a University of California law professor who was serving in the
department, provided arguments to keep United States officials from being
charged with war crimes for the way prisoners were detained and interrogated.
They were endorsed by top lawyers in the White House, the Pentagon and the vice
president's office but drew dissents from the State Department.

The memorandums provide legal arguments to support administration officials'
assertions that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to detainees from the
Afghanistan war. They also suggested how officials could inoculate themselves
from liability by claiming that abused prisoners were in some other nation's
custody.

The methods of detention and interrogation used in the Afghanistan conflict, in
which the United States operated outside the Geneva Conventions, is at the heart
of an investigation into prisoner abuse in Iraq in recent months. Human rights
lawyers have said that in showing disrespect for international law in the
Afghanistan conflict, the stage was set for harsh treatment in Iraq.

One of the memorandums written by Mr. Yoo along with Robert J. Delahunty,
another Justice Department lawyer, was prepared on Jan. 9, 2002, four months
after the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington. The 42-page memorandum,
entitled, ''Application of treaties and laws to Al Qaeda and Taliban
detainees,'' provided several legal arguments for avoiding the jurisdiction of
the Geneva Conventions.

A lawyer and a former government official who saw the memorandum said it
anticipated the possibility that United States officials could be charged with
war crimes, defined as grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions. The document
said a way to avoid that is to declare that the conventions do not apply.

The memorandum, addressed to William J. Haynes, the Pentagon's general counsel,
said that President Bush could argue that the Taliban government in Afghanistan
was a ''failed state'' and therefore its soldiers were not entitled to
protections accorded in the conventions. If Mr. Bush did not want to do that,
the memorandum gave other grounds, like asserting that the Taliban was a
terrorist group. It also noted that the president could just say that he was
suspending the Geneva Conventions for a particular conflict.

Prof. Detlev Vagts, an authority on international law and treaties at Harvard
Law School, said the arguments in the memorandums as described to him ''sound
like an effort to find loopholes that could be used to avoid responsibility.''

One former government official who was involved in drafting some of the
memorandums said that the lawyers did not make recommendations but only provided
a range of all the options available to the White House.

On Jan. 25, 2002, Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, in a memorandum
to President Bush, said that the Justice Department's advice was sound and that
Mr. Bush should declare the Taliban as well as Al Qaeda outside the coverage of
the Geneva Conventions. That would keep American officials from being exposed to
the federal War Crimes Act, a 1996 law, which, as Mr. Gonzales noted, carries
the death penalty.

The Gonzales memorandum to Mr. Bush said that accepting the recommendations of
the Justice Department would preserve flexibility in the global war against
terrorism. ''The nature of the new war places a high premium on other factors
such as the ability to quickly obtain information from captured terrorists and
their sponsors in order to avoid further atrocities against American
civilians,'' said the memorandum, obtained this week by The New York Times. The
details of the memorandum were first reported by Newsweek.

Mr. Gonzales wrote that the war against terrorism, ''in my judgment renders
obsolete Geneva's strict limitations on questioning of enemy prisoners.''

Mr. Gonzales also says in the memorandum that another benefit of declaring the
conventions inapplicable would be that United States officials could not be
prosecuted for war crimes in the future by prosecutors and independent counsels
who might see the fighting in a different light.

He observed, however, that the disadvantages included ''widespread condemnation
among our allies'' and that other countries would also try to avoid jurisdiction
of the Geneva Conventions. It also meant that the United States might have
difficulty in invoking the conventions in protecting its own personnel who might
be captured by an enemy.

Another memorandum from the Justice Department advises officials to create a
situation in which they could plausibly claim that abused prisoners were never
in United States custody.

That memorandum, whose existence was acknowledged by two former officials, noted
that it would be hard to ward off an allegation of torture or inhuman treatment
if the prisoner had been transferred to another country from American custody.
International law prohibits the ''rendition'' of prisoners to countries if the
possibility of mistreatment can be anticipated.

The former officials said that memorandum was explicit in advising that if
someone were involved in interrogating detainees in a manner that could cross
the line into torture or other prohibited treatment, that person could claim
immunity only if he or she contended that the prisoner was never in United
States custody.

The Gonzales memorandum provoked a response from Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell on Jan. 26 in which he strongly suggested that the advantages of applying
the Geneva Conventions far outweighed their rejection. He said bluntly that
declaring the conventions inapplicable would ''reverse over a century of U.S.
policy and practice in supporting the Geneva Conventions and undermine the
protections of the laws of war for our troops.'' He also said he would
''undermine public support among critical allies.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel. (Photo by Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%); TERRORISM (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (77%); PRISONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); COLLEGE
& UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%);
FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (75%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL
SCHOOLS (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); GENOCIDE (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(70%); AL-QAEDA (64%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva Conventions; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ALBERTO GONZALES (78%) George W (Pres) Bush;
Alberto R Gonzales; Colin L (Sec) Powell

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             240 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Zimbabwe: Amnesty Opposes Extradition

BYLINE: By Michael Wines (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 103 words


Amnesty International urged Zimbabwe not to extradite to Equatorial Guinea 70
men accused of plotting to overthrow that nation's government, saying that the
men would probably face torture and a rigged trial under Equatorial Guinea's
authoritarian president, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. The 70 suspected
mercenaries were arrested as their jet landed in Harare in early March,
apparently to complete an arms deal that their accusers say was tied to the
coup. Fifteen others were arrested in Equatorial Guinea, and, critics say, they
were tortured. One has died. The remaining 84 deny wrongdoing.   Michael Wines
(NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); COUPS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARRESTS (88%); POLITICS (84%) Extradition; Coups
D'Etat and Attempted Coups D'Etat; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and
Government  ; International Relations

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) Amnesty International

PERSON: Michael Wines; Teodor Obiang Nguema (Pres) Mbasogo

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (90%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (96%); EQUATORIAL GUINEA (95%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Equatorial Guinea; Zimbabwe

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             242 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Abu Ghraib Investigation

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 714 words


It has been gratifying to see Senator John Warner, the Republican who is
chairman of the Armed Services Committee, lead a bipartisan effort to look into
the abuse of prisoners in Iraq. The hearings have already done far more than the
Pentagon ever intended to do in providing a public airing of the Abu Ghraib
disaster. But with each day's horrible revelations, it seems evident that the
hearings will not be enough. It is also hard to believe that the military's own
investigations will yield much, given the shifting of blame offered up by top
Pentagon leaders, who continue to insist that the nightmare at Abu Ghraib was an
isolated case of unsanctioned behavior by a few sick soldiers.

That defense, never particularly credible, has been undercut by the Red Cross,
by the emerging testimony of detainees and now by the Pentagon's own records.
The Denver Post reported this week that military records documented the deaths
of at last five Iraqi prisoners during brutal interrogations, only one of them
at Abu Ghraib. In one especially chilling case, the former head of Iraq's air
force turned himself in and was held at a ''high value'' prison, where
interrogators appear to have killed him by stuffing him headfirst into a
sleeping bag, sitting on his chest and covering his mouth. The Pentagon papered
this over with a press release saying the prisoner ''said he didn't feel well
and subsequently lost consciousness.''

Despite the efforts of some of the senators -- notably two Republicans, John
McCain and Lindsey Graham, and three Democrats, Carl Levin, Jack Reed and
Hillary Clinton -- each new panel of witnesses simply adds to the fog of
misunderstanding. This week, for example, Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, commander of
the troops in Iraq, said he had never seen a protocol permitting the harsh
treatment of prisoners until it surfaced at a hearing a week earlier. The Army's
subsequent claim that the orders were the work of a single captain seemed even
more implausible.

The theory that a midranking intelligence officer carried out such a drastic
shift in the military's normal rules did fit right in with the overriding theme
of testimony thus far: senior officers blaming those far below them for
everything. General Sanchez said Red Cross reports on prisoner abuse had gone to
low-level officers who had never passed them on. Other accounts contradict that.
But in any case, that's not a defense -- it's an indictment of his command.

Among the big questions that need to be answered is how the government and the
military handled the repeated complaints from the Red Cross. Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld and some of his closest aides said they had been kept in the
dark even longer than General Sanchez. But Red Cross officials met more than
once in the past year with top American officials in Iraq and in Washington.
Douglas Jehl and Eric Schmitt reported in The Times this week that the American
military's first response had been to curtail Red Cross inspections. The Wall
Street Journal reported yesterday that the Red Cross had been so outraged by the
soldiers' treatment of prisoners that it considered changing its policy and
making its reports public.

The military has repeatedly assured us that it will get to the bottom of this
mess, but it has not provided any evidence that it's really capable of doing so.
Senator Warner, meanwhile, has a long list of witnesses to call. He also wants
the Pentagon to deliver a pile of documents, including all reviews by Defense
Department lawyers of interrogation rules at Iraq and at Guantanamo Bay. Mr.
Rumsfeld should fully and immediately comply.

But given the quality of the testimony so far, it is not likely that the Senate
hearings will produce the answers the public deserves. While this may not be the
ideal time for an independent investigation, it is getting hard to see another
option. Neither the Defense Department's inspector general nor Mr. Rumsfeld's
office seems capable of mounting a reliable investigation so close to home. The
best bet is for Congress to form a special committee with subpoena powers and an
investigative staff. That would require, however, that other Republican leaders
in Congress show the same honorable determination that Mr. Warner has
demonstrated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
ARMIES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); WITNESSES
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AIR FORCES (73%); INDICTMENTS (72%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (71%); TERRORISM (67%) Editorials; Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human
Rights; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

COMPANY: DENVER POST CORP (56%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%)

PERSON: JOHN WARNER (90%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JACK REED (79%); JOHN
MCCAIN (79%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%) John W (Sen) Warner

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             244 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Regarding The Torture Of Others

BYLINE: By Susan Sontag.

Susan Sontag is the author, most recently, of ''Regarding the Pain of Others.''

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 4250 words



I.
For a long time -- at least six decades -- photographs have laid down the tracks
of how important conflicts are judged and remembered. The Western memory museum
is now mostly a visual one. Photographs have an insuperable power to determine
what we recall of events, and it now seems probable that the defining
association of people everywhere with the war that the United States launched
pre-emptively in Iraq last year will be photographs of the torture of Iraqi
prisoners by Americans in the most infamous of Saddam Hussein's prisons, Abu
Ghraib.

The Bush administration and its defenders have chiefly sought to limit a
public-relations disaster -- the dissemination of the photographs -- rather than
deal with the complex crimes of leadership and of policy revealed by the
pictures. There was, first of all, the displacement of the reality onto the
photographs themselves. The administration's initial response was to say that
the president was shocked and disgusted by the photographs -- as if the fault or
horror lay in the images, not in what they depict. There was also the avoidance
of the word ''torture.'' The prisoners had possibly been the objects of
''abuse,'' eventually of ''humiliation'' -- that was the most to be admitted.
''My impression is that what has been charged thus far is abuse, which I believe
technically is different from torture,'' Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld
said at a press conference. ''And therefore I'm not going to address the
'torture' word.''

Words alter, words add, words subtract. It was the strenuous avoidance of the
word ''genocide'' while some 800,000 Tutsis in Rwanda were being slaughtered,
over a few weeks' time, by their Hutu neighbors 10 years ago that indicated the
American government had no intention of doing anything. To refuse to call what
took place in Abu Ghraib -- and what has taken place elsewhere in Iraq and in
Afghanistan and at Guantanamo Bay -- by its true name, torture, is as outrageous
as the refusal to call the Rwandan genocide a genocide. Here is one of the
definitions of torture contained in a convention to which the United States is a
signatory: ''any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or
mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining
from him or a third person information or a confession.'' (The definition comes
from the 1984 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. Similar definitions have existed for some time in
customary law and in treaties, starting with Article 3 -- common to the four
Geneva conventions of 1949 -- and many recent human rights conventions.) The
1984 convention declares, ''No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a
state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other
public emergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture.'' And all
covenants on torture specify that it includes treatment intended to humiliate
the victim, like leaving prisoners naked in cells and corridors.

Whatever actions this administration undertakes to limit the damage of the
widening revelations of the torture of prisoners in Abu Ghraib and elsewhere --
trials, courts-martial, dishonorable discharges, resignation of senior military
figures and responsible administration officials and substantial compensation to
the victims -- it is probable that the ''torture'' word will continue to be
banned. To acknowledge that Americans torture their prisoners would contradict
everything this administration has invited the public to believe about the
virtue of American intentions and America's right, flowing from that virtue, to
undertake unilateral action on the world stage.

Even when the president was finally compelled, as the damage to America's
reputation everywhere in the world widened and deepened, to use the ''sorry''
word, the focus of regret still seemed the damage to America's claim to moral
superiority. Yes, President Bush said in Washington on May 6, standing alongside
King Abdullah II of Jordan, he was ''sorry for the humiliation suffered by the
Iraqi prisoners and the humiliation suffered by their families.'' But, he went
on, he was ''equally sorry that people seeing these pictures didn't understand
the true nature and heart of America.''

To have the American effort in Iraq summed up by these images must seem, to
those who saw some justification in a war that did overthrow one of the monster
tyrants of modern times, ''unfair.'' A war, an occupation, is inevitably a huge
tapestry of actions. What makes some actions representative and others not? The
issue is not whether the torture was done by individuals (i.e., ''not by
everybody'') -- but whether it was systematic. Authorized. Condoned. All acts
are done by individuals. The issue is not whether a majority or a minority of
Americans performs such acts but whether the nature of the policies prosecuted
by this administration and the hierarchies deployed to carry them out makes such
acts likely.

II.
Considered in this light, the photographs are us. That is, they are
representative of the fundamental corruptions of any foreign occupation together
with the Bush adminstration's distinctive policies. The Belgians in the Congo,
the French in Algeria, practiced torture and sexual humiliation on despised
recalcitrant natives. Add to this generic corruption the mystifying, near-total
unpreparedness of the American rulers of Iraq to deal with the complex realities
of the country after its ''liberation.'' And add to that the overarching,
distinctive doctrines of the Bush administration, namely that the United States
has embarked on an endless war and that those detained in this war are, if the
president so decides, ''unlawful combatants'' -- a policy enunciated by Donald
Rumsfeld for Taliban and Qaeda prisoners as early as January 2002 -- and thus,
as Rumsfeld said, ''technically'' they ''do not have any rights under the Geneva
Convention,'' and you have a perfect recipe for the cruelties and crimes
committed against the thousands incarcerated without charges or access to
lawyers in American-run prisons that have been set up since the attacks of Sept.
11, 2001.

So, then, is the real issue not the photographs themselves but what the
photographs reveal to have happened to ''suspects'' in American custody? No: the
horror of what is shown in the photographs cannot be separated from the horror
that the photographs were taken -- with the perpetrators posing, gloating, over
their helpless captives. German soldiers in the Second World War took
photographs of the atrocities they were committing in Poland and Russia, but
snapshots in which the executioners placed themselves among their victims are
exceedingly rare, as may be seen in a book just published, ''Photographing the
Holocaust,'' by Janina Struk. If there is something comparable to what these
pictures show it would be some of the photographs of black victims of lynching
taken between the 1880's and 1930's, which show Americans grinning beneath the
naked mutilated body of a black man or woman hanging behind them from a tree.
The lynching photographs were souvenirs of a collective action whose
participants felt perfectly justified in what they had done. So are the pictures
from Abu Ghraib.

The lynching pictures were in the nature of photographs as trophies -- taken by
a photographer in order to be collected, stored in albums, displayed. The
pictures taken by American soldiers in Abu Ghraib, however, reflect a shift in
the use made of pictures -- less objects to be saved than messages to be
disseminated, circulated. A digital camera is a common possession among
soldiers. Where once photographing war was the province of photojournalists, now
the soldiers themselves are all photographers -- recording their war, their fun,
their observations of what they find picturesque, their atrocities -- and
swapping images among themselves and e-mailing them around the globe.

There is more and more recording of what people do, by themselves. At least or
especially in America, Andy Warhol's ideal of filming real events in real time
-- life isn't edited, why should its record be edited? -- has become a norm for
countless Webcasts, in which people record their day, each in his or her own
reality show. Here I am -- waking and yawning and stretching, brushing my teeth,
making breakfast, getting the kids off to school. People record all aspects of
their lives, store them in computer files and send the files around. Family life
goes with the recording of family life -- even when, or especially when, the
family is in the throes of crisis and disgrace. Surely the dedicated, incessant
home-videoing of one another, in conversation and monologue, over many years was
the most astonishing material in ''Capturing the Friedmans,'' the recent
documentary by Andrew Jarecki about a Long Island family embroiled in pedophilia
charges.

An erotic life is, for more and more people, that whither can be captured in
digital photographs and on video. And perhaps the torture is more attractive, as
something to record, when it has a sexual component. It is surely revealing, as
more Abu Ghraib photographs enter public view, that torture photographs are
interleaved with pornographic images of American soldiers having sex with one
another. In fact, most of the torture photographs have a sexual theme, as in
those showing the coercing of prisoners to perform, or simulate, sexual acts
among themselves. One exception, already canonical, is the photograph of the man
made to stand on a box, hooded and sprouting wires, reportedly told he would be
electrocuted if he fell off. Yet pictures of prisoners bound in painful
positions, or made to stand with outstretched arms, are infrequent. That they
count as torture cannot be doubted. You have only to look at the terror on the
victim's face, although such ''stress'' fell within the Pentagon's limits of the
acceptable. But most of the pictures seem part of a larger confluence of torture
and pornography: a young woman leading a naked man around on a leash is classic
dominatrix imagery. And you wonder how much of the sexual tortures inflicted on
the inmates of Abu Ghraib was inspired by the vast repertory of pornographic
imagery available on the Internet -- and which ordinary people, by sending out
Webcasts of themselves, try to emulate.

III.
To live is to be photographed, to have a record of one's life, and therefore to
go on with one's life oblivious, or claiming to be oblivious, to the camera's
nonstop attentions. But to live is also to pose. To act is to share in the
community of actions recorded as images. The expression of satisfaction at the
acts of torture being inflicted on helpless, trussed, naked victims is only part
of the story. There is the deep satisfaction of being photographed, to which one
is now more inclined to respond not with a stiff, direct gaze (as in former
times) but with glee. The events are in part designed to be photographed. The
grin is a grin for the camera. There would be something missing if, after
stacking the naked men, you couldn't take a picture of them.

Looking at these photographs, you ask yourself, How can someone grin at the
sufferings and humiliation of another human being? Set guard dogs at the
genitals and legs of cowering naked prisoners? Force shackled, hooded prisoners
to masturbate or simulate oral sex with one another? And you feel naive for
asking, since the answer is, self-evidently, People do these things to other
people. Rape and pain inflicted on the genitals are among the most common forms
of torture. Not just in Nazi concentration camps and in Abu Ghraib when it was
run by Saddam Hussein. Americans, too, have done and do them when they are told,
or made to feel, that those over whom they have absolute power deserve to be
humiliated, tormented. They do them when they are led to believe that the people
they are torturing belong to an inferior race or religion. For the meaning of
these pictures is not just that these acts were performed, but that their
perpetrators apparently had no sense that there was anything wrong in what the
pictures show.

Even more appalling, since the pictures were meant to be circulated and seen by
many people: it was all fun. And this idea of fun is, alas, more and more --
contrary to what President Bush is telling the world -- part of ''the true
nature and heart of America.'' It is hard to measure the increasing acceptance
of brutality in American life, but its evidence is everywhere, starting with the
video games of killing that are a principal entertainment of boys -- can the
video game ''Interrogating the Terrorists'' really be far behind? -- and on to
the violence that has become endemic in the group rites of youth on an exuberant
kick. Violent crime is down, yet the easy delight taken in violence seems to
have grown. From the harsh torments inflicted on incoming students in many
American suburban high schools -- depicted in Richard Linklater's 1993 film,
''Dazed and Confused'' -- to the hazing rituals of physical brutality and sexual
humiliation in college fraternities and on sports teams, America has become a
country in which the fantasies and the practice of violence are seen as good
entertainment, fun.

What formerly was segregated as pornography, as the exercise of extreme
sadomasochistic longings -- as in Pier Paolo Pasolini's last, near-unwatchable
film, ''Salo'' (1975), depicting orgies of torture in the Fascist redoubt in
northern Italy at the end of the Mussolini era -- is now being normalized, by
some, as high-spirited play or venting. To ''stack naked men'' is like a college
fraternity prank, said a caller to Rush Limbaugh and the many millions of
Americans who listen to his radio show. Had the caller, one wonders, seen the
photographs? No matter. The observation -- or is it the fantasy? -- was on the
mark. What may still be capable of shocking some Americans was Limbaugh's
response: ''Exactly!'' he exclaimed. ''Exactly my point. This is no different
than what happens at the Skull and Bones initiation, and we're going to ruin
people's lives over it, and we're going to hamper our military effort, and then
we are going to really hammer them because they had a good time.'' ''They'' are
the American soldiers, the torturers. And Limbaugh went on: ''You know, these
people are being fired at every day. I'm talking about people having a good
time, these people. You ever heard of emotional release?''

Shock and awe were what our military promised the Iraqis. And shock and the
awful are what these photographs announce to the world that the Americans have
delivered: a pattern of criminal behavior in open contempt of international
humanitarian conventions. Soldiers now pose, thumbs up, before the atrocities
they commit, and send off the pictures to their buddies. Secrets of private life
that, formerly, you would have given nearly anything to conceal, you now clamor
to be invited on a television show to reveal. What is illustrated by these
photographs is as much the culture of shamelessness as the reigning admiration
for unapologetic brutality.

IV.
The notion that apologies or professions of ''disgust'' by the president and the
secretary of defense are a sufficient response is an insult to one's historical
and moral sense. The torture of prisoners is not an aberration. It is a direct
consequence of the with-us-or-against-us doctrines of world struggle with which
the Bush administration has sought to change, change radically, the
international stance of the United States and to recast many domestic
institutions and prerogatives. The Bush administration has committed the country
to a pseudo-religious doctrine of war, endless war -- for ''the war on terror''
is nothing less than that. Endless war is taken to justify endless
incarcerations. Those held in the extralegal American penal empire are
''detainees''; ''prisoners,'' a newly obsolete word, might suggest that they
have the rights accorded by international law and the laws of all civilized
countries. This endless ''global war on terrorism'' -- into which both the quite
justified invasion of Afghanistan and the unwinnable folly in Iraq have been
folded by Pentagon decree -- inevitably leads to the demonizing and dehumanizing
of anyone declared by the Bush administration to be a possible terrorist: a
definition that is not up for debate and is, in fact, usually made in secret.

The charges against most of the people detained in the prisons in Iraq and
Afghanistan being nonexistent -- the Red Cross reports that 70 to 90 percent of
those being held seem to have committed no crime other than simply being in the
wrong place at the wrong time, caught up in some sweep of ''suspects'' -- the
principal justification for holding them is ''interrogation.'' Interrogation
about what? About anything. Whatever the detainee might know. If interrogation
is the point of detaining prisoners indefinitely, then physical coercion,
humiliation and torture become inevitable.

Remember: we are not talking about that rarest of cases, the ''ticking time
bomb'' situation, which is sometimes used as a limiting case that justifies
torture of prisoners who have knowledge of an imminent attack. This is general
or nonspecific information-gathering, authorized by American military and
civilian administrators to learn more of a shadowy empire of evildoers about
whom Americans know virtually nothing, in countries about which they are
singularly ignorant: in principle, any information at all might be useful. An
interrogation that produced no information (whatever information might consist
of) would count as a failure. All the more justification for preparing prisoners
to talk. Softening them up, stressing them out -- these are the euphemisms for
the bestial practices in American prisons where suspected terrorists are being
held. Unfortunately, as Staff Sgt. Ivan (Chip) Frederick noted in his diary, a
prisoner can get too stressed out and die. The picture of a man in a body bag
with ice on his chest may well be of the man Frederick was describing.

The pictures will not go away. That is the nature of the digital world in which
we live. Indeed, it seems they were necessary to get our leaders to acknowledge
that they had a problem on their hands. After all, the conclusions of reports
compiled by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and other reports by
journalists and protests by humanitarian organizations about the atrocious
punishments inflicted on ''detainees'' and ''suspected terrorists'' in prisons
run by the American military, first in Afghanistan and later in Iraq, have been
circulating for more than a year. It seems doubtful that such reports were read
by President Bush or Vice President Dick Cheney or Condoleezza Rice or Rumsfeld.
Apparently it took the photographs to get their attention, when it became clear
they could not be suppressed; it was the photographs that made all this ''real''
to Bush and his associates. Up to then, there had been only words, which are
easier to cover up in our age of infinite digital self-reproduction and
self-dissemination, and so much easier to forget.

So now the pictures will continue to ''assault'' us -- as many Americans are
bound to feel. Will people get used to them? Some Americans are already saying
they have seen enough. Not, however, the rest of the world. Endless war: endless
stream of photographs. Will editors now debate whether showing more of them, or
showing them uncropped (which, with some of the best-known images, like that of
a hooded man on a box, gives a different and in some instances more appalling
view), would be in ''bad taste'' or too implicitly political? By ''political,''
read: critical of the Bush administration's imperial project. For there can be
no doubt that the photographs damage, as Rumsfeld testified, ''the reputation of
the honorable men and women of the armed forces who are courageously and
responsibly and professionally defending our freedom across the globe.'' This
damage -- to our reputation, our image, our success as the lone superpower -- is
what the Bush administration principally deplores. How the protection of ''our
freedom'' -- the freedom of 5 percent of humanity -- came to require having
American soldiers ''across the globe'' is hardly debated by our elected
officials.

Already the backlash has begun. Americans are being warned against indulging in
an orgy of self-condemnation. The continuing publication of the pictures is
being taken by many Americans as suggesting that we do not have the right to
defend ourselves: after all, they (the terrorists) started it. They -- Osama bin
Laden? Saddam Hussein? what's the difference? -- attacked us first. Senator
James Inhofe of Oklahoma, a Republican member of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, before which Secretary Rumsfeld testified, avowed that he was sure he
was not the only member of the committee ''more outraged by the outrage'' over
the photographs than by what the photographs show. ''These prisoners,'' Senator
Inhofe explained, ''you know they're not there for traffic violations. If
they're in Cellblock 1-A or 1-B, these prisoners, they're murderers, they're
terrorists, they're insurgents. Many of them probably have American blood on
their hands, and here we're so concerned about the treatment of those
individuals.'' It's the fault of ''the media'' which are provoking, and will
continue to provoke, further violence against Americans around the world. More
Americans will die. Because of these photos.

There is an answer to this charge, of course. Americans are dying not because of
the photographs but because of what the photographs reveal to be happening,
happening with the complicity of a chain of command -- so Maj. Gen. Antonio
Taguba implied, and Pfc. Lynndie England said, and (among others) Senator
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a Republican, suggested, after he saw the
Pentagon's full range of images on May 12. ''Some of it has an elaborate nature
to it that makes me very suspicious of whether or not others were directing or
encouraging,'' Senator Graham said. Senator Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat,
said that viewing an uncropped version of one photo showing a stack of naked men
in a hallway -- a version that revealed how many other soldiers were at the
scene, some not even paying attention -- contradicted the Pentagon's assertion
that only rogue soldiers were involved. ''Somewhere along the line,'' Senator
Nelson said of the torturers, ''they were either told or winked at.'' An
attorney for Specialist Charles Graner Jr., who is in the picture, has had his
client identify the men in the uncropped version; according to The Wall Street
Journal, Graner said that four of the men were military intelligence and one a
civilian contractor working with military intelligence.

V.
But the distinction between photograph and reality -- as between spin and policy
-- can easily evaporate. And that is what the administration wishes to happen.
''There are a lot more photographs and videos that exist,'' Rumsfeld
acknowledged in his testimony. ''If these are released to the public, obviously,
it's going to make matters worse.'' Worse for the administration and its
programs, presumably, not for those who are the actual -- and potential? --
victims of torture.

The media may self-censor but, as Rumsfeld acknowledged, it's hard to censor
soldiers overseas, who don't write letters home, as in the old days, that can be
opened by military censors who ink out unacceptable lines. Today's soldiers
instead function like tourists, as Rumsfeld put it, ''running around with
digital cameras and taking these unbelievable photographs and then passing them
off, against the law, to the media, to our surprise.'' The administration's
effort to withhold pictures is proceeding along several fronts. Currently, the
argument is taking a legalistic turn: now the photographs are classified as
evidence in future criminal cases, whose outcome may be prejudiced if they are
made public. The Republican chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee,
John Warner of Virginia, after the May 12 slide show of image after image of
sexual humiliation and violence against Iraqi prisoners, said he felt ''very
strongly'' that the newer photos ''should not be made public. I feel that it
could possibly endanger the men and women of the armed forces as they are
serving and at great risk.''

But the real push to limit the accessibility of the photographs will come from
the continuing effort to protect the administration and cover up our misrule in
Iraq -- to identify ''outrage'' over the photographs with a campaign to
undermine American military might and the purposes it currently serves. Just as
it was regarded by many as an implicit criticism of the war to show on
television photographs of American soldiers who have been killed in the course
of the invasion and occupation of Iraq, it will increasingly be thought
unpatriotic to disseminate the new photographs and further tarnish the image of
America.

After all, we're at war. Endless war. And war is hell, more so than any of the
people who got us into this rotten war seem to have expected. In our digital
hall of mirrors, the pictures aren't going to go away. Yes, it seems that one
picture is worth a thousand words. And even if our leaders choose not to look at
them, there will be thousands more snapshots and videos. Unstoppable.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 23, 2004



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Page 24 of The Times
Magazine today about the photographs of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib renders a
word incorrectly in a sentence about sexual images. The sentence should read,
''An erotic life is, for more and more people, that which can be captured in
digital photographs and on video'' -- not ''that whither.''



GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iraqi detainee at Abu Ghraib: The horror of what is shown in
the photographs cannot be separated from the horror that the photographs were
taken. (Photograph from Polaris)
Far left, most of the pictures, like this one of simulated sex, seem part of a
larger confluence of torture and pornography. Left, showing the pictures
uncropped gives a different and in some instances more appalling view.
What formerly was segregated as pornography, as the exercise of extreme
sadomasochistic longings, is being normalized, by some, as high-spirited play or
venting. (Photograph, left, courtesy of the Washington Post)
 On this photograph, Specialist Charles Graner (shown bottom left) indicated by
a number key who was with him at Abu Ghraib. (Photograph from Guy L. Womack)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (84%); LAW OF WAR (78%); MUSEUMS &
GALLERIES (78%); PHOTOGRAPHY (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (75%); PRISONS
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(69%); PUBLIC RELATIONS (69%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (64%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(50%) Torture; Prisoners of War; Photography; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) Susan Sontag

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (96%); RWANDA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA
(67%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             246 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 24, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Deaths Linked to Unit At Iraq Prison

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL and DAVID ROHDE; Douglas Jehl reported from Washington
for this article, and David Rohde from Khost, Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ABUSE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


A military intelligence unit that oversaw interrogations at Abu Ghraib prison in
Iraq was also in charge of questioning at a detention center in Afghanistan
where two prisoners died in December 2002 in incidents that are being
investigated as homicides.

For both of the Afghan prisoners, who died in a center known as the Bagram
Collection Point, the cause of death listed on certificates signed by American
pathologists included blunt force injuries to their legs. Interrogations at the
center were supervised by Company A, 519th Military Intelligence Battalion,
which moved on early in 2003 to Iraq, where some of its members were assigned to
the Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center at Abu Ghraib. Its service in
Afghanistan was known, but its work at Bagram at the time of the deaths has now
emerged in interviews with former prisoners, military officials and from
documents.

Two men arrested with one of the prisoners who died in the Bagram Detention
Center that month said in southeastern Afghanistan on Sunday that they were
tortured and sexually humiliated by their American jailers; they said they were
held in isolation cells, black hoods were placed over their heads, and their
hands at times were chained to the ceiling. ''The 10 days that we had was a very
bad time,'' said Zakim Shah, a 20-year-old farmer and a father of two who said
he felt he would not survive at times. ''We are very lucky.''

The account provided by the two men was consistent with those of other former
Afghan prisoners, including those interviewed by The New York Times and cited in
reports by human rights officials.

In interviews, the two men and other former prisoners who were held at the
center in Afghanistan at that time have described an environment similar in some
ways to that of Abu Ghraib, whose outlines have been depicted in photographs and
testimony. At both places, prisoners were hooded, stripped naked and mocked
sexually by female captors, according to a variety of accounts.

In Iraq, at least three members of the 519th Military Intelligence Battalion who
had been assigned to the joint interrogation center at Abu Ghraib have been
quietly disciplined for conduct involving the abuse of a female Iraqi prisoner
there, an Army spokesman said.

At least one officer, Capt. Carolyn A. Wood, served in supervisory positions at
the interrogation units both at the Bagram Collection Point from July 2002 to
December 2003 and then again at the joint center at Abu Ghraib, according to
Army officials. That center was established in the fall of 2003. In
Congressional testimony last week, a senior Army lawyer, Col. Marc Warren,
praised Captain Wood as an officer who took initiative in Iraq at a time when
American commanders had yet to spell out rules for interrogation. But he also
singled out Captain Wood and her unit as having brought to Iraq interrogation
procedures developed during their service in Afghanistan. No one is known to
have accused Captain Wood of any wrongdoing in connection with the abuses at Abu
Ghraib or the deaths of prisoners there or in Afghanistan.

A spokesman for the 18th Airborne Corps, in Fort Bragg, N.C., identified Captain
Wood as having been sent to Afghanistan in July 2002 as Company A's
interrogation platoon leader, and having later assumed the duties of
''operations officer in charge of the Bagram Collection Point.'' In a written
statement sent Friday, that spokesman, Lt. Col. Billy Buckner, said Captain Wood
had been assigned to the 519th Battalion at Abu Ghraib. But other Army officers
have described her as having served as the officer in charge of the
interrogation center there, under Lt. Col. Steve Jordan, a reservist who served
as its director.

In an interview on Sunday, Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, who oversaw Abu Ghraib
prison in Iraq but has since been admonished and suspended from command,
described Captain Wood as an impressive and well-spoken expert on interrogations
who oversaw the center. Colonel Buckner said that Captain Wood's commanding
officer in Iraq, Lt. Col. Robert Whalen, was not available for comment. To date,
seven enlisted personnel from a military police unit have been the only soldiers
charged with crimes in connection with the abuses at Abu Ghraib. But an Army
report completed in March identified Colonel Jordan as among four people who may
have been among those ''directly or indirectly'' responsible for the misconduct.

Within days after the deaths of the two prisoners in Afghanistan in December
2002, both were ruled homicides by American military doctors in Afghanistan. But
in a public statement at the time, the military described at least one death as
the result of natural causes.

The deaths of two prisoners at the Bagram Collection Point in Afghanistan in
December 2002 are believed to be among nine being investigated by the Army as
possible homicides linked to interrogation practices in Iraq and Afghanistan. At
least two other deaths being investigated occurred in Abu Ghraib, senior
military officers have said, but it is not clear whether those prisoners were
under the authority of the Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center.

The two former Afghan prisoners who were interviewed in Afghanistan on Sunday
said they believed that their acquaintance, a young man named Dilawar whose
death is considered a possible homicide, received the same harsh treatment that
they did. Both prisoners were later sent to the American-run detention center in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, but were released with letters from the Army saying they
did nothing wrong.

The two men said that at Bagram they were forced to strip naked in the presence
of female soldiers when receiving prison clothes, undergoing medical exams and
taking showers. They said female soldiers were never present when they were
naked in Guantanamo Bay.

Both men said appearing naked in front of women was deeply humiliating for
Afghan men, who live in a conservative Islamic culture. ''The other things don't
matter,'' Parkhudin said, referring to the kicking and sleep deprivation. ''But
we are angry about this.''

Since 2002, about 350 prisoners have been held at any given time at American-run
detention centers in Afghanistan. The Bagram Collection Point, at Bagram Air
Base, just north of Kabul, is the main American detention center, and is visited
by officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross. No outside
inspectors visit roughly 20 smaller American bases around Afghanistan where
prisoners are also held.

The two Afghan prisoners who died in American custody in December 2002 are
identified on death certificates only as Dilawar and ''Ullah, Habib.'' Friends
and family members have identified Dilawar as a 22-year-old farmer and part-time
taxi driver. The second prisoner who died has been identified by family members
as Mullah Habibullah, about 30 years old and a brother of a former Taliban
commander.

The Dec. 13 death certificate for Dilawar says he died as a result of ''blunt
force injuries to lower extremities complicating coronary artery disease.'' The
document was signed by Lt. Col. Elizabeth A. Rouse of the Air Force, a military
pathologist, and listed as its finding that the ''mode of death'' was
''homicide,'' rather than ''natural,'' ''accident'' and ''suicide.''
At the time, American military officials said Dilawar had died of a heart attack
and had coronary artery disease. The fact that the military characterized his
death a ''homicide'' was not publicly known until his family showed a reporter
from The New York Times his death certificate in late February 2003. Family
members, who do not speak English, were unable to understand the certificate.

According to military documents, Dilawar was found dead in his isolation cell on
Dec. 10, his fifth day of captivity. The military later disclosed that the death
in Bagram of Mullah Habibullah, which occurred on Dec. 3, 2002, had also been
deemed a homicide by an Army pathologist. He too was found collapsed in a cell
on the second floor of the center.

The two men interviewed on Sunday in Turiuba, a village in Khost Province in
southeastern Afghanistan, said they had been held in isolation cells on the
second floor of the Bagram center for the first 10 days.
Mr. Shah, the 20-year-old farmer, and Parkhudin, a 26-year-old farmer and former
soldier, said they were later transferred from Bagram to the American detention
center in Guantanamo Bay. Their first 10 days in Bagram were by far the most
harrowing of their 15 months in American custody, they said.
Guards shouted at them or kicked them whenever they tried to sleep, the two men
said. The only time they were allowed to move freely was during trips to eat or
go to the bathroom, they said. If they tried to speak to a prisoner in an
adjoining cell, guards beat them, they said.

''They were punching me and kicking me when I talked to the other prisoners,''
said Parkhudin, who like many Afghans has only one name. Mr. Shah said soldiers
never struck him when he tried to sit, but they constantly shouted at him to
keep him awake. ''We were standing for the whole 10 days,'' said the young
farmer, who said he grew so exhausted at one point that he vomited. ''When we
were trying to sit they would tell us 'Hands up!' 'Stand up!' '' Parkhudin said
his hands were chained to the ceiling for 8 of the 10 days. Mr. Shah said his
hands were chained for only 4 hours in total over the 10 days. Parkhudin said he
believed American interrogators treated him worse because they thought he was a
Taliban commander.

A third detainee who was in the Bagram center at the time, Abdul Jabar, a
35-year-old taxi driver from the same area as Dilawar, said he saw him being led
downstairs to the bathroom hooded. In a March 2003 interview with The New York
Times, he said the young man ''was struggling a lot.''

He added, ''He was scared because he could not get enough oxygen.''

Sixteen months later, military investigations into both deaths have not been
completed. Military officials have said that it has proved difficult to track
the personnel who were on duty in the Bagram Detention Center at the time.
''It's complicated because forces have rotated outside of Afghanistan,'' Lt.
Col. Tucker Mansager, a United States military spokesman in Afghanistan, said
Saturday. ''Our United States Army Criminal Investigative Division is having to
follow those people to the various places they've gone in order to interview
them and complete an actual criminal investigation into those allegations.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Zakim Shah, left, and Parkhudin, shown yesterday in Turiuba,
Afghanistan, were both arrested in December 2002 along with an Afghan whose
death in the Bagram Detention Center is being investigated as a homicide. (Photo
by David Rohde/The New York Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
ARMIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (79%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); HOMICIDE (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); TERRORISM
(72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); MANAGERS &
SUPERVISORS (71%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%); GENOCIDE
(63%); TESTIMONY (62%); NATURISTS & NATURISM (61%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; Terrorism; Photography  ; Nudism
and Nudity; Intelligence Services; Women

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Douglas Jehl; David Rohde

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Bagram (Afghanistan); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             249 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberian Ruler Can Be Tried, Court Rules

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, May 31


Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian president accused of crimes against
humanity in connection with a rebel insurrection in neighboring Sierra Leone,
can be prosecuted by an international war crimes tribunal, a United
Nations-backed court in Sierra Leone ruled Monday.

Mr. Taylor's lawyers had argued that a court in one country had no right to try
the head of state of another country. But the four judges on the appeals panel
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone rejected that argument, ruling that as an
international tribunal, the special court does have that authority. The ruling
clears the last legal hurdle for the prosecution, but another more daunting one
remains. Nigeria, which has sheltered Mr. Taylor since he stepped down as
president of Liberia in August 2003, has so far rebuffed demands to turn him
over to the court in Sierra Leone. The Nigerian president, Olusegun Obasanjo,
has said only that he would return his guest to his home country if the Liberian
courts seek to prosecute him.

Liberia, which emerged from 14 years of crushing civil war with Mr. Taylor's
departure, has issued no such request.

Mr. Taylor's lawyer in Freetown, Sierra Leone's capital, declined to comment on
the special court's ruling. ''I haven't read the report, so how can I comment on
it?'' said the lawyer, Terrence Terry.

The special court was created jointly by the United Nations and the government
of Sierra Leone to punish the ringleaders of that country's decade-long war. Mr.
Taylor is the most prominent among 11 people indicted so far. He faces 17 counts
of murder, rape and other crimes against humanity in connection with the support
he reportedly gave the rebels in Sierra Leone.

''With this decision, Charles Taylor has no more legal cards to play,'' said
Richard Dicker, director of international justice for Human Rights Watch, based
in New York. ''The time has come for Nigeria to hand Taylor over to the special
court.'' The special court will begin its first trial on Thursday. Among the
defendants is Sam Hinga Norman, a former government minister in Sierra Leone
accused of raising a terrifying pro-government militia, the Kamajors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (73%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (58%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (96%); LIBERIA (96%); NIGERIA (93%); UNITED STATES (79%);
SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             250 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

30 Inmates and Guard Die in Jail Revolt in Brazil

BYLINE: By TODD BENSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: SAO PAULO, Brazil, June 1


At least 30 inmates and one guard were killed in a three-day uprising at a jail
in Rio de Janeiro, in the worst prison violence in Brazil in more than a decade,
authorities said Tuesday.

The revolt at the month-old Benfica detention center on the northern outskirts
of Rio started Saturday. It ended Monday night after an evangelical pastor
persuaded inmates to release 21 hostages in exchange for a promise from prison
authorities to separate detainees belonging to rival gangs, officials said.

The police, who were still securing the prison on Tuesday, said that they had
found at least 15 bodies that had been beheaded and that they feared the death
toll would rise. A 42-year-old guard who had been taken hostage was shot dead by
inmates on Sunday when he tried to escape. At least 14 of the prison's 900
inmates escaped in the riot; on Tuesday, three of those were recaptured.

''We still don't know exactly how many, but without going into the gruesome
details, I can say that yes, there were bodies that were decapitated, mutilated
and even burned,'' said a spokeswoman for the Rio state prison authority.

The bloodshed was the worst prison violence in Brazil since 1992, when more than
100 inmates were killed by the police at Sao Paulo's notorious Carandiru prison,
which has since been closed and partly demolished.

Astirio Pereira dos Santos, the head of Rio's prison authority, said the death
toll would probably have been much higher if the Rev. Marcos Pereira da Silva, a
pastor who is popular among gang members and has become known for mediating
prison riots, had not intervened.

''If the pastor didn't resolve this, the police would have stormed the place and
we would certainly have had another Carandiru on our hands, and the tragedy
would have been much greater,'' Mr. dos Santos told GloboNews television.

Uprisings and jailbreaks are common in Brazil's prison system, which is often
criticized by human rights groups for overcrowding and abuse. Many prisons here
are dominated by drug kingpins from rival gangs, making the penal system a
frequent battleground for gang warfare.

The Rio revolt came just over a month after prisoners at an overcrowded prison
in the Amazon state of Rondonia killed 14 fellow inmates in a weeklong uprising.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); RIOTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (73%); RELIGION (71%); GANGS (58%) Prisons and Prisoners; Demonstrations
and Riots

PERSON: Todd Benson

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (93%); SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (73%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%)

REGION: Brazil; Rio De Janeiro (Brazil)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             253 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone War Crimes Trial Opens Without Chief Suspect

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, June 3


A international war crimes tribunal set up to try those responsible for this
country's long and crippling conflict opened here on Thursday morning, with vows
from the court's chief prosecutor to slay what he repeatedly called ''the beast
of impunity.''

Yet missing from the United Nations-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone was
its leading suspect: Charles G. Taylor, the exiled former president of Liberia
and the man accused of fomenting the rebel insurgency in the 1991-2002 war that
killed an estimated 50,000 people.

Mr. Taylor, indicted more than a year ago on 17 counts of crimes against
humanity, including murder, enslavement and the recruitment of child soldiers,
has been given asylum in Nigeria. Three men indicted as his top collaborators in
Sierra Leone are dead or missing.

Instead, the first defendants appearing before the court on Thursday were three
men who led Sierra Leone's feared pro-government militia, including the
country's former interior minister, Sam Hinga Norman. Mr. Norman's militia, the
Civil Defense Force, is accused of cannibalism, rape and the indiscriminate
killing of civilians. Mr. Norman faces eight counts of crimes against humanity.

''The ghosts of thousands of the murdered dead stand among us,'' David Crane, an
American prosecutor, told the three-judge panel in his opening statement. ''They
cry out for a fair and transparent trial to let the world know what took place,
here in Sierra Leone.''

To his right sat Mr. Norman, 54, scribbling notes on loose-leaf sheets and
occasionally looking up with a faint smile. At the end of the day, Mr. Norman
stood up and demanded to represent himself. The court adjourned until next
Tuesday to consider his request.

The outcome of these trials carries implications far beyond the borders of this
small West African country. The Special Court, created jointly by the government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations, represents the first time an
international war crimes tribunal has been held inside the country where the
conflict took place. The tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia have
been holding their hearings in other countries. The Sierra Leone court also
represents the first time that the recruitment of child soldiers is being tried
as a war crime.

With a price tag of about $80 million, the Special Court is held up as an
efficient model of international justice, and one that the United States
government, which opposes the Rome-based International Criminal Court, can
accept. Washington is a major donor to this court, and Americans fill some of
the most important posts, including that of prosecutor.

The Special Court has stirred debate here and abroad about the value of such a
tribunal. Some here see it as an unwelcome intrusion from the outside. Others
say it would be more significant if it could try major figures, like Mr. Taylor.

''We expect Charles Taylor to account for his involvement,'' said John Caulker,
a member of a human rights group here called Forum of Conscience. ''We want to
see him here in person and explain.''

So far, 13 men have been indicted, though only 9 are in custody and facing
trial. Foday Sankoh, the head of the Revolutionary United Front, the rebel group
that made hacking off limbs its trademark, died in custody last year. His
accomplice, a Liberian named Sam Bockarie, was killed. Johnny Paul Koroma, the
former head of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council who seized power in 1997
and later formed an alliance with the rebel front, has gone missing.

The trial of Mr. Norman and two deputies of the Civil Defense Force is to be
followed by the trials of Mr. Sankoh's top officials.

The spectators' gallery, separated from the courtroom by a glass wall, was
packed with local journalists, defendants' families and ordinary people whose
lives were upended by the war. Among them was a man with steel claws in place of
hands; both his arms had been chopped off during the war.

Mr. Crane's 40-minute opening statement was part Sunday sermon, part an
exposition of international human rights law. ''The jackals of death,
destruction and inhumanity are caged behind bars of hope and reconciliation,''
the prosecutor said at one moment.

The prosecution promised a gory catalog of testimony. Former child soldiers, Mr.
Crane said, would describe the horrors they had committed. One witness would
describe seeing Civil Defense Force fighters decapitate 10 of their captives.
Another would tell how the intestines of a man were roasted and eaten.

A lawyer for Mr. Norman said his client could not be held responsible because
his militia, which was charged with putting down a rebel insurgency, was
ultimately under the command of a West African peacekeeping force stationed in
Sierra Leone during the war. ''Our man was basically a go-between,'' the lawyer,
Sulaiman Banja Tejan-Sie, said of Mr. Norman.

As for Mr. Taylor, the prosecution continues to insist that he must be handed
over.

Mr. Taylor lost a legal challenge earlier this week, when the Special Court's
appeal chamber ruled that an international tribunal had the authority to try a
head of state. Mr. Taylor's lawyers had argued that, as the president, he
enjoyed immunity from prosecution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INDICTMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CHILD
SOLDIERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
JUDGES (72%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: DAVID W CRANE (57%) Somini Sengupta; Charles G Taylor; Sam Hinga Norman

CITY: FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (57%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); LIBERIA (93%); NIGERIA (92%);
RWANDA (79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sierra Leone; Liberia; Nigeria; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             254 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Meets Pope, Who Voices His Displeasure Over Iraq

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: ROME, June 4


With President Bush at his side, Pope John Paul II on Friday reiterated his
unhappiness over the invasion of Iraq and urged the president to speed the
restoration of sovereignty to the Iraqi people.

Speaking haltingly in front of reporters and a television camera after a
15-minute private meeting with Mr. Bush at the Vatican, the pope mixed praise
for the United States with a diplomatically worded but unmistakable expression
of displeasure with the war and its aftermath.

The pope welcomed the establishment of an interim Iraqi government, but said it
was ''a moment of great concern'' for the Middle East and called on the United
States to work quickly toward a new United Nations resolution.

''It is the evident desire of everyone that this situation now be normalized as
quickly as possible with the active participation of the international community
and, in particular, the United Nations organization, in order to ensure a speedy
return of Iraq's sovereignty, in conditions of security for all its people,''
the pope said.

He went on to suggest that the mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners by the United
States had undermined the broader battle against terrorism.

''In the past few weeks, other deplorable events have come to light which have
troubled the civic and religious conscience of all, and made difficult a serene
and resolute commitment to shared human values,'' the pope said, referring to
the reports of abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison. ''In the absence of such
a commitment, neither war nor terrorism will ever be overcome.''

Thousands of demonstrators marched through Rome on Friday, the first day of Mr.
Bush's three-day trip to Italy and France, to protest against the war and
American foreign policy.

But the government of Italy, which has nearly 3,000 troops in Iraq, has been one
of Mr. Bush's most steadfast allies in the war, and the president's stop here
was intended in part to thank Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. Two days before
he goes to Normandy to commemorate the 60th anniversary of D-Day, Mr. Bush also
noted the entrance of allied forces into Rome on June 4, 1944.

In choosing to meet with the pope for the first time since the war, the
president was taking a calculated risk. A senior administration official,
speaking to reporters on Air Force One on Thursday, acknowledged that Mr. Bush
had changed his schedule to make sure he could meet with the pope and said,
''The president finds it an opportunity, first and foremost, to acknowledge the
tremendous spiritual and moral leadership that the Holy Father provides for the
world.''

Although White House officials denied any political motivation, the chance to
associate Mr. Bush with that moral authority five months before Election Day has
clear political implications. He is seeking to win a bigger share of the
Catholic vote in his re-election race, and his appearance with the pope held the
potential to assist him in that strategy and in harnessing support from social
conservatives generally.

Alluding to abortion and other issues on which Mr. Bush is appealing to his
base, the pope said to the president, ''I also continue to follow with great
appreciation your commitment to the promotion of moral values in American
society, particularly with regard to respect for life and the family.''

Mr. Bush's presumptive Democratic opponent in the presidential race, Senator
John Kerry of Massachusetts, is Catholic. But some Roman Catholic bishops in the
United States have threatened to withhold the sacrament of holy communion from
politicians who support abortion rights, as Mr. Kerry does, provoking a
sometimes bitter debate over the role of the church in partisan politics.

But while his statement may have helped Mr. Bush on domestic issues, the pope
pressed Mr. Bush on foreign policy.

''Mr. President, your visit to Rome takes place at a moment of great concern for
the continuing situation of grave unrest in the Middle East, both in Iraq and in
the Holy Land,'' the 84-year-old pope said in a quavering delivery, with Mr.
Bush seated to his right.

He added that the president was ''very familiar with the unequivocal position''
of the Vatican in opposing the invasion of Iraq, and he said progress in Iraq
was important to efforts to being peace between Israel and the Palestinians.

Mr. Bush did not respond directly during his public appearance with the pope.
But he subsequently awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United
States' highest civilian award, and used the occasion to set out his view of how
his administration views its role in the world.

The pope thanked Mr. Bush and said, ''God Bless America.''

The White House also announced Friday evening that Iraq's interim president,
Ghazi al-Yawar, would come to the United States next week to attend a summit
meeting of the G-8 nations at Sea Island, Ga.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Police officers in Rome yesterday during clashes with marchers
protesting President Bush's visit. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (93%); RELIGION (92%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
POLITICAL PROTESTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); ANNIVERSARIES (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(70%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); ARMED FORCES
(67%); RIOTS (66%); FOREIGN POLICY (62%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Demonstrations
and Riots; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Roman Catholic Church

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); SILVIO BERLUSCONI (58%) Richard W Stevenson; George
W (Pres) Bush; John Paul II (Pope)

CITY: ROME, ITALY (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%); ITALY (94%); HOLY SEE (88%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%); FRANCE (73%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Italy; Rome (Italy)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             257 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

LAWYERS DECIDED BANS ON TORTURE DIDN'T BIND BUSH

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS and ERIC SCHMITT; Kate Zernike contributed reporting
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: LEGAL OPINIONS;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1262 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


A team of administration lawyers concluded in a March 2003 legal memorandum that
President Bush was not bound by either an international treaty prohibiting
torture or by a federal antitorture law because he had the authority as
commander in chief to approve any technique needed to protect the nation's
security.

The memo, prepared for Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, also said that any
executive branch officials, including those in the military, could be immune
from domestic and international prohibitions against torture for a variety of
reasons.

One reason, the lawyers said, would be if military personnel believed that they
were acting on orders from superiors ''except where the conduct goes so far as
to be patently unlawful.''

''In order to respect the president's inherent constitutional authority to
manage a military campaign,'' the lawyers wrote in the 56-page confidential
memorandum, the prohibition against torture ''must be construed as inapplicable
to interrogation undertaken pursuant to his commander-in-chief authority.''

Senior Pentagon officials on Monday sought to minimize the significance of the
March memo, one of several obtained by The New York Times, as an interim legal
analysis that had no effect on revised interrogation procedures that Mr.
Rumsfeld approved in April 2003 for the American military prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.

''The April document was about interrogation techniques and procedures,'' said
Lawrence Di Rita, the Pentagon's chief spokesman. ''It was not a legal
analysis.''

Mr. Di Rita said the 24 interrogation procedures permitted at Guantanamo, four
of which required Mr. Rumsfeld's explicit approval, did not constitute torture
and were consistent with international treaties.

The March memorandum, which was first reported by The Wall Street Journal on
Monday, is the latest internal legal study to be disclosed that shows that after
the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks the administration's lawyers were set to work to
find legal arguments to avoid restrictions imposed by international and American
law.

A Jan. 22, 2002, memorandum from the Justice Department that provided arguments
to keep American officials from being charged with war crimes for the way
prisoners were detained and interrogated was used extensively as a basis for the
March memorandum on avoiding proscriptions against torture.

The previously disclosed Justice Department memorandum concluded that
administration officials were justified in asserting that the Geneva Conventions
did not apply to detainees from the Afghanistan war.

Another memorandum obtained by The Times indicates that most of the
administration's top lawyers, with the exception of those at the State
Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, approved of the Justice Department's
position that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to the war in Afghanistan. In
addition, that memorandum, dated Feb. 2, 2002, noted that lawyers for the
Central Intelligence Agency had asked for an explicit understanding that the
administration's public pledge to abide by the spirit of the conventions did not
apply to its operatives.

The March memo, a copy of which was obtained by The Times, was prepared as part
of a review of interrogation techniques by a working group appointed by the
Defense Department's general counsel, William J. Haynes. The group itself was
led by the Air Force general counsel, Mary Walker, and included military and
civilian lawyers from all branches of the armed services.

The review stemmed from concerns raised by Pentagon lawyers and interrogators at
Guantanamo after Mr. Rumsfeld approved a set of harsher interrogation techniques
in December 2002 to use on a Saudi detainee, Mohamed al-Kahtani, who was
believed to be the planned 20th hijacker in the Sept. 11 terror plot.

Mr. Rumsfeld suspended the harsher techniques, including serving the detainee
cold, prepackaged food instead of hot rations and shaving off his facial hair,
on Jan. 12, pending the outcome of the working group's review. Gen. James T.
Hill, head of the military's Southern Command, which oversees Guantanamo, told
reporters last Friday that the working group ''wanted to do what is humane and
what is legal and consistent not only with'' the Geneva Conventions, but also
''what is right for our soldiers.''

Mr. Di Rita said that the Pentagon officials were focused primarily on the
interrogation techniques, and that the legal rationale included in the March
memo was mostly prepared by the Justice Department and White House counsel's
office.

The memo showed that not only lawyers from the Defense and Justice departments
and the White House approved of the policy but also that David S. Addington, the
counsel to Vice President Dick Cheney, also was involved in the deliberations.
The State Department lawyer, William H. Taft IV, dissented, warning that such a
position would weaken the protections of the Geneva Conventions for American
troops.

The March 6 document about torture provides tightly constructed definitions of
torture. For example, if an interrogator ''knows that severe pain will result
from his actions, if causing such harm is not his objective, he lacks the
requisite specific intent even though the defendant did not act in good faith,''
the report said. ''Instead, a defendant is guilty of torture only if he acts
with the express purpose of inflicting severe pain or suffering on a person
within his control.''

The adjective ''severe,'' the report said, ''makes plain that the infliction of
pain or suffering per se, whether it is physical or mental, is insufficient to
amount to torture. Instead, the text provides that pain or suffering must be
'severe.' '' The report also advised that if an interrogator ''has a good faith
belief his actions will not result in prolonged mental harm, he lacks the mental
state necessary for his actions to constitute torture.''

The report also said that interrogators could justify breaching laws or treaties
by invoking the doctrine of necessity. An interrogator using techniques that
cause harm might be immune from liability if he ''believed at the moment that
his act is necessary and designed to avoid greater harm.''

Scott Horton, the former head of the human rights committee of the Association
of the Bar of the City of New York, said Monday that he believed that the March
memorandum on avoiding responsibility for torture was what caused a delegation
of military lawyers to visit him and complain privately about the
administration's confidential legal arguments. That visit, he said, resulted in
the association undertaking a study and issuing of a report criticizing the
administration. He added that the lawyers who drafted the torture memo in March
could face professional sanctions.

Jamie Fellner, the director of United States programs for Human Rights Watch,
said Monday, ''We believe that this memo shows that at the highest levels of the
Pentagon there was an interest in using torture as well as a desire to evade the
criminal consequences of doing so.''

The March memorandum also contains a curious section in which the lawyers argued
that any torture committed at Guantanamo would not be a violation of the
anti-torture statute because the base was under American legal jurisdiction and
the statute concerns only torture committed overseas. That view is in direct
conflict with the position the administration has taken in the Supreme Court,
where it has argued that prisoners at Guantanamo Bay are not entitled to
constitutional protections because the base is outside American jurisdiction.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW OF WAR
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); PRISONS (77%); APPROVALS (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); NAVIES (72%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (72%); CORRECTIONS (70%); TERRORISM (67%); HIJACKING (67%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (50%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Geneva Conventions; Law and Legislation  ; Prisoners of War; Torture;
World Trade Center (NYC); Pentagon Building; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking;
Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Security and Warning Systems; Law
and Legislation  ; Treaties

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (53%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department; State Department

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Neil A Lewis; Eric Schmitt; George W (Pres) Bush;
Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; David S Addington; Mary
Walker; William J Haynes

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); IRAQ (93%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Iraq; United States; Iraq; Afghanistan  ; New York City; Washington
(DC); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             258 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Physician, Turn Thyself In

BYLINE: By M. Gregg Bloche.

M. Gregg Bloche teaches law and health policy at Georgetown and Johns Hopkins
Universities.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; After Abu Ghraib; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


According to press reports, military doctors and nurses who examined prisoners
at Abu Ghraib treated swollen genitals, prescribed painkillers, stitched wounds,
and recorded evidence of the abuses going on around them. Under international
law -- as well as the standards of common decency -- these medical professionals
had a duty to tell those in power what they saw.

Instead, too often, they returned the victims of torture to the custody of their
victimizers. Rather than putting a stop to torture, they tacitly abetted it, by
patching up victims and staying silent.

The duty of doctors in such circumstances is clear. They must provide needed
treatment, then do all they can to keep perpetrators from committing further
abuse. This includes keeping detailed records of injuries and their likely
causes, performing clinical tests to gather forensic evidence and reporting
abuses to those with the will and power to act.

During the 1980's and 1990's, American human rights investigators traveled to
many countries with oppressive governments, assembling evidence of medical
complicity in torture. A pattern emerged in rogue regimes that claimed pride in
their civility: doctors both contained and abetted torture -- by treating its
victims, returning them to perpetrators and then remaining silent.

I was one of these investigators. I vividly remember the Uruguayan military
intelligence chief who spoke to me with contempt about Argentine ''barbarians''
who made tens of thousands disappear. By contrast, he boasted, in Uruguay the
army kept doctors nearby to keep things from getting out of hand. Fewer than 200
Uruguayans died in detention while the army ruled.

Now the American military is essentially ruling Iraq -- and it is urgent that we
find out what our military doctors, nurses and medics know. They are likely to
have kept records. Already, a medical assessment unearthed by investigators has
given the lie to the Pentagon's claim that the former chief of Iraq's air force
chief lost consciousness and died after saying he didn't feel well; the medical
report said his death ensued from ''asphyxia due to smothering and chest
compression.''

Congress and others investigating abuse of detainees in Iraq, Guantanamo Bay and
elsewhere should quickly obtain all relevant medical records. They should ask
independent experts to review these records -- and to question military medical
personnel about what they saw and heard. Independent doctors should also examine
people who say they were abused, using state-of-the-art protocols for
documentation of torture and other ill-treatment. These protocols make it
possible to find patterns of abuse.

Had military doctors come forward immediately with such evidence, brutal
practices that have shamed us all could have been stopped at the outset. And had
the perpetrators feared exposure through medical findings, they might have been
dissuaded from their lawless course.

When guards and interrogators become torturers, doctors are first responders.
International law demands that they act as such. In Iraq, it appears, a ''don't
ask, don't tell'' ethic stood in the way. By staying silent for months, until an
inquest began, doctors and nurses abandoned their patients. But these doctors
and nurses probably saw enough to offer smoking-gun evidence of what went awry
at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere. It is time for us to ask and them to tell.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NURSES & NURSING (91%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); ARMIES
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); FORENSICS (73%); AIR FORCES (73%); MEDICAL RECORDS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%)
Torture; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Doctors; Nursing and
Nurses

PERSON: M Gregg Bloche

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); URUGUAY (93%); CUBA (70%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             259 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Charges an Australian With Fighting for Taliban

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT and KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: GUANTANAMO; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


The United States on Thursday charged an Australian citizen, now imprisoned at
the American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, with fighting for the Taliban
in Afghanistan. He is expected to go before a military tribunal sometime in
August.

The prisoner, David Hicks, was formally accused of conspiracy to commit war
crimes, attempted murder by an unprivileged belligerent, and aiding the enemy,
according to a Pentagon statement. Mr. Hicks is the third detainee at Guantanamo
Bay to be charged.

Australia's prime minister, John Howard, discussed Mr. Hicks's case with
President Bush during a visit to Washington last week. On Thursday, a spokesman
for the Australian Embassy here, Matt Francis, said his government was
''satisfied the military commission process will be fair and transparent while
protecting the security interests of the U.S.''

Mr. Francis said the Australian government had been told that if Mr. Hicks was
convicted and sentenced to a prison term, he would be able to serve his time in
an Australian jail.

In a sign underscoring the Pentagon's concern that interrogation methods used at
Guantanamo may have used improperly at the Abu Ghraib prison and other detention
sites in Iraq, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has ordered the Navy
inspector general, Vice Adm. Albert T. Church III, to broaden an earlier review
of detention and interrogation procedures at the military prisons at Guantanamo
and at Charleston, S.C., to Army detention and interrogation operations in Iraq
and Afghanistan.

The May 25 directive, first reported Wednesday by The Chicago Tribune, would
lead to an unusual situation in which a naval officer would review Army
operations.

A senior Pentagon official said Mr. Rumsfeld was concerned about reports that
some harsher interrogation techniques had ''migrated'' to Iraq from Guantanamo
and Afghanistan as military intelligence soldiers who had served in those places
were transferred to occupation duty in the Middle Eastern nation.

Detainees and human rights groups have reported some similarities in
interrogation techniques used at Guantanamo, in Afghanistan, and in Iraq:
detainees stripped naked and paraded with women's underwear covering their
heads; interrogators blasting air conditioning at uncomfortable levels in
isolation rooms, and detainees being forced to squat or stand in uncomfortable
positions for long periods.

According to the plea bargain for John Walker Lindh, the American now serving 20
years for fighting alongside the Taliban, soldiers wrote profanities on him
while he was naked and blindfolded, then photographed themselves alongside him
in scenes reminiscent of the photos from Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad.

Pentagon officials acknowledged that Admiral Church's inquiry, which has sent
four-person teams to Cuba, Iraq and Afghanistan, will overlap with at least two
Army inquiries. But the officials said Mr. Rumsfeld wanted to plug any seams or
gaps in the existing reviews.

Mr. Rumsfeld is considering a small group of three- and four-star officers, from
which he would choose the replacements for the general who is leading the Army's
inquiry into the role of military intelligence soldiers at Abu Ghraib, and the
officer who would receive and act on the report, defense officials said
Thursday.

The current investigating officer, Maj. Gen. George R. Fay, recently told his
superior, Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the ground commander in Iraq, that he
could not complete his investigation without questioning General Sanchez. But
Army regulations generally prevent officers from interviewing their superiors.

So General Sanchez asked to be removed from his role in reviewing General Fay's
work, and asked that both he and General Fay be replaced by more senior
officers.

General Fay and his 29-person staff have been conducting their interviews in an
office building in Alexandria, Va. Some sessions have lasted less than an hour;
others, particularly those with soldiers who do not have lawyers, have stretched
over two days, according to soldiers who have been interviewed.

In another sign of the repercussions from the Abu Ghraib scandal, the Pentagon
issued new reporting procedures Thursday for situations involving detainees who
die in American custody. The new procedures require that the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the secretary of defense be notified when any detainee
dies in American custody. They also require the head of a detention center to
notify a military investigative agency, which in turn would notify military
medical examiners, who would then determine whether an autopsy should be
performed. Inquiries into the deaths of detainees at Abu Ghraib and other
prisons in Iraq and Afghanistan have revealed a confusing system of requirements
for autopsies and the signing of death certificates.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); NAVIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); SENTENCING (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); TERRORISM (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); PLEA
AGREEMENTS (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); MURDER (58%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (55%)
Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (55%) Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: JOHN HOWARD (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) David (Australian Taliban) Hicks;
John (Prime Min) Howard; George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Albert T
III (Vice Adm) Church; Eric Schmitt; Kate Zernike

CITY: CHARLESTON, SC, USA (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (55%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AUSTRALIA (97%); CUBA (95%); IRAQ (94%);
AFGHANISTAN (94%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Australia; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             260 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Russia: Arrests In 2 Bombings

BYLINE: By Sophia Kishkovsky (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 129 words


The deputy prosecutor general, Sergei Fridinsky, told the Interfax news agency
that two suspects had been arrested in the May 9 killing of the pro-Moscow
Chechen president, Akhmad Kadyrov. He would say only that the two are Chechen
residents aged 28 and 22. Mr. Kadyrov was killed when a bomb went in Grozny, the
Chechen capital. In a separate action, the police in the south Russian city of
Samara seized five Chechens suspected of involvement in a June 4 bomb blast that
killed 11 people at a local market, Russian news agencies reported. The police
have not determined whether the attack was a result of terrorism or gang
warfare. A Russian human rights group charged that ethnic Chechens in Samara
were being targeted in indiscriminate police raids.   Sophia Kishkovsky (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); ASSASSINATION (88%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (87%); POLICE FORCES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); WAR & CONFLICT
(85%); CIVIL WAR (85%); POLITICS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%) Bombs
and Explosives; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Assassinations and Attempted
Assassinations; Politics and Government; Terrorism

PERSON: Sophia Kishkovsky; Akhmad (Pres) Kadyrov; Sergei Frindinsky

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); EUROPE (91%)

REGION: Russia; Grozny (Chechnya); Chechnya (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serbs Admit Responsibility for the Massacre of 7,000

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, June 11


Nearly nine years after the event, Bosnia's Serbian leadership has admitted
responsibility for the massacre of at least 7,000 Muslim men and boys in the
town of Srebrenica.

A 42-page report, commissioned by Bosnia's Serb Republic and made public Friday,
admits for the first time that police and army units under the government's
control ''participated'' in the massacre, which took place in July 1995.

The killings, viewed as the worst atrocity committed in Europe since World War
II, were part of a final push by Bosnia's Serb leadership to create an
''ethnically pure'' Serbian state. The massacre provoked international revulsion
and ultimately helped prompt United States and European leaders to intervene and
bring an end to the three-year-long conflict.

Until recently, Bosnia's Serbian leadership has refused to acknowledge the
extent of the killings. In 2002, another inquiry by the same government sought
to minimize the number of people killed.

The latest report, commissioned in January under strong international pressure,
concludes that from July 10 to July 19, 1995, ''several thousand'' Bosnian
Muslims ''were liquidated in a manner which represents a heavy violation of
international human rights.'' It also states that ''the executioner undertook
all measures to hide the crime by removing bodies.''

The report includes the locations of 32 mass graves, 28 of which were
''secondary,'' containing bodies that had been removed from other sites in order
to hide them from international investigators.

International officials in the province say 11 of the sites have never been
disclosed before.

In one of the clearest statements of contrition by Serbian officials since the
end of the war, the report's conclusion states that the fact should be faced
''that some members of the Serb people have committed a crime in Srebrenica in
July 1995.'' This in turn, it said, might help to bring perpetrators of other
war crimes in Bosnia to justice.

The findings were welcomed by the country's most senior international official,
Bosnia's high representative, Lord Ashdown, as an indication that the Bosnian
Serb leadership was moderating its stance on war crimes.

''Provided that this continues through the remaining stages of the report, it
may be possible to say that a dynamic of obstructionism on war crimes issues is
being replaced by a dynamic of greater cooperation,'' Lord Ashdown said in a
statement issued by his office.

Evidence given to the commission by Serbian Republic police officers and
officials showed that the massacre was the final part of a three-stage plan
titled Operation Krivaja. This included the initial attack on Srebrenica, then a
United Nations safe haven protected by lightly armed Dutch peacekeepers,
followed by the separation of women and children from men and boys, and their
subsequent execution.

The statement by Lord Ashdown's office noted that the commission ''alludes to
orders'' for the police in neighboring Serbia to take part in the operation, as
well as units from the rebel Serbian forces within Croatia. This evidence
contradicts claims by the Serbian leaders in Belgrade that their forces did not
support Bosnia's breakaway Serb Republic.

In April, the president of the Bosnian Serb Republic, Dragan Caric, indicated
that his government would begin to redress its hard-line stance on crimes
committed by Serbs during the war.

''After years of prevarication, we will have to finally face up to ourselves and
to the dark side of our past,'' he said. ''We must have courage to do that.''

The Bosnian Serb government remains the only authority within the former
Yugoslavia not to have handed over war crimes suspects to the United Nations
international criminal tribunal at The Hague.

The court's most wanted suspect, the former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan
Karadjic, is believed by international prosecutors to be hiding in the republic,
protected by members of the Serbian security forces.

Cooperation with the court is seen as a prerequisite for Bosnia's integration
into institutions like the European Union and NATO's partnership for peace
program.

The report, Lord Ashdown said ''is a work in progress.''

''It is going in the right direction,'' he said, ''but much more needs to be
done to overcome nine years of near total inactivity'' on war crimes by the
Serbian Republic authorities and especially the Interior Ministry police.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina highlighting Srebrenica: At least 7,000
Muslim men and boys were slain in Srebrenica.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); ARMIES (72%); WORLD WAR II (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%) Islam; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); SERBIA (95%);
EUROPE (93%); SLOVENIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Europe; Bosnia and
Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             264 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Judge Ends Inquiry Into Qaeda Cell Tied to 9/11

BYLINE: By RENWICK McLEAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: MADRID, June 16


The Spanish judge investigating a cell of Al Qaeda in Spain and its ties to the
Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks in the United States announced Tuesday that he
had concluded his investigation.

Of 41 suspects indicted by the judge, Baltasar Garzon, 24 are expected to face
trial. Three are accused of taking part in the Sept. 11 attacks. The rest are
charged with forming part of a terrorist network.

The three Sept. 11 suspects include Imad Eddin Barakat Yarkas, the suspected
leader of Al Qaeda in Spain, who has been in Spanish custody since November
2001. The others are Ghasoub al Abrash Ghalyoun and Driss Chebli, according to
El Pais, Spain's largest daily.

The trials are expected to begin early next year.

Judge Garzon announced the conclusion of his investigation in a six-page legal
document that largely summarized the charges and findings he presented in a much
longer and more detailed report last September.

In the document released Tuesday, the judge said he was closing the
investigation even though he was still waiting for potentially important
information from several countries, including Saudi Arabia, Greece and Belgium.
He explained that, since the information was unlikely to affect the ''basic
nucleus'' of the case, he had decided to end the investigation now to avoid
coming too close to a legal deadline for either releasing or trying the
suspects.

Under Spanish law, suspects like the ones investigated by Judge Garzon may not
be kept in jail longer than four years without a trial, according to local media
reports. Judge Garzon said that, if further information came to his attention,
he would pass it on to the courts handling the trials.

Seventeen of the suspects indicted by the judge are not expected to be tried,
either because they are imprisoned in other countries or are fugitives.

Two such figures are Said Berraj and Amer Azizi. Both are suspected by Spanish
authorities of playing a role in the train bombings in Madrid on March 11.

Also indicted is Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born founder of the Qaeda terror
network. Judge Garzon has argued that Spain has jurisidiction over Mr. bin Laden
and other Qaeda members because the Sept. 11 attacks were planned on Spanish
soil.

The judge began his investigation of Al Qaeda's presence in Spain in 1996, long
before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. His first big arrests came in November 2001
when Mr. Yarkas, the suspected local Qaeda leader, was sent to prison along with
seven others.

Judge Garzon is known for his aggressive approach to investigations and for his
determination to follow legal trails even if they go beyond Spain's borders.

In October 1998, he persuaded British authorities to arrest Gen. Augusto
Pinochet, the former dictator of Chile, and asked for him to be extradited to
Spain for trial on charges of human rights abuses against Spanish citizens
living in Chile.

The general was eventually deemed unfit to stand trial and was never extradited.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon has indicted 41 suspects.
(Photo by Mark Gregory Peters/Cover)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); JUDGES (91%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
JAIL SENTENCING (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
PRISONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); CORRECTIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (70%)
Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) Baltasar (Judge) Garzon; Renwick Mclean; Ghasoub
Al-Abrash (Aka Abu Musab) Ghalyoun; Imad Eddin Barakat Yarkas; Driss Chebli;
Osama Bin Laden

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHILE (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (91%);
UNITED KINGDOM (78%); BELGIUM (55%)

REGION: Spain; Washington (DC); New York City; Spain

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             266 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Colombia: Rights Group Responds

BYLINE: By Juan Forero (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 89 words


A day after President Alvaro Uribe accused Amnesty International of being
''accomplices of terrorism'' for not having condemned the rebel massacre of 34
coca farmers in Norte de Santander province, the organization responded by
saying that the president's statements were unacceptable and that its
investigators have repeatedly ''condemned human rights violations by guerrilla
groups.'' Eric Olson, the American director for the group, said Amnesty had not
condemned the massacre because it was verifying the facts.   Juan Forero (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (85%);
INVESTIGATIONS (84%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); COLOMBIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             267 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Time for Action on Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 488 words


The United States and the U.N. secretary general have strongly condemned the
vicious ethnic cleansing campaign sponsored by Sudan's government, which
threatens hundreds of thousands of people with starvation before autumn. That's
not enough. The situation demands strong action.

The civil war of the last two decades between Sudan's Arab Muslim rulers and the
partly Christian south now appears to be ending, after a cost of some two
million lives. But just as a peace agreement was being worked out, a new war
erupted in the mainly Muslim region of Darfur, where non-Arab residents rebelled
against Arab domination.

To suppress this revolt, Khartoum's autocratic clique of generals and
politicians has backed a thuggish militia known as the Janjaweed, which has
terrorized non-Arab communities. Women have been raped and branded, villages
razed and crops destroyed. More than 15,000 people have been killed and about a
million more driven from their homes.

Bush administration lawyers are busily studying whether this meets the legal
definition of genocide, but that misses the point. Whatever you call it, the
rising death toll could soon evoke memories of the tragedy in Rwanda a decade
ago, when both the United States and the Security Council found excuses to stand
aside while 800,000 died. That shameful failure must not be repeated.

Washington and the United Nations are working closely with Sudan to support the
north-south peace agreement, for which the Bush administration deserves
considerable credit. But both Washington and the United Nations need to convince
Khartoum that they will not settle for a peace that permits terror and
starvation in Darfur.

Sudan's government should cut off support for the Janjaweed and send its army to
disarm these war criminals. It should allow international relief groups and
human rights monitors access to the camps where hundreds of thousands of people
now live under harsh and insecure conditions. And it needs to arrange emergency
food airlifts until Darfur's people can return to their lands and provide for
themselves. This will not happen without strong pressure on Khartoum, but in the
Security Council, Pakistan, Algeria and China have been more interested in
shielding Sudan's government from criticism than in protecting its people from
starvation.

Washington can act on its own and with more enlightened partners, like the
European Union. So far the administration has talked about imposing travel bans
on Janjaweed leaders and freezing their assets. That is meaningless because none
of those leaders are expected to try to travel to the United States, and none
have assets anywhere Washington can seize them. It would be a more useful start
to impose these and other penalties on Sudanese government officials until they
move against the Janjaweed. Hundreds of thousands of lives may depend on quick,
firm action.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT
(91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); STARVATION (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); LAWYERS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (72%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (72%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); EUROPEAN UNION (50%) Editorials; United States
International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) United
Nations

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SUDAN (98%); CHINA (79%); RWANDA (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (51%)

REGION: Sudan; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             268 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld Admits He Told Jailers to Keep Detainee in Iraq Out of Red Cross View

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER and ANDREA ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: PRISONERS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


Senior Pentagon officials acknowledged Thursday that a suspected Iraqi terrorist
who was held in a military jail -- but kept off prison rosters -- should have
been registered more quickly with the International Committee of the Red Cross.

But the officials said the fact that the secret detention of the captive, who
was jailed near the Baghdad airport without records, stretched for seven months
was probably attributable to a bureaucratic breakdown.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Thursday at a Pentagon news briefing
that he ordered the detainee held without a registration number at the written
request of George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence.

At the same briefing, Daniel J. Dell'Orto, the Pentagon's principal deputy
general counsel, said the initial decision to hold the detainee without
registering him was permissible, at least temporarily, for security reasons.

But he added: ''We should have registered him much sooner than we did. It didn't
have to be at the very instant we brought him into our custody. And that's
something that we'll just have to examine as to whether there was a breakdown in
the quickness with which we registered him.''

Pentagon officials declined to discuss Mr. Tenet's reason for wanting the
detainee, believed to be a high-ranking officer of Ansar al-Islam, a terrorist
organization, held off the prison rolls. An agency spokesman said the C.I.A.
would have no comment on Mr. Tenet's reasoning.

Mr. Rumsfeld said the detainee, who is still in military detention in Iraq, has
been treated humanely. Officials said he was now being registered with the Red
Cross.

A Human Rights Watch report last week identified 13 ''ghost detainees'' taken
into United States custody since Sept. 11, 2001. The author of the report, Reed
Brody, said the 13 were either being held in undisclosed detention facilities,
or the United States government had not acknowledged holding them.

The detainees are all associated with Al Qaeda and include Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed and Ramzi bin al-Shibh, whose interrogations were discussed at the
Sept. 11 commission hearings this week.

Mr. Brody's staff identified the 13 detainees by tracking their arrests, largely
from news reports or interviews with their relatives, he said. They were
arrested in Pakistan, Indonesia, Thailand, Morocco and other countries.

''What's clear in these cases is that they're being held in situations that are
equal to or worse than Triple X,'' said Mr. Brody, referring to the Ansar
detainee in Iraq. ''They are being held outside anybody's scrutiny. We have no
idea in most cases whether these people are dead or alive.''

Also on Thursday, the Senate Judiciary Committee rejected a proposal by two
Democratic senators, Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont and Dianne Feinstein of
California, to subpoena Justice Department documents on the administration's
policies regarding the treatment of prisoners. The proposal, which was rejected
in a 10-9 vote, identified 23 memos, letters or reports from Sept. 25, 2001,
through March of this year on topics that included the treatment of prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and rules for interrogation.

According to the proposal, the documents include a memo from Mr. Rumsfeld to
Gen. James T. Hill, the senior officer of the Southern Command, dated April 2003
and titled, ''Coercive interrogation techniques that can be used with approval
of the Defense Secretary.'' Another memo dated Jan. 4, 2004, written by the top
legal adviser to Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior American commander in
Iraq, and sent to military intelligence and police personnel at the Abu Ghraib
prison, is titled, ''New plan to restrict Red Cross access to Abu Ghraib.''

Mr. Leahy and several other senators asked Attorney General John Ashcroft for
some of the documents at a June 8 hearing, but Mr. Ashcroft said he would not
hand them over, an aide to Mr. Leahy said.

''A formal request would have to come by way of subpoena under the rules of the
Senate,'' said Mark Corallo, a Department of Justice spokesman. ''You would
think that senators would know their own Senate rules.''

Before the vote was taken, the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, Orrin G.
Hatch, told committee members that he had read several of the memos and advised
them against voting for the proposal.

''We should not reveal our interrogation techniques to our enemies,'' said
Senator Hatch, Republican of Utah. ''There must be some reasonable limits on
what can and should be disclosed by the executive branch to Congress and the
public about the war against terrorism.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, at a briefing yesterday, said the
C.I.A. asked him to keep a detainee secret. (Photo by European Pressphoto
Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%);
ARRESTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); SUBPOENAS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); RELIGION (70%); WRITERS (70%); LAWYERS (69%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (84%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (82%);
PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Red Cross; Central Intelligence Agency; Ansar Al-Islam;
Justice Department; Senate Judiciary Committee

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (57%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (57%) Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld;
George J (Dir) Tenet; Thom Shanker; Andrea Elliott

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDONESIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%);
MOROCCO (72%); THAILAND (71%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             272 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 23, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Resolution Is Reworded To Keep Immunity for Troops

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: UNITED NATIONS;
Pg. 11

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 22


The United States circulated a reworded resolution among Security Council
members on Tuesday evening to try to overcome broad opposition to its effort to
keep its troops immune from any prosecution by the International Criminal Court.

The measure, introduced last month and then withdrawn, would extend such
protection to American soldiers participating in United Nations-approved
peacekeeping forces. The current expiration for such immunity is June 30.

That same day, next Wednesday, Iraq regains sovereignty and the mostly American
force there becomes a United Nations-mandated one. The United States is pressing
hard for a vote beforehand.

This is the third year in which the United States has sought the exemption, and
though there were three abstentions last year and several more expected this
year, American diplomats in May said they felt confident they could obtain
support for a ''technical rollover'' of the measure.

The Bush administration says the protection stops people from using the court to
bring politically motivated war crimes prosecutions against Americans abroad.

Last week, Secretary General Kofi Annan called on the Security Council to turn
back the American move, saying it was ''of dubious judicial value'' and
particularly objectionable in the aftermath of the prisoner abuse cases in Iraq.

Mr. Annan said that passing the measure would discredit the council, the United
Nations and the ''primacy of the rule of law,'' and he appealed to the 15
members to maintain the common purpose they had shown earlier this month in
voting unanimously on a resolution affirming the arrangements for transferring
power in Iraq.

That appeal caused several nations to rethink their backing of the original
resolution and of their reluctance to be seen as defying the United States.

The version that American diplomats circulated on Tuesday dropped language in
the original proposal that expressed the intention to renew the one-year
exemption each July 1 for further 12-month periods ''for as long as may be
necessary.''

Mr. Annan had protested that the clause would perpetuate United Nations approval
of what was meant to be a temporary emergency departure from international law.

The new language pledges that this request for a one-year exemption is the last.

James B. Cunningham, the American deputy ambassador, said the ambassadors would
consult with their governments overnight and that the United States would wait
to hear how the compromise was received before deciding whether to put it to a
vote.

Richard Dicker, director for international justice at Human Rights Watch and an
opponent of immunity for American troops, expressed doubt that the compromise
would change enough minds. ''I wonder how one reconciles support for even one
year's exemption with the very strong words of the secretary general,'' Mr.
Dicker said.

But Abdallah Baali, the Algerian ambassador, said he thought otherwise. ''A
number of countries have been looking for a gesture from the Americans,'' Mr.
Baali said, ''and this could be that gesture.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); APPROVALS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); IMMUNITY (78%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (77%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Immunity From Prosecution; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             276 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Prisoners, Only Certainty Is Right to a Court Hearing

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK; Deborah Sontag contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE SUPREME COURT: WHAT'S AHEAD; Pg.
14

LENGTH: 1036 words


In a matter of days, lawyers for prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay and in a naval
brig in Charleston, S.C., will begin to test the limits of the victories they
won in the Supreme Court on Monday.

All of the prisoners now have the right to tell their stories to a court. But
how and where that will happen is not entirely clear, and the Supreme Court gave
the lower courts only limited and conflicting guidance.

In the cases of the two American citizens held as unlawful enemy combatants, the
Supreme Court struggled to describe what an appropriate proceeding would look
like. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor suggested in the case of Yaser Hamdi, who was
captured in Afghanistan, that military tribunals might be appropriate forums,
that they might consider hearsay evidence typically barred from criminal cases
and that the ordinary burden of proof might be shifted from the government to
the prisoner.

But that view attracted only three other votes.

For the more than 600 prisoners at Guantanamo, the court did little more than
order the government to respond to the 14 petitions before it.

''Whether and what further proceedings may become necessary after the
respondents make their response,'' Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for the
majority, ''are matters we need not address now.''

Even as the short-term guidance in the cases was sketchy, their long-term
implications may turn out to be enormous. Lurking in the 10 separate opinions in
the three cases were some broad propositions about the temporal and geographic
limits of the fight against terrorism.

Some justices suggested that detentions may not exceed the duration of
traditional combat operations, seeming to reject the notion that people may be
held for as long as efforts to combat terrorism persist. Others said that the
extraction of information from prisoners was not by itself enough justification
to hold prisoners for long periods.

And several justices seemed to agree that the court had extended the right to
file suits challenging the legality of detentions not only to Guantanamo Bay but
to anywhere in the world that the United States holds people of any nationality
captive away from the battlefield.

Lawyers for the Center for Constitutional Rights, which represents the 14
Guantanamo prisoners in the Supreme Court case and scores of others detained
there, said they would soon try to meet with their clients and file further
petitions, perhaps in the form of a class action. The center of legal activity
in the case will almost certainly continue to be the Federal District Court in
Washington, where the original petitions were filed.

This flood of litigation, perhaps accompanied by a series of evidentiary
hearings attended by the individual detainees, alarmed some of the justices.

''Each detainee undoubtedly has complaints -- real or contrived,'' Justice
Antonin Scalia wrote in his dissent in the Guantanamo case, joined by Chief
Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas. ''The court's
unheralded expansion of federal-court jurisdiction is not even mitigated by a
comforting assurance that the legion of ensuing claims will be easily resolved
on the merits.''

The second man called an unlawful combatant, Jose Padilla, whose case is
generally thought stronger than Mr. Hamdi's, was instructed to try again, but in
a different federal district court.

''The court says it wants a do-over,'' said Jonathan Freiman, one of his
lawyers, ''so we'll refile in South Carolina and do it over.''

Though Mr. Padilla was the only prisoner to lose his case in the Supreme Court,
the loss was only a nominal one, Mr. Freiman said.

''The court made it clear,'' he said, ''that at a bare minimum an American
citizen in military prison has the right to a lawyer and a day in court. It's
quite possible that the court will find that an American citizen picked up in a
civilian setting cannot be put in prison at all without criminal charges being
brought against him.''

The decision in the Hamdi case suggests that Mr. Padilla may not qualify as an
unlawful combatant at all. For purposes of the Hamdi case, at least, the
four-justice plurality considered only people ''part of or supporting forces
hostile to the United States or coalition partners'' who ''engaged in an armed
conflict against the United States'' as potentially subject to detention as
unlawful combatants.

Mr. Padilla, who was captured at an airport in Chicago and who has been accused
of contemplating various terrorist acts, may not fit that definition.

In the Hamdi case, Justice O'Connor gave the first inkling of the Supreme
Court's thinking about the temporal limit of what the administration calls the
war on terror. Because that war could last, she said, for generations or longer,
''Hamdi's detention could last for the rest of his life.''

While she did not reject that possibility outright, she appeared to rely heavily
on the fact that the war in Afghanistan is continuing, suggesting that the legal
landscape for people like Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla would be radically different
once traditional combat there ends.

That is so, she wrote, because the purpose of detaining unlawful combatants is
to prevent them from returning to the field of battle to take up arms once
again.

The most lasting implication in the decisions may be the apparent extension of
the right to habeas corpus to noncitizens held abroad.

''From this point forward,'' Justice Scalia wrote in the Guantanamo decision,
referring to the more than 600 prisoners there, ''federal courts will entertain
petitions from these prisoners, and others like them around the world,
challenging actions and events far away, and forcing the courts to oversee one
aspect of the executive's conduct of a foreign war.''

Though the Supreme Court considered no alternative to suits in the federal
courts to consider the claims of the Guantanamo detainees, Justice O'Connor
wrote that ''an appropriately authorized and properly constituted military
tribunal'' might hear Mr. Hamdi's challenge. It appears that no such tribunals
are currently available.

Military commissions were created by executive order in 2001 to try unlawful
enemy combatants, but they are not authorized to try American citizens.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Detainees in Guantanamo Bay. The Supreme Court gave limited and
conflicting guidance on their cases. (Photo by Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (93%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
EVIDENCE (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LITIGATION (89%); PETITIONS
(89%); TERRORISM (86%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); NAVIES (78%); CLASS ACTIONS (77%); HEARSAY
(77%); BURDENS OF PROOF (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (64%) Terrorism; Decisions and
Verdicts; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Suits and Litigation; Freedom and
Human Rights; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: ANTONIN SCALIA (57%); JOHN PAUL STEVENS (57%) Adam Liptak; Yaser Esam
Hamdi; Jose (Abdullah Al-Muhajir) Padilla

CITY: CHARLESTON, SC, USA (91%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Charleston (Sc)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             277 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Ruling on Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 35 words


The justices kept federal courts open to lawsuits by foreigners who say they
were victims of serious human rights violations anywhere in the world. Page A21.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             278 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Everything Explainer

BYLINE:  By Samantha Power; Samantha Power is the author of " 'A Problem From
Hell': America and the Age of Genocide," winner of the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for
general nonfiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1446 words


HEGEMONY OR SURVIVAL
America's Quest for Global Dominance.
By Noam Chomsky.
278 pp. New York:
Metropolitan Books/
Henry Holt & Company. $22.

SINCE Sept. 11, 2001, Americans have been heard to exclaim -- with varying
degrees of shame, bewilderment and indignation -- Why do they hate us?" The
response tends to fall between two extremes. Bush administration officials say,
in essence, they hate us for who we are. As President Bush has put it, "They
hate progress, and freedom, and choice, and culture, and music, and laughter,
and women, and Christians, and Jews and all Muslims who reject their distorted
doctrines." At the opposite end stands the M.I.T. professor Noam Chomsky. "Why
do they hate us?" Chomsky asks in "Hegemony or Survival: America's Quest for
Global Dominance." "Because of you and your associates, Mr. Bush, and what you
have done."

Revered and reviled, Noam Chomsky is a global phenomenon. Indeed, if book sales
are any standard to go by, he may be the most widely read American voice on
foreign policy on the planet today. With the United States increasingly suspect
around the world -- a recent Gallup poll found that 55 percent of citizens in
Britain thought the United States "posed a threat to peace," while a June BBC
survey found that 60 percent of Indonesians, 71 percent of Jordanians and even
25 percent of Canadians viewed the United States as a greater threat than Al
Qaeda -- the appetite for Chomsky's polemics is only increasing. It is but one
testament to America's diminished standing that his most recent book,

"9-11," a slight collection of interviews (largely conducted via e-mail), was
published in 26 countries and translated into 23 languages, finding its way onto
best-seller lists in the United States, Canada, Germany, India, Italy, Japan and
New Zealand. And at home, as mainstream dissent dissipated in the wake of 9/11,
a new generation of disgruntled critics has turned to Chomsky for guidance.

"Hegemony or Survival" is a raging and often meandering assault on United States
foreign policy and the elites who shape it. Drawing upon case after historical
case of violent meddling (Iran, Cuba, Vietnam, Nicaragua, Kosovo, etc.), Chomsky
argues that the Bush administration's war on terrorism builds upon a long
tradition of foreign interventions carried out in the name of "liberation" or
"counterterror," of special interests run amok and of disdain for international
institutions that dare to challenge American hegemony. "It is only natural," he
writes, "that state policy should seek to construct a world system open to U.S.
economic penetration and political control, tolerating no rivals or threats."

Chomsky finds the Bush administration new in only two ways: the crassness of its
motives is far more transparent, and it is now playing for far higher stakes.
"Over the years, tactics have been refined and modified," Chomsky writes,
"progressively ratcheting up the means of violence and driving our endangered
species closer to the edge of catastrophe." Unless American statesmen stop
ranking hegemony above survival, he says, our 100,000-year-old experiment in
human life may well be doomed.

For Chomsky, the world is divided into oppressor and oppressed. America, the
prime oppressor, can do no right, while the sins of those categorized as
oppressed receive scant mention. Because he deems American foreign policy
inherently violent and expansionist, he is unconcerned with the motives behind
particular policies, or the ethics of particular individuals in government. And
since he considers the United States the leading terrorist state, little
distinguishes American air strikes in Serbia undertaken at night with
high-precision weaponry from World Trade Center attacks timed to maximize the
number of office workers who have just sat down with their morning coffee.

It is inconceivable, in Chomsky's view, that American power could be harnessed
for good. Thus, the billions of dollars in foreign aid earmarked each year for
disaster relief, schools, famine prevention, AIDS treatment, etc. -- and the
interventions in Kosovo and East Timor -- have to be explained away. The Kosovo
and Timor operations' prime achievement, he writes, was to establish the norm of
resort to force without Security Council authorization. On this both the
Kosovars and the Timorese, whose welfare Chomsky has heroically championed over
the years, would strongly disagree.

"Survival or Hegemony" is not easy to read. Chomsky's glib and caustic tone is
distracting. He relies heavily upon quotations, but rarely identifies the
speaker or writer. The endnotes supply more frustration. Bill Clinton's
humanitarian rationale for the Kosovo war was ridiculed "by leading military and
political analysts" in Israel, we are told, but the citation leads only to an
earlier book by Chomsky himself. When he agrees with a claim, Chomsky introduces
it with the word "uncontroversially" or credits it to "distinguished
authorities." Those who don't share his viewpoint don't simply disagree; they
are the "prevailing intellectual culture" or the "educated classes." This is a
thinker far too accustomed to preaching to an uncritical choir.

Often he meets official falsehoods with exaggerations of his own. President
Clinton, he says, "was flying Al Qaeda and Hezbollah operatives to Bosnia to
support the U.S. side in the ongoing wars." And "radical Islamists" have taken
over in Kosovo, leading to a "Taliban phenomenon." These are far-fetched claims
that he doesn't adequately back up.

But for all that is wrong with "Hegemony or Survival," reading Chomsky today is
sobering and instructive for two reasons. First, his critiques have come to
influence and reflect mainstream opinion elsewhere in the world; and second, the
radicalism of the Bush administration has laid bare many of the structural
defects in American foreign policy, defects that Chomsky has long assailed.

Much blood was shed in the last century by United States forces or proxies in
the name of righteous ends. Because every state justifies its wars on the
grounds of self-defense or altruism, Chomsky is correct that any "profession of
noble intent is predictable, and therefore carries no information." He is also
right to object to the historical amnesia that American statesmen bring to their
dealings with other states. He seethes at the hypocrisy of Donald Rumsfeld, Paul
Wolfowitz and Colin Powell, who invoked Saddam Hussein's 1988 gassing attacks in
order to help justify the recent war, but who did not see fit to explain why the
Reagan administration (which they served as senior officials) doubled its aid to
Hussein's regime after learning of the gassings.

Chomsky also denounces the dependence of foreign policy elites on special
interests. With African agriculture ravaged by American farm subsidies, with
Israeli settlements unchallenged by Washington's elites and with campaign
contributors to both parties landing mammoth paybacks in overseas contracts, it
is certainly well past time to sound the alarm.

And it is essential to demand, as Chomsky does, that a country with the might of
the United States stop being so selective in applying its principles. We will
not allow our sovereignty to be infringed by international treaty commitments in
the areas of human rights or even arms control, but we demand that others
should. We rebuff the complaints of foreigners about the 650 people who remain
holed up in Guantanamo kennels, denied access to lawyers and family members,
with not even their names released. Yet we expect others to take heed of our
protests about due process. We have "official enemies" -- those whose police
abuses, arms shipments and electoral thefts we eagerly expose (Zimbabwe, Burma,
North Korea, Iran). But the sins of our allies in the war on terror (Saudi
Arabia, Turkey, Israel, Pakistan, Russia, Uzbekistan) are met with "intentional
ignorance." Although he is typically thin on prescriptions, Chomsky offers "one
simple way to reduce the threat of terror: stop participating in it."

Chomsky is wrong to think that individuals within the American government are
not thinking seriously about the costs of alliances with repressive regimes; he
is also wrong to suggest that it would be easy to get the balance right between
liberty and security, or democracy and equality -- or to figure out what the
hell to do about Pakistan. But he is right to demand that officials in
Washington devote themselves more zealously to strengthening international
institutions, curbing arms flows and advancing human rights. "It is easy to
dismiss the world as 'irrelevant,' or consumed by 'paranoid anti-Americanism,' "
he writes, "but perhaps not wise."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Henrik Drescher)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); RELIGION (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); BOOK SALES (78%);
BESTSELLERS (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); TERRORISM (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); AL-QAEDA (75%); POLLS & SURVEYS (73%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (72%); FOREIGN POLICY (71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (70%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (64%); COUNTERTERRORISM (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: HENRY HOLT & CO PUBLISHING (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (92%); INDIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); NEW
ZEALAND (79%); INDONESIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); GERMANY (53%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesian Atrocities

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 133 words


To the Editor:

"Indonesia's Secret War" (editorial, Jan. 3) correctly criticizes the Bush
administration for failing to press Indonesia to end atrocities in Aceh for fear
of offending a partner in fighting terrorism.

The administration's policy is even worse than that.

When Acehnese villagers filed suit against ExxonMobil, accusing it of complicity
in the Indonesian military's atrocities in Aceh, the administration argued for
dismissal of the suit on the ground that it might discourage Jakarta's
cooperation in combating terrorism. That sends an awful message: as long as the
Indonesian government helps protect Americans from arbitrary violence, it is
free to impose arbitrary violence on its own people.

BRAD ADAMS
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch, Asia Division
New York, Jan. 3, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); PUBLIC POLICY (88%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(71%); LITIGATION (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: EXXON MOBIL CORP (57%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (57%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (57%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); INDONESIA (92%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             281 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Anti-Globalization Forum Adds Variety of Causes to Its Agenda

BYLINE:  By SARITHA RAI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 491 words

DATELINE: BOMBAY, Jan. 19


Anti-globalization protesters jostled with opponents of war, and those fighting
India's caste system performed street plays alongside groups opposing religious
and sex discrimination. At the six-day annual World Social Forum here in India's
financial capital, hundreds of groups raised their voices in protest, if not
always in unison.

The agenda of the gathering, held for the first time outside Brazil, appeared to
have shifted from its central focus on trade and the inequities of global
capitalism, splintering into a long list of regional causes.

"I came here and went 'Huh?' " said Ellen Lenox, an English teacher from
Brasilia. "The focus has changed from unfair global trade and the monopoly of
big business toward antiwar, antidiscrimination causes."

As in the last three years, this year's World Social Forum is timed to run
concurrently with the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, which is seen
by critics and most of those in attendance here as a gathering of rich
capitalists.

Amid the heat and dust of a vast derelict factory complex in suburban Goregaon
usually reserved for home decor or auto expositions, thousands of people
gathered from across India and abroad to make common cause, with the slogan
"Another world is possible."

Members of the organizing committee in Bombay, also known as Mumbai, said about
80,000 people from more than 100 countries were taking part.

Prominent among the speakers in the first three days of the forum were Jose
Bove, the French farmer who led the demolition of a half-built McDonald's
outlet; the Iranian human rights activist and Nobel laureate Shirin Ebadi; and
the Indian novelist Arundhati Roy.

Coca-Cola and Pepsi were barred from the refreshment stands in favor of water
and freshly squeezed sugar cane juice and lemonade. Microsoft Windows and
Internet Explorer were discarded in favor of Linux operating systems and Mozilla
browsers.

Continuing with the theme of the previous three global gatherings, all held in
Porto Alegre, Brazil, peace activists vehemently criticized President Bush's
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. But some new themes emerged.

Pratap Kumar complained that for Dalits, or untouchables, like him, who were on
the lowest rung of India's caste system, diatribes against globalization ring
hollow to people denied basic human rights.

"What does anti-liberalization mean when we don't have the basic freedom to
drink water at the village well or send our children to the same school as those
from the upper castes?" asked Mr. Kumar, from Vijayawada in the southeastern
state of Andhra Pradesh.

On Monday, halfway through the meeting, the sober proceedings were hijacked by
the news that a young South African delegate had accused a South African judge
of raping her in a hotel room here on Saturday night. Local television networks
reported that the judge, who was also attending the forum, had been arrested by
the local police after the woman entered a complaint.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GLOBALIZATION (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); SOFT DRINK INDUSTRY (88%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%);
AGRICULTURAL TRADE (76%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CHILDREN
(74%); RELIGION (73%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (73%); INTERIOR DECORATING (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); NOBEL PRIZES (68%); AWARDS & PRIZES (68%); INTERNET BROWSERS
(67%); COMPUTER OPERATING SYSTEMS (62%); JUDGES (60%); ARRESTS (60%); LOCAL
TELEVISION STATIONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: COCA-COLA CO (53%)

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (56%)

TICKER: KO (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED
SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (53%)

PERSON: ARUNDHATI ROY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (88%); BRASILIA, BRAZIL (72%)

STATE: MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (88%); SOUTH INDIA (79%); ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (79%);
GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (77%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (95%); BRAZIL (94%); SWITZERLAND (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             282 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2004 Wednesday
                                National Edition

U.N. Help for Crime in Guatemala

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 378 words


Guatemala's 36-year civil war ended in 1996, but some former soldiers and
paramilitary allies have turned to drug trafficking, the smuggling of
immigrants, kidnappings and theft. They also attack human rights advocates,
journalists and judges who attempt to bring them to account.

The world is just beginning to recognize the links between armed conflicts and
organized crime, a problem in places as different as Northern Ireland, Bosnia
and Cambodia. In Guatemala, the influence, resources and weapons held by former
combatants make them stronger than the state's justice system. So Guatemala
recently signed an agreement to set up a United Nations office that would
investigate and, if necessary, prosecute this organized crime.

The accord would set up a special prosecutor's office employing Guatemalan and
international police officers, investigators and prosecutors. They would have
the power to go anywhere in Guatemala, even showing up unannounced at a military
base.

The agreement is a leap for the U.N. The international war crimes tribunals
established for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda address crimes committed during
a defined period of the past. The Guatemalan office would pursue current cases,
using the national judicial system. Its goal would not only be to combat
organized crime, but also to train and support Guatemalans trying to fight it.

Some Guatemalans are uncomfortable with the extensive powers the agreement would
grant to outsiders. But Guatemala's sovereignty is not under attack, as the
government endorsed the plan and asked the U.N. for help. Its new president,
Oscar Berger, who took office on Wednesday, supports it.

Still, influential opposition comes from political allies of the former security
forces. They have considerable sway in the new Congress, which must approve the
plan.

Guatemala's new government must lobby Congress strenuously for passage, then
appoint a staff with the energy, skills and commitment required. If the special
prosecutor's office is set up, the challenge internationally will be to finance
it. The project deserves support as one that could not only diminish the
smuggling of drugs and people, but could also help control crime in a nation
suffering a war's effects long after the fighting is over.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SMUGGLING (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); ORGANIZED CRIME (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (78%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%);
LOBBYING (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (99%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             284 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 28, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

War-Crimes Panel to Take On Congo Case

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Jan. 27


The International Criminal Court hopes to begin its first investigation -- an
examination of war crimes accusations in northeast Congo -- by October, its
chief prosecutor said Tuesday.

The prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said continuing violence in the region made
it difficult to begin the investigation earlier because potential witnesses
could be killed.

"The idea is that we start in October because then we can be sure we have
stopped the violence and we can go there and talk to people," he said at an
international antigenocide conference in Sweden.

The court, which has no formal cases on its books yet, was set up in The Hague
to try suspects for genocide, war crimes and systematic human rights abuses.

Ethnic clashes between rival Hema and Lendu militias in the northeastern
province of Ituri have claimed more than 50,000 lives since 1999.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said that trials would probably begin next year and that the
court could only investigate crimes that took place after July 2002, when it
came into force.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); WITNESSES (73%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%); STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN (76%)

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); SWEDEN (79%); NETHERLANDS
(78%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             288 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 844 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

Bomb at Iraq Police Post Kills 54, Many Job Seekers
A car bomb exploded outside the police station in a town 30 miles south of
Baghdad, killing at least 54 people and wounding at least 60 others, police and
hospital officials said. Most of the casualties were Iraqis applying for jobs
with the police.   A1

France Votes to Ban Scarves
The National Assembly voted 494-to-36 to ban Muslim head scarves and other
religious symbols from public schools, a move that underscored the broad public
support for the French secular ideal but was certain to deepen resentment among
France's large Muslim population.   A3

Russian Candidate Reappears
A Russian presidential candidate, Ivan P. Rybkin, 57, reappeared at Sheremetyevo
Airport, outside Moscow, alive and well if confused about the fuss he had
caused. He disappeared under mysterious circumstances on Thursday evening.   A6

Young Detainee Returns Home
Mohammad Ismail Agha, 15, one of three young Afghans released 10 days ago from
imprisonment at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, has returned home, no worse for wear but
bitter at what he has been through.   A3

Haiti Moves to Curb Violence
Haiti said it had regained control over three of the towns convulsed by an armed
uprising, while the Bush administration suggested that it might support
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide stepping down.   A9

Romania Gains in AIDS War
Romania has finally declared itself the winner of a long war against AIDS. The
country is now being cited as a model of how governments, drug companies and
international agencies can bring AIDS under control. However, public health
experts fear a second wave will hit soon.   A1

NATIONAL   A16-26

Kerry Wins Big Victories In Virginia and Tennessee
Senator John Kerry won commanding victories in the Tennessee and Virginia
primaries, dealing a serious blow to his rivals for the Democratic presidential
nomination.   A1

Gen. Wesley K. Clark abandoned his race after third-place finishes.   A25

Bush Releases Records
The White House released 18 months of President Bush's National Guard payroll
records showing what officials asserted was proof that he had fully completed
his service in the Guard during the Vietnam War.   A1

Compromise in Gay Marriage
Massachusetts state lawmakers fashioned a proposed amendment to the state
constitution that would define marriage as a heterosexual institution but allow
same-sex couples to join in civil unions.   A1

Rights Panel Backs D.C. Voting
An international human rights commission has ruled that the United States is
violating international law by refusing to give residents of Washington a vote
in Congress.   A20

Protester Subpoenas Dropped
Federal prosecutors dropped subpoenas they had issued ordering antiwar
protesters to appear before a grand jury and ordering a university to turn over
information about them.   A18

'Smoking Guns' Not Found
The chairman of the commission on the Sept. 11 attacks said that there were ''no
smoking guns'' in classified Oval Office intelligence reports.   A22

EDUCATION   B8

Fulbright Applicants Reviewed
A compromise was reached that will allow 30 students to compete for Fulbright
scholarships even though their applications were delayed.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Phone Customers Bilked In a New Mafia Venture
New York organized crime figures bilked millions of unsuspecting customers out
of more than $200 million over five years by piggybacking bogus charges on their
telephone bills, federal authorities said.   A1

Outrage at Release of Records
New York City officials released Dr. Robert Atkins's confidential medical
report, revealing that he had a history of heart attack. The release outraged
Atkins followers and annoyed the mayor.   B1

Woman Dies Retrieving Phone
A woman, 19, whose cellphone dropped onto the tracks in a Queens subway station
was killed when she climbed down to retrieve it and was crushed by an oncoming
train.   B1

FASHION   B10-11

DINING   F1-12

ARTS   E1-12

SPORTS   D1-7

OBITUARIES   A23

SCIENCE/HEALTH

H.I.V. Outbreak in Colleges
A new H.I.V. test has led health workers in North Carolina to identify what they
and federal officials say is the first outbreak of the infection among college
students.   A18

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

OPEC Cuts Oil Production
OPEC announced cuts in production, aggressively displaying its desire to
maintain oil prices at their highest sustained level in two decades. Oil prices
jumped in response.   C1

Claim of Stewart Cover-Up
Martha Stewart's assistant testified that Ms. Stewart deleted part of a record
of a phone message from her stockbroker after a telephone conversation with her
lawyer.   C1

Bidders for AT&T Wireless
Cingular and Vodafone are the only companies expected to make bids for AT&T
Wireless when the company is put up for auction on Friday, according to people
close to the auction.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: The president's Guard service; an environmental deficit; Haiti
erupts; this is your proselytizer speaking.

Columns: Nicholas D. Kristof, William Safire.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); AIDS & HIV (90%); NEWS
BRIEFS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); POLICE FORCES
(90%); SUBPOENAS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); COHABITATION (84%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS
(84%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (79%); EMPLOYMENT (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); RELIGION (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); RELIGION IN
SCHOOLS (76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (74%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (74%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%);
PUBLIC SCHOOLS (70%); GAYS & LESBIANS (70%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (68%); PUBLIC
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (65%); VIETNAM WAR (65%); MARRIAGE (65%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (60%); GRAND JURY (60%); HOSPITALS (57%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (76%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); HAITI (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%);
FRANCE (91%); CUBA (87%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             292 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Democrats See the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 85 words



To the Editor:

David Brooks (column, Feb. 17) should acknowledge that President Jimmy Carter
was right in looking to poverty, oppression and the abuse of human rights as
root causes of the terrorism we face today.

Islamic fundamentalism is a response to America's cold war policy. The
fundamentalists can take advantage of the hatred aroused by America's past
support of such repressive regimes as the shah in Iran, the Saudis and Saddam
Hussein himself.

DONALD S. ROSANELLI
East Rutherford, N.J., Feb. 17, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); TERRORISM (87%); RELIGION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); COLD WAR
(87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (84%); FUNDAMENTALISM (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (72%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (91%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             293 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Try To Frighten Afghan Voters In Rural Areas

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 18


After a relatively dormant winter, Taliban insurgents are waging a violent
campaign in the countryside to frighten people from cooperating with the
American-backed government and from taking part in elections scheduled for the
summer.

In Zormat, a district in southeastern Afghanistan, the police recently detained
three men carrying Taliban leaflets warning people not to register for the vote,
a process being overseen by the United Nations that is months behind schedule.

''You should not take an election registration card,'' the leaflets read,
according to the local deputy police chief, Zazai Kamran. ''If anyone does, his
life will be in danger.'' The leaflets also call on people to fight against the
government.

The leaflets were discovered three weeks ago, and the three men were handed over
to the American forces based there. But the message continues to circulate.

Similar warnings have been going around the southern provinces of Kandahar and
Helmand, residents say. The campaign has been accompanied by a series of
bombings and suicide attacks in Kandahar and Kabul since November.

''People want to register for elections, but they are scared,'' said Rahmuddin,
security chief of the Kandahar office of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission. Like many Afghans, he uses one name.

The United Nations, which began getting voter roles together in December, has
registered only 1 million of an estimated 10.5 million eligible voters, half of
what it had planned by this time.

Registration of women is proving especially problematic. They are only 23
percent of those registered, a reflection of the insecurity in the country, but
also of a deeply traditional culture in which many women never leave the home.

Only one registration office has opened in southern Afghanistan, in Kandahar,
and it has registered barely 45,000 people. A second office, for women, opened
this week, but no other southern province has even started registrations.

President Hamid Karzai's mandate as leader of the transitional government ends
in June, and under an agreement sponsored by the United Nations, national
elections should be held to elect a new leader by then.

American and United Nations officials said they were trying to keep to that
timetable, to build on the success of the new Constitution adopted in January,
and to cement the fragile progress in the country.

The newly appointed United Nations special representative to Afghanistan, Jean
Arnault, said Wednesday that since the constitutional assembly, he had detected
a new momentum among the population to take part in the political process.
''Something has happened,'' he said. ''We now have a process of social
mobilization.''

But the pattern of violence, not only from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, but also
from warlords who maintain well-armed militias, is such that United Nations
officials acknowledge that the elections may miss their June target date.

A number of government and foreign officials voiced doubts that elections could
or should go ahead this year. Even if they did, large parts of the country might
be excluded, which would jeopardize the legitimacy of the vote, they warned.

''I am concerned about the nonregistration of large numbers in the country, and
the people's feeling that these are not free elections,'' said Sarah Chayes,
coordinator of Afghans for Civil Society, a nonprofit organization in Kandahar.

The United Nations plans to open 4,200 registration offices around the country
in May for three weeks, and then to begin polling two weeks later. But without
greater progress in combating the Taliban, officials fear, offices in the south
and southeast could present potential targets.

American military commanders have been meeting with the Afghan government and
United Nations officials in Kabul in recent weeks on how to tackle the security
problems.

Efforts to build a new national army and police force are moving painfully
slowly. They are so far behind schedule that the United States military
announced a stopgap measure to train an Afghan guard force of 2,000 to 5,000 men
to bolster security.

The Afghan National Army this week sent three battalions to the provinces to
help with disarmament and to inhibit activities by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, a
spokesman, Maj. Muhammad Arif Anas, said.

In addition, diplomats in Kabul said this week that NATO countries would send
extra peacekeeping troops during the voter registration and polling. Some are
optimistic that the elections, even if flawed, will go according to plan.

''Even if some districts or provinces do not hold elections,'' a diplomat said,
''the overall result could be accepted as broadly representative, especially if
Mr. Karzai emerges as a clear winner.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TALIBAN (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS
& VOTING (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS
& ELECTIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
VIOLENT CRIME (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%); WOMEN (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%)
Terrorism; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Politics and Government; Elections;
Bombs and Explosives; Women; Registration of Voters

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) Taliban; United Nations

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%) Carlotta Gall

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kandahar (Afghanistan); Kabul (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             294 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 20, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico Seizes Official in 'Dirty War' Case of 70's

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 510 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 19


The former chief of Mexico's secret police, Miguel Nazar Haro, was arrested here
on charges of kidnapping a leftist leader 29 years ago, federal officials said
Thursday.

He is the first former government official arrested in connection with crimes
committed during Mexico's ''dirty war'' against the left, which lasted from the
1960's to the 1980's. Hundreds of suspected enemies of the government were
arrested, tortured and killed by state agents.

Mr. Nazar Haro, 79, was an officer in the Federal Security Directorate, which
served as an intelligence service and a secret police force. He led the
directorate from 1978 to 1982; it was disbanded in 1985.

He was an important liaison for the C.I.A. during the 1970's and early 1980's,
providing the United States with information on leftists throughout Mexico,
Central America and the Caribbean, American officials say.

The C.I.A. blocked his indictment by a federal grand jury in San Diego in 1982,
immediately after he left his post as chief of the secret police. He was
suspected of involvement in an auto-theft ring that stole hundreds of cars in
California and brought them to Mexico, according to the chief federal prosecutor
in San Diego at the time.

The prosecutor, William H. Kennedy, asserted then that C.I.A. officials had told
him that Mr. Nazar Haro was their most important source in Mexico and Central
America. The Federal Security Directorate gathered information used by the
Reagan administration to justify assertions of Soviet and Cuban subversion in
the region.

The C.I.A. argued successfully that the importance of the information gleaned
from Mexico's secret police overrode the interests of United States law
enforcement.

The arrest of Mr. Nazar Haro on Wednesday night on a Mexico City freeway was the
first concrete achievement by a special prosecutor appointed by President
Vicente Fox to investigate crimes committed during the war against leftists.

Mr. Nazar Haro's predecessor as chief of the secret police, Luis de la Barreda
Moreno, faces similar charges and remains a fugitive.

Mr. Nazar Haro is charged in the disappearance of Jesus Piedra Ibarra, a leftist
leader who was arrested in 1975, beaten, tortured, transported to a military
camp in Mexico City, and held in secret for years, according to Mexico's human
rights commission. He was last reported alive in 1984. His body has never been
found.

He led a small band of armed guerrillas called the 23rd of September League, a
tiny part of a much broader left-wing movement in Mexico. His mother, Rosario
Ibarra, is a prominent advocate for the arrest of government leaders of the era,
including Luis Echevarria, who was president from 1970 to 1976.

''A single arrest doesn't mean much,'' she said on Thursday. ''The orders came
directly from Luis Echeverria.'' Mr. Echeverria has been questioned by the
special prosecutor but refused to testify.

The Supreme Court ruled in November that former officials could be prosecuted in
disappearance cases, saying no statute of limitations could apply when no body
had been found.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TORTURE (89%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GRAND JURY (78%); MISSING
PERSONS (78%); VEHICLE THEFT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); US PRESIDENTS
(73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); APPOINTMENTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); LARCENY & THEFT (67%); POLITICS (62%) Kidnapping; Torture;
United States International Relations; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (58%) Miguel Nazar Haro; Jesus Piedra Ibarra; Tim
Weiner

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (93%); SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); CENTRAL
AMERICA (73%)

REGION: Mexico; Mexico

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             300 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 1, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ulster Attack Linked to the I.R.A. Provokes Anger in Ireland

BYLINE: By BRIAN LAVERY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: DUBLIN, Feb. 29


The Irish prime minister let slip last week that he had always assumed that Sinn
Fein's president was once a member of the Irish Republican Army. It may have
been a moment of pique, but the episode points to Dublin's growing exasperation
with paramilitary violence in the north.

Prime Minister Bertie Ahern made the comment about Gerry Adams, who for many
years has vehemently denied membership in the I.R.A.

Mr. Ahern was evidently provoked by the beating of a Belfast man for which the
Northern Ireland police blamed the I.R.A. Though the group says it is abiding by
a cease-fire, in Dublin the debating chamber in Parliament rang with
denunciations of the I.R.A., and Justice Minister Michael McDowell spoke of Sinn
Fein's ''vomit-making hypocrisy.''

Mr. Adams's role in the I.R.A.'s Belfast division in the 1970's is well
documented and widely accepted. Many leading Sinn Fein politicians are former
members of paramilitary groups; Mr. Adams's deputy, Martin McGuinness, has
acknowledged that he himself was once a guerrilla commander.

Still, Mr. Ahern's comment rattled Mr. Adams's usually steely composure.

''I'm flabbergasted that he should make such remarks,'' he said in a radio
interview with RTE, the Irish state broadcaster. ''It is beyond me. Was it a
mistake?''

Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A., was roundly criticized last week,
not only by Mr. Ahern, after the beating and attempted kidnapping of a dissident
republican, Bobby Tohill, in Belfast. The I.R.A., in a rare statement, said it
did not authorize the attack on Mr. Tohill, who needed 93 stitches after four
men beat him with metal bars in a Belfast pub. Such actions are often just as
common as attacks between Roman Catholics and Protestants, and would violate the
I.R.A.'s cease-fire declared seven years ago.

In a landmark speech last October, Mr. Adams said Sinn Fin had a ''total and
absolute commitment to exclusively democratic and peaceful means of resolving
differences.''

''We are opposed to any use or threat of force for any political purpose,'' he
said.

The cease-fires in Northern Ireland, whether of the republican paramilitaries
who want Ulster to join the Irish Republic or their loyalist rivals who want to
stay part of Britain, are notoriously flexible. But the attack on Mr. Tohill, on
Feb. 20, stands out, both because the police say he would have been killed had
they not rammed his attackers' getaway van with a patrol car, and because of its
potential efect on negotiations over Northern Ireland's fragile local
government.

In London, the British prime minister, Tony Blair, said, ''You cannot be talking
about human rights for people one day and beating the human rights out of them
the next day.''

The British and Irish governments have been meeting regularly, with Northern
Ireland's political parties, over the last month to review the 1998 treaty
intended to end the province's 30-year sectarian conflict and set up a local
legislature to share power between Protestants and Roman Catholics.

In such talks Mr. Ahern has a reputation as a conciliatory negotiator who shies
away from direct conflict. Yet his demands for an end to the ''horrific''
violence in Northern Ireland suggest he is losing his patience with the I.R.A.'s
slow pace in meeting requirements to disarm and disband.

Ulster's local government was suspended in 2002, leaving the province ruled
directly from London. The change followed allegations, never proved, that I.R.A.
spies operated in the British secretary of state's office. Republicans say the
incident was manufactured to damage them.

Similarly, Mr. Adams said police officers might have orchestrated the rescue of
Mr. Tohill to cast blame on the I.R.A.

David Trimble, leader of the Ulster Unionist party, threatened to pull out of
the faltering talks if Mr. Blair did not take some action against Sinn Fein. The
largest Protestant party, the Rev. Ian Paisley's hard-line Democratic Unionists,
has remained surprisingly quiet.

Like Mr. Ahern, other politicians in Dublin seemed more eager to criticize Sinn
Fein, which holds 5 of the 166 seats in the Parliament in Dublin and is expected
to make gains in municipal elections.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gerry Adams vehemently denies having belonged to the I.R.A.
(Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); POLITICS (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%);
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (75%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(70%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (65%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (64%);
RELIGION (62%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: SINN FEIN (94%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (91%) Irish Republican
Army; Sinn Fein

PERSON: BERTIE AHERN (79%); TONY BLAIR (58%) Gerry Adams; Brian Lavery; Bobby
Tohill

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); DUBLIN, IRELAND (94%); LONDON, ENGLAND
(76%)

COUNTRY: IRELAND (95%); NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%)

REGION: Northern Ireland; Ireland; Belfast (Northern Ireland); Northern Ireland

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             303 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 554 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-18

Evolving Case Against Hussein
The Bush administration is sending a high-level team of prosecutors and
investigators to Iraq to take charge of assembling and organizing the evidence
to be used in a war crimes trial of Saddam Hussein.   1

Iraqi political leaders in Najaf shuttled between meetings with senior clerics
to find a way to break the deadlock over Iraq's interim constitution.   10

More than 10,000 Iraqi men and boys are in American custody, swept up in raids
by American forces. In some villages, entire swaths of farmland have been
cleared of males.   1

Uranium Remains Unchecked
American auditors say that little effort has been made to recover large
quantities of weapons-grade uranium that the United States has dispersed to 43
countries over the last several decades.   16

At Least 10 Palestinians Killed
Six Palestinians were killed when a group of Palestinian assailants tried an
elaborate attack on Israeli soldiers at the main crossing point between Israel
and the Gaza Strip. Hours later, Israeli forces swept into two camps in central
Gaza, killing at least four Palestinians.   4

Scientists Saved on Ice Floe
A dozen Russian researchers were rescued from the remains of their camp,
drifting 400 miles from the North Pole, Russian officials said.   18

OBITUARIES   35

NATIONAL   19-25

Teenage Pregnancy Declines
The teenage pregnancy rate has fallen steadily for a decade. Changes in the
sexual behavior of boys, in particlar, are the most startling.   1

Bush Foreign Policy Questioned
Senator John Kerry cast doubts on President Bush's judgment -- from his handling
of Iraq, North Korea and the Mideast peace process to his decision to make
pre-emption a central tenet of American foreign policy. Mr. Kerry said he would
have sent an international force into Port-au-Prince to protect Haiti's widely
disliked but democratically elected leader, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.   1

Mr. Kerry had no trouble turning out a crowd of angry Texas Democrats on his
first campaign swing through Bush country.   24

Questions on 'Safe' Weapon
Increasing police use of the Taser, an alternative to a gun that fires a
stunning bolt of electricity, is saving lives around the country, the
authorities say. But human rights groups say the weapon can be used to torture.
1

Rich Senate Hopefuls
Nearly half of the 15 Republicans and Democrats who have lined up to run for an
open Illinois Senate seat are millionaires.   19

Ferry Capsizes in Baltimore
A water taxi with 25 people aboard capsized in the Inner Harbor in Baltimore
after a violent gust of wind struck the boat, leaving passengers frantically
clinging to the overturned pontoon in frigid waters. One person is dead and
three are missing.   23

NEW YORK/REGION   27-37

Gay Marriage Debate
New York politicians are facing the fact that as the same-sex marriage issue
becomes more immediate, party labels and previous positions are becoming less
relevant.   27

Reshaping Meals on Wheels
The confined elderly are having qualms about a pilot program in which, to cope
with the mushrooming elderly population, the city intends to reduce the number
of deliveries.   27

Veteran Rocker Is Arrested
David Crosby was arrested in a Times Square hotel after an employee found
marijuana, a loaded pistol and two knives in his bag, the police said.   31

Chess   31
Weather   22
Cong. Vote   31

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); FERRIES (88%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (84%); MEN (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); POLITICS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); TORTURE (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PEACE PROCESS (72%); MARINE PASSENGER TRANSPORT (72%);
ADOLESCENTS (70%); MARINE VESSELS (67%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (65%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (65%); MARRIAGE (60%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (60%); WEALTHY PEOPLE
(60%); ARMED FORCES (53%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); JOHN KERRY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (85%); PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (85%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
ISRAEL (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); HAITI (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             306 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Takes Steps to Tighten Mexican Border

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, March 15


Federal officials have become increasingly worried about a surge in violence and
instability along the Arizona-Mexico border and will begin what they describe as
a major air and ground initiative to help keep out illegal immigrants, drug
smugglers and possibly terrorists, officials said on Monday.

The $10 million plan, to be announced on Tuesday by the Department of Homeland
Security, will include the first use of unmanned aircraft for border patrol, the
addition of several hundred agents and the creation of seven tent complexes to
detain illegal border crossers.

Asa Hutchinson, an under secretary for domestic security, said in an interview
that a tightening of security in border areas in California, Texas and elsewhere
had led smugglers to turn in increasing numbers to Arizona -- often with violent
results.

''This is not a secure border,'' Mr. Hutchinson said. ''Arizona has become the
chokepoint. This is our current battleground.''

But some human rights and immigrants' advocates believe that broader economic
and political changes -- rather than a law enforcement crackdown -- are the
answer.

''Our border is in utter chaos here in Arizona,'' said the Rev. Robin Hoover,
head of a Tucson group called Humane Borders that provides relief for migrants,
''but a Berlin Wall is not the way to solve the problem.''

Moreover, the unmanned aircraft face technical and safety hurdles. A report in
January by the Congressional Research Service said that drones, as the aircraft
are commonly known, offer several attractive features for border patrol work and
can identify ''a potentially hostile target the size of a milk carton at an
altitude of 60,000 feet.'' But their use is also hindered by accident rates more
than 100 times that of manned aircraft, according to the report.

''I think the jury is still out'' on unmanned aircraft, Mr. Hutchinson
acknowledged, but he added that ''we're looking for new tools.''

Homeland security officials expect to begin using the remote-controlled aircraft
in June to supplement manned air and ground patrols. It will be the first time
the drones will be used for border patrol in the United States, other than on a
trial basis, officials said.

The officials would not give details about the drones, including their numbers
or how frequently they would patrol.

The unmanned aircraft will allow federal officials to spot crossers along parts
of the more than 300 miles of the often-desolate border in Arizona that are not
regularly patrolled, said David Aguilar, who is chief border patrol agent in
Tucson.

Federal officials also plan to expand their patrols with helicopters and manned
airplanes, create a new interagency network to coordinate the initiative, and
add 200 permanent border patrol agents and 60 temporary agents trained in search
and rescue operations. The increase will bring the number of border agents in
Tucson to more than 1,900.

Officials will also create seven air-conditioned tent complexes to house and
detain some immigrants until they can be sent home, rather than freeing them
before court appearances and risking having them flee, Mr. Hutchinson said.

Homeland Security officials said they expected to spend $10 million in the next
six months on the additional personnel and technology.

''This is going to make a tremendous difference,'' said Mr. Aguilar, who will
run the interagency effort. ''It will be a very different focus.''

The past few months have seen a spasm of violence and apprehensions along the
Arizona border, even as illegal border crossings in other parts of the country
have dropped.

Border Patrol agents in Arizona apprehended nearly 200,000 people from last
October to early March, a rise of 34 percent over the same period a year
earlier. And seizures of marijuana at the border were up 17 percent, Mr. Aguilar
said.

With the influx have come more immigrant deaths in the desert -- more than 200
last year by Mr. Hoover's count, many because of the heat. There have also been
execution-style shootings, tortures and kidnappings that law enforcement
officials blame on human smuggling rings. Four people died in a shootout between
immigrant smugglers on an Arizona interstate last November.

Mr. Hutchinson described the smugglers and other traffickers in immigrants and
drugs across the Arizona border as ''greedier, more ruthless and more violent''
than before. ''These are people who have no regard for anyone's safety,'' he
said.

He added that the potential problems went beyond drugs and illegal immigrants.
''Any time you have vulnerabilities at the border, you have to worry about
terrorists taking advantage of that too,'' he said.

But Mr. Hoover, whose group provides water stations in the Arizona desert for
immigrants, said resourceful traffickers would always find a way to get across
the border unless officials looked at the root causes of immigration problems.

''It's like putting rocks in a river -- the water just goes around it,'' he
said. ''You can show off a lot of new technology and more men and women in
uniform, but it's all just more of the same.''

                             --------------------


Death Penalty Sought for Driver

  HOUSTON, March 15 (AP) -- Federal prosecutors said Monday they would seek the
death penalty against the driver of a truck in which 19 illegal immigrants
suffocated last year.

Prosecutors say Tyrone Williams, 33, of Schenectady, N.Y., drove more than 70
illegal immigrants from Mexico, Central America and the Dominican Republic on
May 13 from the Rio Grande Valley toward Houston. Prosecutors say that when the
immigrants began succumbing to the heat in the trailer, Mr. Williams abandoned
it 100 miles southwest of Houston. Seventeen immigrants were found dead inside
the truck. Two others died later.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Don Watt of the Border Patrol on duty near Nogales, Ariz., in
January. Several hundred more agents will be added to secure the border. (Photo
by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (91%); TERRORISM
(90%); SMUGGLING (90%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (89%); UNMANNED MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (77%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (77%); INTERVIEWS (75%); SUBSTANCE
ABUSE (72%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (72%); HELICOPTERS (71%) Immigration and Refugees;
Drug Abuse and Traffic; Terrorism; Illegal Aliens; Freedom and Human Rights;
Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (83%); CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH
SERVICE (54%) Homeland Security Department

PERSON: Eric Lichtblau

CITY: TUCSON, AZ, USA (90%); NOGALES, AZ, USA (79%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (96%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); MEXICO (94%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: Mexico; Arizona

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             308 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1020 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Qaeda Leader Believed Surrounded in Pakistan
Pakistani military and intelligence officials believe they have surrounded Al
Qaeda's No. 2 leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, in a small cluster of villages near the
border with Afghanistan. There were reports for months that Dr. Zawahiri was in
the area, and ferocious resistance led the government to believe the militants
were defending Dr. Zawahiri.   A1

Saudis Denounce U.S. Criticism
Saudi Arabia's government said it was ''disappointed'' by Washington's criticism
of its detention of 13 intellectuals and called the matter an internal security
issue. The liberals -- who include professors, lawyers and writers -- had
planned to issue a statement criticizing the new National Human Rights
Association.   A12

More Hotels Attacked in Iraq
An explosion outside a hotel in Basra killed four Iraqis. Two additional Baghdad
hotels used frequently by Westerners were also attacked, causing officials to
believe that the assaults are aimed at deterring the American plans to recreate
Iraq as a sovereign state with democratic political institutions.   A11

Georgian Leader Lifts Blockade
President Mikhail Saakashvili of Georgia said he would lift a four-day-old
economic blockade against the renegade province of Adzharia because he had won
important concessions from the leader there, Aslan Abashidze.   A8

NATO Troops Head to Kosovo
NATO ordered reinforcements of an additional 1,000 troops to Kosovo as
peacekeepers struggled to stem a wave of violence between ethnic Albanians and
Serbs across the province, in southern Serbia.   A3

Spanish Party Initiates Defense
The ousted Popular Party in Spain, trying to prove it had not lied, declassified
some internal documents and offered a chronology of its actions following the
recent terror attacks. Investigators said privately that they had presented
strong evidence the day after the blasts that ETA could not have been involved.
A12

NATIONAL   A14-20

In Praising Troops, Bush Cites Withdrawal by Spain
President Bush told 20,000 American soldiers they had helped remove ''two of the
most violent regimes on Earth,'' then made a veiled warning to Spain for its
decision to pull its troops from Iraq.   A20

Fallout Analysis Revived
The federal government, in order to cope with the possibility that terrorists
might someday detonate a nuclear bomb on American soil, is reviving a scientific
art that was lost after the cold war: fallout analysis.   A1

Scalia Rejects Recusal
Justice Antonin Scalia argued forcefully that he would not remove himself from a
case before the Supreme Court involving his friend Vice President Dick Cheney.
A1

Medicare Estimates to Double
Trustees for Medicare and Social Security will report next week that the two
entitlement programs will eventually need more than twice as much money as
previously estimated, experts say.   A14

Senate Democrats, reacting to disclosures that the former Medicare
administrator, had prevented his chief actuary from sharing information with
Congress, called on the General Accounting Office to investigate.   A14

Warning to Be Issued on Tuna
Two federal agencies will recommend that pregnant women, nursing mothers and
young children eat no more than six ounces of albacore tuna each week, officials
said.   A16

State Seeks E.P.A. Crackdown
North Carolina has petitioned the Environmental Protection Agency to crack down
on pollution it says seeps across its borders from power plants in 13 other
states.   A16

EDUCATION

Student Loans Under Review
The House of Representatives is considering changes to a popular program that
allows college graduates to consolidate their educational loans at a fixed rate
over many years.   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Antiques Dealer Enters Guilty Plea to Tax Evasion
A well-known antiques dealer who had agreed to buy a condominium from Gov. John
G. Rowland pleaded guilty to one count of supplying false information about the
condominium on his tax return.   B1

New Twist in Murder Case
The court told Daniel Pelosi to go home when he showed up expecting to be
charged or indicted in the 2001 killing of the Manhattan financier R. Theodore
Ammon.   B5

11 Charged in Prescription Case
A crime ring that stole millions of dollars worth of prescription medications
and resold them on the black market was broken up this week with the arrests of
11 people, the authorities said.   B5

WEEKEND   E1-30; E31-40

Musical's Lead Roles Recast
The producers of the Tony Award-winning blockbuster, ''The Producers,''
announced that they would fill the lead roles of the rogue producer Max
Bialystock and his mousy accountant, Leopold Bloom, with Brad Oscar and Roger
Bart, respectively, on April 6.   E2

Comedy Show to Keep Its Star
Comedy Central completed a deal that will extend the contract of Jon Stewart,
star of ''The Daily Show,'' through 2008.   E3

ESCAPES   F1-14

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-10

OBITUARIES   C11

Milton Resnick
The volatile, acerbic, unfailingly blunt New York painter, known for dour,
near-monochrome canvases was 87.   C11

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

Microsoft Talks Collapse
European regulators announced that talks with Microsoft had collapsed, exposing
the company to an antitrust ruling that could limit its ability to add new
software features.   A1

Shell's Nigeria Ties Shown
The Royal Dutch/Shell Group has kept secret important details of its reduction
of oil and gas reserves, particularly in Nigeria, for fear of damaging its
business relationship with the government there and that country's desire to
produce more oil, internal company documents show.   A1

Trade Case Against China
The United States filed the first case against China at the World Trade
Organization, contending that Beijing imposes unfair taxes on imported
semiconductors.   C1

F.C.C. Rules on Indecency
The Federal Communications Commission issued a series of decisions involving
indecency over the airwaves, putting broadcasters on notice that it would
tolerate almost no further transgressions.   C5

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: One year after.

Columns: Bob Herbert, Paul Krugman.

Crossword   E40
TV Listings   E28
Public Lives   B2
Weather   C12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); MEDICARE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); BASQUE
HOMELAND & FREEDOM (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); COLD WAR (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); LIBERALISM (76%); LAWYERS (73%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); HOTELS & MOTELS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
SUPREME COURTS (69%); SOCIAL SECURITY (62%); ACTUARIAL SERVICES (60%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (56%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (82%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DICK CHENEY (58%); ANTONIN SCALIA (55%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); SPAIN (93%);
SERBIA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); KOSOVO (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); ALBANIA (79%); GEORGIA (75%)

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             312 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Vetoes U.N. Resolution Condemning Israel for Hamas Killing

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 25


The United States vetoed a Security Council resolution Thursday night condemning
Israel for killing the Hamas leader, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, because it did not
denounce killings of Israelis by Hamas.

The United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, told the Council that while
the United States was ''deeply troubled'' by the killing of Sheik Yassin and
believed Israel's action had escalated tensions in the region, it could not
support the resolution ''because it is silent about the terrorist atrocities
committed by Hamas, because it does not reflect the realities of the conflict in
the Middle East and because it will not further the goals of peace and security
in the region.''

The resolution was a version of a measure that had been under negotiation for
two days and sought to provide balance by condemning ''all terrorist attacks
against any civilians as well as all acts of violence and destruction.''
Algeria, which sponsored the motion, balked at demands that Hamas and Israeli
victims of terror be mentioned.

Three countries abstained -- Britain, Germany and Romania -- while 11 -- China,
France, Russia, Angola, Chile, Pakistan, Spain, Algeria, Benin, Brazil and the
Philippines, -- were in favor of the resolution.

The Algerian ambassador, Abdallah Baali, said that the Council vote ''is not
sending the right message to the world, which has unanimously condemned this
crime.'' Most of the 41 nations that addressed a Security Council debate on
Tuesday condemned Israel, and on Wednesday the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights in Geneva passed a resolution denouncing ''targeted
assassinations'' by Israel.

Mr. Baali said that he would have to meet with other Arab envoys to decide
whether they would move for a vote in the 191-member General Assembly, a path
they have followed in the past when such measures have failed to pass the
Security Council.

Unlike Security Council resolutions, those passed in the General Assembly are
nonbinding and largely symbolic. But they generally attract widespread support
when Israel is the target. In December, a resolution protesting the construction
of the barrier Israel is building in the West Bank, vetoed in the Security
Council, was approved in the General Assembly in a 90-to-8 vote, with 74
abstentions.

Dan Gillerman, the Israeli ambassador, and Nasser al-Kidwa, the Palestinian
observer to the United Nations, traded angry charges on Thursday. Defending
Israel's strike on Sheik Yassin, Mr. Gillerman directed a comment to Inocencio
F. Arias, the ambassador from Spain, where 190 people were killed in a terror
attack two weeks ago.

''If you knew before the bloody massacre of your citizens who was going to carry
out this horrendous act,'' he asked, ''would you have stood still and let this
happen?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (95%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); APPROVALS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%) Palestinians; United States International Relations;
Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL
(84%) United Nations; Hamas (Palestinian Group)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (73%) Warren Hoge; Ahmed (Sheik) Yassin

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); SPAIN (88%); CHINA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY
(79%); PAKISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             313 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

An African Tragedy

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 164 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof, by describing the Sudanese government's campaign of ethnic
cleansing of Sudan's blacks (''Ethnic Cleansing, Again,'' column, March 24),
shows a concern for this tragedy that is utterly absent in any of black Africa's
leaders.

The Africans have come up with something called the new African Union supposedly
to come to grips with the problems dogging the continent -- among them, horrific
abuses of human rights that characterize so many African regimes.

But nary a word have we heard from these leaders about their concerns for the
brutalities that the Arabs in Khartoum have for years inflicted on the poor
blacks in the south.

Is it that these leaders, most of them abusers of their people's rights, feel
that they have no moral grounds to protest what happens in Sudan? Or are they
simply unconcerned?

SHYAKA KANUMA
Kigali, Rwanda, March 24, 2004

The writer is an information officer, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Country Office.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); REFUGEES (69%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
(55%)

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (78%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (58%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (95%); SUDAN (91%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             317 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror in Tashkent

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 397 words


After a deadly series of bombings that have claimed at least 47 lives,
Uzbekistan has been quick to portray itself as the latest American ally to be
targeted for retaliation by international terrorism. There is truth to that: the
formerly Soviet Central Asian republic contains an American air base that
supports operations in neigboring Afghanistan and has been targeted by groups
linked to Al Qaeda.

But that is hardly the whole story. Uzbekistan's ruthless dictator, Islam
Karimov, uses his country's role in the campaign against global terrorism as
cover for repression that only foments further terror, of the homegrown variety.
Rather than look the other way at what many expect will be another wave of
repression in response to last week's violence, Washington should push the
government in Tashkent to keep its promises of democratic reform. This would
protect Uzbekistan's people and America's credibility in the region.

Mr. Karimov, a former Soviet Politburo member, has ruled with an iron hand since
Uzbekistan's independence in 1991. Political opponents and peaceful Muslim
groups have long been persecuted, accused of sedition. An estimated 7,000 people
are currently detained in horrific conditions and subject to torture. The State
Department's annual human rights report issued in February was rightly critical
of the regime. In just one case that came to international attention, Muzafar
Avazov died in August 2002 after his fingernails were pulled out and he was
thrown into a vat of boiling water. When Mr. Avazov's mother, Fatima Mukadirova,
protested, she was sentenced to six years of hard labor.

Mrs. Mukadirova was released in February, hours before a visit by Defense
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. Through such timely concessions, Mr. Karimov
obviously hopes to fend off criticism of his regime's rights record. It should
not be that easy. The State Department will decide this month whether Mr.
Karimov has fulfilled his 2002 pledge to move toward a multiparty democracy with
an independent judiciary and a free press. This commitment was a part of the
strategic partnership, and a condition Congress imposed on further assistance.

The United States needs to hold Uzbekistan to this commitment. Not doing so
would make a mockery of its avowed mission to spread democracy in the region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); AL-QAEDA
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(76%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (66%); TORTURE (66%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (66%);
SENTENCING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: Islam (Pres) Karimov

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (91%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             318 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 6, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Remember Rwanda, but Take Action in Sudan

BYLINE: By Samantha Power.

Samantha Power is the author of ''A Problem From Hell: America and the Age of
Genocide,'' which won the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1062 words


Ten years ago this week, Rwandan Hutu extremists embarked on a genocidal
campaign in which they murdered some 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus -- a
genocide more efficient than that of the Nazis.

On this anniversary, Western and United Nations leaders are expressing their
remorse and pledging their resolve to prevent future humanitarian catastrophes.
But as they do so, the Sudanese government is teaming up with Arab Muslim
militias in a campaign of ethnic slaughter and deportation that has already left
nearly a million Africans displaced and more than 30,000 dead. Again, the United
States and its allies are bystanders to slaughter, seemingly no more prepared to
prevent genocide than they were a decade ago.

The horrors in the Darfur region of Sudan are not ''like'' Rwanda, any more than
those in Rwanda were ''like'' those ordered by Hitler. The Arab-dominated
government in Khartoum has armed nomadic Arab herdsmen, or Janjaweed, against
rival African tribes. The government is using aerial bombardment to strafe
villages and terrorize civilians into flight. And it is denying humanitarian
access to some 700,000 people who are trapped in Darfur.

The Arab Muslim marauders and their government sponsors do not yet seem intent
on exterminating every last African Muslim in their midst. But they do seem
determined to wipe out black life in the region. The only difference between
Rwanda and Darfur, said Mukesh Kapila, the former United Nations' humanitarian
coordinator for Sudan, ''is the numbers of dead, murdered, tortured, raped.''

A radio exchange between a Sudanese ground commander and a pilot overhead (taped
by a British journalist in February) captures the aims of the attackers:

Commander: We've found people still in the village.

Pilot: Are they with us or against us?

Commander: They say they will work with us.

Pilot: They're liars. Don't trust them. Get rid of them.

And later:

Pilot: Now the village is empty and secure for you. Any village you pass through
you must burn. That way, when the villagers come back they'll have a surprise
waiting for them.

The lessons of Rwanda are many. The first is that those intent on wiping out an
inconvenient minority have a habit of denying journalists and aid workers access
and of pursuing bad-faith negotiations. Thus far the Sudanese government has
pursued both approaches, and Western officials have been far too trusting of
their assurances.

A second lesson is that outside powers cannot wait for confirmation of genocide
before they act. In 1994 the Clinton administration spent more time maneuvering
to avoid using the term ''genocide'' than it did using its resources to save
lives. In May 1994, an internal Pentagon memo warned against using the term
''genocide'' because it could commit the United States ''to actually do
something.'' In the case of Sudan, American officials need not focus on whether
the killings meet the definition of genocide set by the 1948 Genocide
Convention; they should focus instead on trying to stop them.

A third lesson is that even when the United States decides not to respond
militarily, American leadership is indispensable. This is especially true
because Europe continues to avoid intervening in violent humanitarian crises.
And it remains true despite the Bush administration's unpopularity abroad. The
United States often takes an all-or-nothing approach: if it doesn't send troops,
it tends to foreclose other policy options.

In Sudan, this tendency has been compounded by the administration's reluctance
to risk undermining the peace process it has spearheaded between Sudan's
government and the rebels in the south. While President Bush is understandably
eager to show he can make peace as well as war, he must stand up to Sudan's
government during these difficult negotiations.

After all, regimes that resort to ethnic killing and deportation as a tool of
statecraft rarely keep their word. An important predictor of Sudan's reliability
as an ally in the war on terrorism and as a party to the American-brokered peace
accord is its treatment of African Muslims in Darfur.

What would standing up to Sudan entail? The administration has several options.

On the economic and diplomatic front, the United States has already demonstrated
its clout in Sudan, which is desperate to see American sanctions lifted. So far,
Secretary of State Colin Powell has rightly described the humanitarian crisis as
a ''catastrophe.'' But the White House and the Pentagon have been mostly mute.
President Bush must use American leverage to demand that the government in
Khartoum cease its aerial attacks, terminate its arms supplies to the Janjaweed
and punish those militia accused of looting, rape and murder. The president made
a phone call last week to Sudan's president, Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, but
one ritual conversation hardly counts as pressure. Mr. Bush should keep calling
until humanitarian workers and investigators are permitted free movement in the
region, a no-fly zone is declared and the killings are stopped, and he should
dispatch Mr. Powell to the Chad-Sudan border to signal America's resolve.

The Bush administration can't do this alone. Ten thousand international
peacekeepers are needed in Darfur. President Bush will have to press Sudan to
agree to a United Nations mission -- and he will also need United Nations member
states to sign on. The Europeans can help by urging the Security Council to
refer the killings to the newly created International Criminal Court. Though the
United States has been hostile to the court, this is one move it should not
veto, as an investigation by the court could deter future massacres.

President Clinton has said that one of the greatest mistakes of his presidency
was not doing more to prevent the Rwandan genocide. When he visited Rwanda in
1998, he tried to explain America's failure to respond: ''It may seem strange to
you here, especially the many of you who lost members of your family, but all
over the world there were people like me sitting in offices, day after day after
day, who did not fully appreciate the depth and the speed with which you were
being engulfed by this unimaginable terror.''

Today, roughly 1,000 miles north of Rwanda, tens of thousands of Africans are
herded onto death marches, and Western leaders are again sitting in offices. How
sad it is that it doesn't even seem strange.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Joseph Hart)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (90%); JOURNALISM
(86%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); TORTURE
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); REFUGEES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%);
IMMIGRATION (76%); DEPORTATION (76%); ANNIVERSARIES (72%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (69%);
BAD FAITH (66%); POLITICS (60%) Freedom and Human Rights; News and News Media;
Foreign Aid; United States International Relations; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Civil War
and Guerrilla Warfare; Immigration and Refugees; Deportation

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (58%) Samantha Power; George W (Pres) Bush; Omar Hassan
Al- (Pres) Bashir

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Rwanda; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             319 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 6, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Genocide Next Door

BYLINE: By Emmanuel Dongala.

Emmanuel Dongala, a novelist and chemist, teaches at Simon's Rock College of
Bard. His novel about African child soldiers will be published next year.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: GREAT BARRINGTON, Mass.


It wasn't surprising that the 20th century ended with Africa having a genocide
of its own. The accumulation of myriad little things going adrift was destined
to result in a tragedy of such a magnitude. When militia from the majority Hutu
population began their killing spree against the Tutsi minority 10 years ago, I
was living in Brazzaville, the capital of Congo Republic, in central Africa.
It's a cliche now to talk about the global village, but there we were, following
what was happening in real time on television broadcasts.

For 100 days, from April to July 1994, the massacre continued unimpeded for the
world to see, and left more than 800,000 people dead. Neighbors who did not have
a television huddled in my living room to watch, just like they did for sports
events. Only this time we were not watching African soccer teams compete in the
Cup of Nations, we were witnessing the first televised genocide in the history
of humankind. We could see, caught through the long-distance lenses of the
cameras, shadowy figures hacking to death defenseless people along the roadways.
There, in caricature, was a demonstration of the schizophrenic state in which
Africa still finds itself today, that of a continent where different periods of
history coexist: the contemporary state-of-the art communications satellite
beaming the brutal work of a primitive weapon.

In carrying out their genocide, the Nazis used technology to kill in an
anonymous way; for them, the victims were only numbers. In Rwanda, in a
perversion of the legendary African conviviality and solidarity, people killed
one by one, among those they knew. Some murdered neighbors. Women pushed men to
rape other women. And instead of protecting their flock, some church leaders
delivered the Tutsis among them to the killers.

Since the brutalities unfolded in full view, we could not pretend, as some had
during the Nazi genocide, that we did not know. Yet most of us in Africa did not
grasp the gravity of what was going on. It is only when the killing spree ended
and we started counting the bodies that we realized there had been a genocide --
and a well-planned one, as we later learned. Months before, the Rwandan
government had imported thousands of dollars worth of machetes from China.

During those vicious 100 days, though, Western countries, including the United
States, refused to call it a genocide. Using the term would have meant moral and
legal obligations. Yet many Africans believed the reason for the denial was that
genocide is historically linked to ''civilized'' people. In Africa, where
barbarism was the norm, the Hutu killing spree was just another tribal war.
After all, how can one commit a genocide with machetes?

Then the refugees started flowing into our country, most of them Hutus. They had
walked hundreds of miles through the dense and hot equatorial forest of Zaire
and then crossed the Congo River. How could we tell who were the murderers and
who were the victims? Of all those I met, one woman made me understand the
depths of the tragedy. She was about 20 years old. I learned that she had not
been raped or suffered any other personal violence. Then she casually told me
she had no family left -- no father, mother, siblings, grandparents. No one. My
African mind was unable to imagine someone in the world without a single family
member.

The shock waves of the Rwandan tragedy would soon hit home when, three years
later, the Congo Republic became embroiled in its own civil war. Until then, we
looked condescendingly on the people of Rwanda, thinking that such atrocities
could never happen in our blessed country.

But then the long-simmering political rivalry between President Pascal Lissouba
and his immediate predecessor escalated into nationwide violence. Huge columns
of Congolese refugees, including my family and me, fled Brazzaville and plodded
through the forest, hungry and crippled with malaria. Among our pursuers were
many of those same Rwandan refugees, who had been coerced into fighting with the
faction that ultimately won our civil war.

Today, I still think the genocide in Rwanda has not been the electroshock that
should have jolted me and other African scholars from our ''Africanly'' correct
way of thinking.

Some of our outdated ideological ideas must be challenged. With the backing of
the government, Arabs are carrying out a massacre of genocidal scale against
black Africans in Sudan, yet many academics and leaders in Africa are reluctant
to speak out because of a misplaced sense of solidarity. We are also reluctant
to face other unpleasant realities because we are afraid that would project the
wrong picture of Africa to the world.

In 1958, Ahmed Sekou Toure of Guinea was the only leader of all the French
African colonies to seek immediate independence. Because of this, we refused for
a long time to denounce the crimes Toure was committing against his people. And
because Robert Mugabe fought for freedom in Rhodesia (now called Zimbabwe), it
is not acceptable to criticize his autocratic rule, for doing so would be siding
with the white settlers. As for Rwanda, many people dare not speak against the
crimes that Rwandan troops are committing in the Democratic Congo Republic
because of the moral legitimacy President Paul Kagame gained by stopping
genocide in his country.

This week there will be many ceremonies to commemorate the 10th anniversary of
the tragic events in Rwanda. Beyond honoring the dead, we should think about how
to make a reality of the mantra ''Never again,'' which the world has been
chanting since the genocide of the Jews. Setting international tribunals for war
crimes, punishing the guilty and working on reconciliation are necessary steps,
but they are not themselves a sufficient solution.

In Africa, the genocide happened in Rwanda, but it could have taken place in any
of the many pseudo-nation-states that are the legacy of colonialism -- states in
which the people are more loyal to their ethnic communities than to a faraway
central government. The manipulation of ethnicity by politicians has given
ethnicity an importance it does not intrinsically have. Thus, leaders are
perceived as representing their ethnic group, and elections are perceived as a
contest between rival ethnic groups.

This situation demands a radical rethinking. States must be rebuilt by taking
the different ethnic groups into account so that no group feels ostracized and
all share the country's resources. Transforming the state along these lines will
bring security to all citizens. It is this security, more than a museum or
commemorative speeches, that will be the greatest homage we can pay to the
victims of the Rwandan genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%);
POLITICS (77%); REFUGEES (72%); GLOBALIZATION (71%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY
(70%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (68%); SOCCER (68%); SPORTS & RECREATION
(68%); SPORTS (68%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%); RELIGION (50%); SATELLITE
TECHNOLOGY (50%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (50%) Politics and Government;
Freedom and Human Rights; Elections; Security and Warning Systems; Tutsi Tribe;
Hutu Tribe; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Emmanuel Dongala

CITY: BRAZZAVILLE, CONGO (92%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (99%); CONGO (94%); RWANDA (93%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%); CHINA
(79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Africa; Rwanda; Africa

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             320 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 7, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two-Front Insurgency

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE.

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In light of about a dozen American combat deaths yesterday, we should keep in
mind our historic bet: that given their freedom from a savage tyrant, the three
groups that make up Iraq could, with our help, create a rudimentary democracy
that would turn the tide against terror.

In the northern group, we can see success: rival Kurdish parties have come
together to work within an Iraqi parliament when elections come. ''Kirkuk is our
Jerusalem,'' they say, and that oil-rich area -- long the center of Iraqi
Kurdistan, before Saddam's ethnic cleansing -- should be their regional capital
in unified Iraq.

In the center group -- the Sunnis, who profited most from Saddam's dictatorship
-- we see mostly a sullen population, its Baathist diehards allied with an
affiliate of Al Qaeda longing for regime restoration. There is where the
atrocities of Falluja were committed in the fiercest Sunni challenge to
liberation.

In Baghdad and the South, long-oppressed Shiites -- 60 percent of Iraq's
population -- have the most to gain from democracy and reconstruction. But they
are now split. A minority of terrorists led by the firebrand Moktada al-Sadr,
under Iran's influence, are challenging the quietist Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
That ayatollah is keen to protect his following by complaining about the
liberation and wrings his hands about Sadr, who has openly declared alliance
with Hamas and Hezbollah and war on the West.

All this means that we are now fighting an active two-front insurgency. That
calls for a change in our strategy. Up to now we have tried to hunker down and
train Iraqis to handle security, lest we appear to be nasty ''occupiers.'' That
only emboldened the Sunni terrorists and Shiite Iranists. One anti-American
confidently told another Iraqi with cool nonpartisanship about ousting U.S.
presidents: ''We'll do to Bush what we did to Carter.''

But now that the Saddam restorationists and Islamic fundamentalists have made
their terrorist move on both fronts, we can counterattack decisively.

''In war, resolution.'' Having announced we would pacify rebellious Baathists in
Falluja, we must pacify Falluja. Having designated the Shiite Sadr an outlaw, we
must answer his bloody-minded challenge with whatever military force is required
and with fewer casualties in the long run.

But we must impress on the minds of millions of Shiites that there is no free
ride to freedom. We should keep the heat on Shiite ditherers by holding fast to
the June 30 deadline for the delivery of sovereignty to Iraq's three groups.
It's less about the U.S. election than demanding that Iraqi leaders and U.N.
facilitators live up to their promises.

We should couple this with a temporary increase in troop strength, if necessary:
we will pull alongside, not pull out or pull alone. We should take up the Turks
on their offer of 10,000 troops to fight on our side against two-front terror.
The Kurds, who have patched things up with Ankara and know which side of the
two-front war they and we are on, would withdraw their ill-considered earlier
objection.

We should break the Iranian-Hezbollah-Sadr connection in ways that our special
forces know how to do. Plenty of Iraqi Shiites, who are Arab, distrust the
Persian ayatollahs in Iran and can provide actionable intelligence about a
Syrian transmission belt.

And we should coolly confront the quaking quagmirists here at home.

Does Ted Kennedy speak for his Massachusetts junior senator, John Kerry, when he
calls our effort to turn terror-supporting despotism into nascent liberty in
Iraq ''Bush's Vietnam''?

Do the apostles of retreat realize how their defeatism, magnified by Arab media,
bolsters the morale of the insurgents and increases the nervousness of the
waverers?

Does our coulda-woulda-shoulda crowd consider how it dismays the majority of
Iraqis wondering if they can count on our continued presence as they feel their
way toward freedom?

These are the times that try men's souls, and -- as Tom Paine's enlightened
acquaintance, Mary Wollstonecraft, would have added -- women's, too. This is the
crisis; we'll come through it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (77%); HAMAS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); ELECTIONS
(76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); ETHNIC GROUPS (76%); POLITICS (76%); POPULATION
SIZE (75%); HEZBOLLAH (72%); RELIGION (72%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (71%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (64%); US PRESIDENTS (62%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Politics and
Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Kurds

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); HAMAS (54%); HEZBOLLAH (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (77%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (72%) William Safire; Moktada Al-
Sadr

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             322 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Netherlands: Congo Man Convicted Of Torture

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 96 words


A Dutch court convicted a former Congolese military officer, Sebastien Nzapali,
51, for torture in his native country and gave him a 30-month prison sentence.
Charges of murder and rape were deemed not proved. Mr. Nzapali's case is unusual
because the Dutch authorities found out about his past after he applied for
political asylum. Lawyers saw the case as breaking new legal ground: Mr. Nzapali
is the first person to be convicted in a Dutch court under a new law permitting
prosecution of human rights crimes even though they happened in another country.
Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); TORTURE (90%); SENTENCING (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (88%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); MURDER (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (88%);
POLITICAL ASYLUM (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             323 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Decade After Massacres, Rwanda Outlaws Ethnicity

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: KIGALI, Rwanda, April 8


Although he is not a government spokesman, Ernest Twahrwa can recite Rwanda's
official view toward ethnicity with great precision: ''There is no ethnicity
here. We are all Rwandan.''

Mr. Twahrwa, a Hutu, is halfway through a six-week government re-education camp
set up to purge him and other former fighters of any ethnic ideologies that they
may still harbor from 1994, when extremist Hutu massacred 800,000 Tutsi and
moderate Hutu.

''They're trying to change what we think,'' Mr. Twahrwa said. ''There have been
many changes in this country. I need to change too. I need to be a new person.''

This country, where ethnic tensions were whipped up into a frenzy of killing, is
now trying to make ethnicity a thing of the past. There are no Hutu in the new
Rwanda. There are no Tutsi either. The government, dominated by the minority
Tutsi, has wiped out the distinctions by decree.

The re-education camp is one way of driving the point home to people who once
lived by the motto ''Hutu power.'' As Hutu fighters who fled to Congo after 1994
return to Rwanda they are sent to the camp. Along with civics they are taught
some hands-on skills like carpentry. They leave with $75 and, at least in
theory, a whole new way of thinking.

That new thinking has its critics -- those who say that denying that ethnicity
exists merely suppresses the painful ethnic dialogue that Rwanda requires.

But the government insists that if awareness of ethnic differences can be
learned, so can the idea that ethnicity does not exist. Rwanda has an entrenched
culture of obedience, and the populace has been quick to pick up on the
government's no-ethnicity policy, at least in conversations with an outsider.

To hear Mr. Twahrwa put it: ''Ethnicity is bad. I want it to go away.''

Ethnicity has already been ripped out of schoolbooks and rubbed off government
identity cards. Government documents no longer mention Hutu or Tutsi, and the
country's newspapers and radio stations, tightly controlled by the government,
steer clear of the labels as well.

Most dramatic is how Rwanda's eight million people now shun the identifications
that seemed to loom so large 10 years ago as Hutu extremists began their mass
killings.

''We don't like to use the terms at all in class,'' said Bosco Manishaka, the
assistant director of a Kigali primary school. ''The children do learn about the
history of the country and how we were divided. We advise them to learn from the
past.''

It is not just considered bad form to discuss ethnicity in the new Rwanda. It
can land one in jail. Added to the penal code is the crime of ''divisionism,'' a
nebulous offense that includes speaking too provocatively about ethnicity.

Rwanda's approach contrasts markedly with that employed in neighboring Burundi,
which has the same ethnic makeup as Rwanda and the same recent history of ethnic
violence. Burundi's transitional government has opted to set aside certain
positions for Hutu and certain positions for Tutsi. The two ethnic groups rotate
the presidency. A Tutsi held it for 18 months, and now a Hutu fills the seat.

Critics argue that Rwanda's crackdown on ''divisionism'' has turned into a way
of quashing dissent toward the governing party of President Paul Kagame, who led
the Tutsi rebel movement that swept in from Uganda in 1994 to oust the Hutu
militias known as Interahamwe, which were responsible for much of the violence.
His administration has shut down opposition parties for being too divisive and
jailed journalists and activists for the same.

The government does not want to hear suggestions that one ethnicity or the other
has too much power. Those are divisive thoughts. It is not possible to know, or
even discuss, whether the majority Hutu population is well represented in
universities. No such records are kept.

To try to repair tensions that still linger from 1994, and reduce a huge backlog
in the judicial system, Rwanda has created community courts called gacacas.
Locals gather together to rehash the killings. They are encouraged to point
fingers at suspected killers. The accused are given a chance to stand up and
defend themselves, or to apologize.

Confessions can sometimes bring the most extraordinary result: a hug from the
accuser and an offer of forgiveness. More often, though, there are arguments.

At one such court in the Gikondo neighborhood of Kigali, a Hutu man stood up to
deny that he was responsible for the dead bodies that were found in his yard
during 1994. He said he had just found them there.

A man in the crowd challenged him. ''Tell us what happened,'' the man said.

''You're lying,'' said another.

But the accused, fidgeting with his glasses, stuck to his story.

Despite the government's policy, the terms Hutu and Tutsi do sometimes manage to
come to the surface.

''To deny that ethnicity exists in our country is lying,'' Jean Nayinzira
Nepomuscene, a Hutu who ran against Mr. Kagame last fall but garnered just 1
percent of the vote, said in an interview. ''If a person is a Tutsi you can't
tell him not to be a Tutsi. A Hutu, you can't tell him not to be a Hutu.''

Mr. Kagame's main opponent in the election was a Hutu, Faustin Twagiramungu, who
overtly appealed to the Hutu majority for support. Mr. Kagame's government
likened his approach to the techniques used by Hutu extremists in 1994 to foment
the mass killings, and threatened to jail him.

When the Belgians ruled colonial Rwanda they favored the Tutsi over the Hutu and
issued identification cards to institutionalize the difference.

After Rwanda's independence, political battles and periodic massacres revolved
around the ethnic labels. Still, intermarriage remained common, with children
taking on the ethnicity of their father. Physical differences between the two
groups blurred.

Abudallah Shabami, another student at the re-education camp, located several
hours north of Kigali in Ruhengeri, says he has fought on behalf of the Hutu
even though his family is a blend. ''There are both Hutu and Tutsi in my
family,'' he says. ''My wife is a Tutsi. My mother was a Tutsi.''

He caught himself and remembered his lessons. ''I see myself as a Rwandan now,
because there are no more ethnicities here,'' he said.

Ethnicity has not been dislodged from peoples' minds, though.

A Tutsi woman, who was raped in 1994 by so many Hutu militiamen in the village
of Taba that she lost count, said she has difficulty interacting comfortably
with Hutu.

''I don't trust them,'' said the woman, who, identified only as J.J., testified
about her ordeal before the international tribunal on Rwanda.

Francois Ngarambe, who is president of Ibuka, a group representing survivors,
said his young children had only a vague notion of the ethnic differences that
led to the killings in 1994. ''They don't see themselves that way,'' he said.
''That's what gives me hope.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Words that had defined ethnicity have been crossed out on an
identity card that is now among items on display at the Gisozi memorial.
 Photographs of people killed in the massacres of 1994 in Rwanda are on display
at the memorial center in Gisozi, near the capital, Kigali. Remains of victims
recovered from mass graves are buried at the site. (Photographs by Guillaume
Bonn/Think, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ETHNICITY (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CHILDREN (77%); PRIMARY
SCHOOLS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); CRIMINAL LAW (60%); CORRECTIONS
(60%) Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe

PERSON: Marc Lacey

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (89%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             325 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Abandon Rwandan Women Again

BYLINE: By Lindsey Hilsum.

Lindsey Hilsum is the international editor for Channel 4 News in Britain.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 546 words

DATELINE: LONDON


At commemorations held in Rwanda and around the world this week for the 800,000
people who were murdered in the Rwandan genocide 10 years ago, politicians and
other leaders said ''never again.'' Those words, while well-intentioned, have a
hollowness to them: people are still dying of the genocide in Rwanda and the
world is still failing them.

I was in Rwanda when the fighting began. It was clear at the time that rape was
a tool of war. The majority of women who survived the Hutu attacks on Tutsis
were gang-raped, sometimes for weeks on end, by the thugs who murdered their
families. Many of them are now dying slow, painful deaths from AIDS. There are
7,800 confirmed cases, with estimates of as many as 14,000 undocumented women
who are infected with the virus. (Today a total of 500,000 people, nearly nine
percent of the adult population of Rwanda, is H.I.V. positive.)

In a forthcoming report, Africa Rights, a human rights organization, has
documented the cases of nearly 200 Rwandan women infected by H.I.V. The
testimonies speak of shame, stigma, pain and poverty. Many of these women took
in children left orphaned by the genocide. As the women succumb to AIDS, the
children are left without care or supervision. The cycle of tragedy intensifies.

This is not to say all H.I.V. positive Rwandans have been forgotten. Bill
Clinton -- who has expressed regret at his own failure to address the genocide
while president -- has pledged through his foundation to finance antiretroviral
treatment for 60 percent of people with AIDS in Rwanda.

Rwanda is also one of 12 countries in sub-Saharan Africa that was selected to
receive money for antiretroviral drugs through President Bush's AIDS initiative.
And Unicef and the World Health Organization are stepping up their AIDS programs
in Central Africa. Remarkably little has been done, however, specifically to
help the women who contracted AIDS during the genocide.

In fact, the United States Agency for International Development has selected
prisoners convicted of participating in the genocide as a target group to
receive counseling and testing as they return to the community. And the United
Nations International Tribunal for Rwanda provides antiretroviral drugs to the
prisoners accused of masterminding the slaughter.

Similar programs on this scale simply do not exist for Rwanda's rape victims.
And while it would be naive to suggest that providing antiretroviral drugs to
Rwanda's rape victims will solve all of their problems, it certainly would help.
In Kigali, I met Clementine, one of a group of 14 survivors whose antiretroviral
treatment has been provided by a British charity. After two years on
antiretroviral drugs, Clementine is plump, has a job as a driver and supports
five orphans.

These women require support in other areas, too. They need housing, jobs,
counseling and medical assistance for life. International organizations are
already committed to helping Rwandans; programs designed specifically for these
women are essential.

As we remember those who died in the Rwandan genocide 10 years ago, we should
also find ways to care for those who survived -- particularly the women whose
lives have been blighted by rape, grief and disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIDS & HIV (92%); GENOCIDE (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); MURDER
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); ANTIVIRALS (89%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (89%); AIDS & HIV TREATMENT (89%); CHILDREN (88%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); DISEASE REPORTING (74%); FAMILY (74%); MEDICAID (71%);
ORPHANS (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (69%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
(69%); AIDS & HIV POLICY (69%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (67%);
POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (66%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (66%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (65%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (60%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (55%)

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (50%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (93%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
SUB SAHARAN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             327 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cruel Choices

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 728 words


I can't get the kaleidoscope of genocide out of my head since my trip last month
to the Sudan-Chad border: the fresh graves, especially the extra-small mounds
for children; the piles of branches on graves to keep wild animals from digging
up corpses; the tales of women being first raped and then branded on the hand to
stigmatize them forever; the isolated peasants, unfamiliar with electricity, who
suddenly encounter the 21st century as helicopters machine-gun their children.

Then there were the choices faced by the Sudanese refugees I interviewed. For
example, who should fetch water from the wells?

The Arab Janjaweed militia, armed by Sudan's government, shoots tribal African
men and teenage boys who show up at the wells, and rapes women who go. So
parents described an anguished choice: Should they risk their 7- or 8-year-old
children by sending them to wells a mile away, knowing that the children have
the best prospect of returning?

And what should parents do when the Janjaweed seize their children, or gang-rape
their daughters? Should they resist, knowing they will then be shot at once in
front of their children?

Or what about the parents described by Human Rights Watch who were allowed by
the militia to choose how their children would die: burned alive or shot to
death?

Some 1,000 people in Sudan's Darfur region are still dying each week. But at
least the world has finally begun to pay attention -- and it's striking how a
hint of concern in the West has persuaded Sudan to reach a cease-fire there.

President Bush finally found his voice last week, protesting the ''atrocities''
in Darfur. More forcefully, Kofi Annan warned on the day commemorating the
Rwandan genocide that reports about brutalities in Darfur ''leave me with a deep
sense of foreboding. . . . The international community cannot stand idle.''

So far in Darfur, thousands have been killed, and about one million black
Africans have been driven from their homes by the lighter-skinned Arabs in the
Janjaweed. Vast sections of Darfur, a region the size of France, have been
burned and emptied. The Janjaweed have also destroyed wells, or fouled them by
dumping corpses into them, to keep villagers from ever returning.

''You can drive for 100 kilometers and see nobody, no civilian,'' said Dr.
Mercedes Tatay, a physician with Doctors Without Borders who has just spent a
month in Darfur. ''You pass through large villages, completely burned or still
burning, and you see nobody.''

In the refugee camps in Darfur, malnutrition and measles are claiming the
survivors, especially young children. Roger Winter, assistant administrator of
the U.S. Agency for International Development, estimates that even if the
fighting stops today, at least 100,000 are still likely to die in coming months
-- of disease, malnutrition and other ailments. Yet Sudan is still curbing
access to Darfur by the U.N. and aid groups.

I'm not suggesting an invasion of Sudan. But it's a fallacy to think that just
because we can't do everything to stop genocide, we shouldn't do anything. One
of the lessons of the last week is how little it took -- from Washington, the
U.N. and the African Union -- to nudge Sudan into accepting a cease-fire and
pledging access for humanitarian workers.

Now we need more arm-twisting to get Sudan to comply with the cease-fire (it
marked the first day, Monday, by bombing the town of Anka). The Sudanese
government is testing us, but so far the State Department has shown a
commendable willingness to stand up to it.

We can save many tens of thousands of lives in the coming weeks -- but only if
Mr. Bush and Mr. Annan speak out more boldly, if the U.N. Security Council
insists on humanitarian access to Darfur and if the aid community mounts a huge
effort before the rainy season makes roads impassible beginning in late May.

In the last 100 years, the United States has reacted to one genocide after
another -- Armenians, Jews, Cambodians, Bosnians -- by making excuses at the
time, and then saying, too late, ''Oh, if only we had known!'' Well, this time
we know what is happening in Darfur: 110,000 refugees have escaped into Chad and
testify to the atrocities.

How many more parents will be forced to choose whether their children are shot
or burned to death before we get serious?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CHILDREN (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); REFUGEES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); SHOOTINGS
(75%); MEN (74%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (70%); BURN
INJURIES (70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (66%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (66%);
MALNUTRITION (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%); MEDICAL CHARITIES (60%);
HELICOPTERS (56%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%) United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) George W (Pres) Bush; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Nicholas
D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (92%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE GUIDE

BYLINE: By Barbara Delatiner

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 698 words



Best Bet

Andrew Liput says that you do not have to be Jewish to remember the Holocaust.
Man's inhumanity to man ''transcends religions,'' said Mr. Liput, who was born
and raised a Catholic and now attends a Baptist church. ''What happened to the
Jews can happen to anyone.''

Four years ago, while living and working on Long Island (he and his family now
live in Raleigh, N.C.), Mr. Liput, a lawyer and amateur historian with an
interest in human and civil rights, began collecting memorabilia about the
Holocaust. His goal, he said, was to assemble a traveling exhibit and create a
curriculum on civil and human rights for Long Island youngsters.

His collection has about 185 items -- from Nazi documents on racial policy to
clothing from concentration camps to porcelain figures produced by slave labor
in a Nazi factory outside Dachau -- and has become the cornerstone of the new
Suffolk Center on the Holocaust, Diversity and Human Understanding. Mr. Liput
donated the objects to the center, which was formed by Suffolk Community College
''to help eliminate prejudices, bigotry and racism,'' said Dr. M. Vicki Wacksman
of Dix Hills, a college trustee and organizer of the center.

Until a permanent home is found for the center, Dr. Wacksman said, some of the
Liput collection is housed in the library on the college's Selden campus. Today,
to mark Yom Hashoah or Holocaust Remembrance Day, a number of items will be
displayed in the Sagtikos Building on the Brentwood campus as part of the
program, ''Building Bridges to Human Understanding.''

The program, which begins at 11:30 a.m., will include a discussion on ''Moving
Long Island Toward Becoming a Bias-Free Community''; a talk by Peter Malkin, the
Israeli agent who captured Adolph Eichmann; and the continuous screening of
''Good People Stood By and Did Nothing,'' a documentary about the Holocaust and
other examples of genocide that Mr. Liput made with Jeb Bergh of Huntington.

The exhibition from Mr. Liput's collection will be shown through Tuesday.

Information on the event: (631)451-4700.

Focus on Genes

 The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory celebrates ''A Century of Genetic Research''
with a series of concerts and free lectures that gets under way this week in its
Grace Auditorium off Route 25A.

Tomorrow at 7 p.m., Dr. Mark Hallett of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke speaks on ''How Your Brain Recovers from a Stroke.'' The
concerts begin at 6 p.m. on Saturday with the Molinaro-Levy Project, a
piano-harmonica duo. Information: (516)367-6822.

Celebrating the Outdoors

 The Cold Spring Harbor Fish Hatchery and Aquarium's Spring Festival gets going
on Saturday with fishing, games and noshing from 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Information: (516)692-6768.

In East Islip, Heckscher State Park holds a two-day Spring Festival Saturday and
next Sunday from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Activities include bird walks and children's
arts and crafts. Information: (631)581-2100.

At Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay there is an Arbor Day Festival 2004
from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday and next Sunday featuring wildlife shows,
music and tree planting with Smokey the Bear. Information: (516)922-9200.

Free Choices

TODAY -- The Bob Cantwell Jazz Quintet offers the ''Great Sounds of Jazz'' at 3
p.m. in Salten Hall on the Old Westbury campus of New York Institute of
Technology. Information: (516)686-7640.

Richard W. Sonnenfeldt who escaped from Nazi Germany and later returned there as
a United States soldier and the American prosecution's chief interpreter at the
1945 Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal, speaks at 8 p.m. at the Port Jewish Center
on Manorhaven Boulevard in Port Washington. Information: (516)944-7202.

TOMORROW -- Daniel Ellsberg discusses ''The True Patriots Act: Following One's
Conscience'' at 2 p.m. in the Nassau Community College Center Building in Garden
City. Information: (516)572-7153.

FRIDAY -- The Freeport Library offers a ''Cook's Tour of Irish and Jewish
Cuisine'' at 7 p.m. as part of Long Island Reads, which this year has singled
out Pete Hamill's novel ''Snow in August,'' about a friendship between an
Irish-Catholic boy and a rabbi. Information: (516)379-3274.
   Barbara Delatiner

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (90%); RELIGION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (86%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%);
PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%); HISTORY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CURRICULA (75%); ACADEMIC LIBRARIES
(74%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (74%); ZOOS & AQUARIUMS (74%); COMMUNITY
COLLEGES (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%); JEWISH
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (73%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (71%); LIBRARIES (69%);
FESTIVALS (69%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (66%); NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS &
INJURIES (64%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (62%); NEUROSCIENCE (62%);
DOCUMENTARY FILMS (62%); STROKES (62%); SCIENCE NEWS (60%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
(60%); GENES & CHROMOSOMES (60%); WIND INSTRUMENTS (60%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

COMPANY: COLD SPRING HARBOR LABORATORY (63%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8731 COMMERCIAL PHYSICAL & BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH (63%)

CITY: RALEIGH, NC, USA (57%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             330 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Middle East: Libya: Qaddafi Wants End To Harsh Laws

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 95 words


Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi has called for the abolition of Libya's three decade-old
Exceptional Courts, whose verdicts could not be appealed, and other strict laws
criticized by human rights groups. During talks in Tripoli with judges and
prosecutors, he urged delegates meeting across the country in annual People's
Congress forums to annul the exceptional laws, which also banned political
parties and stipulated death penalties for dissidents. The official news agency
JANA reported that Colonel Qaddafi had also called for an end to torture and
arrests without warrants.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); TORTURE (87%);
ARREST WARRANTS (86%); ARRESTS (86%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (85%); JUDGES (85%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (84%); POLITICAL PARTIES (83%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

CITY: TRIPOLI, LIBYA (90%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (93%); MIDDLE EAST (72%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             336 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Afghanistan: First Execution Since Fall Of Taliban

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 84 words


The government executed a former military commander convicted of murder, its
first execution since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. The execution, with a
bullet to the head, was carried out April 20 but was reported this week by
Amnesty International, which accused politicians of silencing the murderer,
Abdullah Shah, before he could expose human rights violations. Mr. Shah was
convicted of killing one of his wives by pouring boiling water over her and an
infant daughter by throwing her against a wall.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); MURDER (90%); HOMICIDE (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%); INFANTS & TODDLERS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (91%)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             337 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thai Troops Kill 107 in Repelling Muslim Attackers

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, April 28


In the worst outbreak of violence in years of turmoil in Thailand's Muslim
southern provinces, 112 people were killed Wednesday when scores of armed men
raided as many as 15 police stations and security outposts, the government said.

Officials said the dead included 107 attackers, about 30 of whom were killed at
the most revered mosque in the region, whose loudspeakers were used to call for
a local uprising. Officials said the high toll was the result of good
intelligence data that had allowed the government to bring in reinforcements and
prepare for the attacks.

The government said five police officers and soldiers also died.

Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra blamed bandits and drug addicts, as he has in
the past as dozens of police officers and local officials have been
assassinated, scores of schoolhouses burned and bombs set at Buddhist temples.

But the defense minister, Chetta Thanajaro, said the attacks were carried out by
Muslim separatists who may have received training abroad.

No group claimed responsibility and there was no evidence on Wednesday of a
direct link to international terrorist groups. But the main terrorist group in
southeast Asia, Jemaah Islamiyah, which is connected to Al Qaeda, has had a
presence in Thailand.

Violence in the region has intensified since the start of the year, claiming the
lives of 65 soldiers, police officers, government officials and Buddhist monks.
On Jan. 4, more than 100 well-armed insurgents stormed a military depot, killed
four soldiers and made off with more than 300 firearms.

Some analysts say the violence is growing out of the same grievances that led to
a separatist rebellion in the 1960's and 70's in the impoverished southern
provinces, where many residents feel neglected and repressed in this largely
Buddhist nation. Such grievances and the long-simmering rebellion offer clear
opportunities for militant recruitment and hard-line mosques have begun to
appear.

The area has grown so dangerous that on Tuesday, the government gave teachers
permission to carry guns.

Wednesday's attacks were carried out in large part by lightly armed young men,
many carrying only machetes, who were apparently willing to die in what some
military officers were calling suicide raids.

''Most of the dead insurgents are youths of ages ranging from 15 to 20, but two
of the leaders are aged about 50 and 60,'' said Lt. Gen. Proong Bunphandung, the
chief of police for the south.

Witnesses said the attackers, some of whom wore black or green outfits and red
headbands, shouted ''God is great!'' and ''We are ready to die for God!''

Government officials said 17 attackers were taken prisoner.

Most of the attacks, which began after the early morning Muslim prayer, were
crushed immediately. The siege on the important Kreasae mosque, outside Pattani
town, lasted more than six hours and left the building battered and splashed
with blood.

Human rights advocates criticized the police and the military, saying they had
used their intelligence data to set a trap and maximize casualties, rather than
try to limit the bloodshed.

''The government didn't have to kill them all, but anyway the government killed
them all,'' said Sunai Phasuk, a spokesman for rights groups, including Human
Rights Watch. ''They didn't have to storm into the mosque, but they did storm
into the mosque -- one of the holiest places in Muslim Southeast Asia.''

Government officials said the heavy response was meant to teach a lesson and to
quell further attempts at rebellion in the south. Local leaders said they feared
that the opposite would happen.

''I am really concerned that the problems in the south will escalate further,''
Abdul Rosue Aree, deputy chairman of the Islamic Council in Narathiwat, told The
Nation, a daily newspaper. ''The incident will definitely affect Muslim people.
They will have bad feelings towards authorities, and the turmoil will continue
and not be resolved.''

The attacks were a sign of the severity of discontent in the region, Mr. Sunai
said.

''No matter who they were, it is quite shocking that more than 100 people, most
of them youths, were ready to sacrifice their lives in fighting against the
authorities.''

Among local witnesses, the phrase ''We are all Muslims'' was repeated often,
suggesting a level of sympathy for the attackers.

About 6 million of Thailand's 66 million people are Muslim, living mostly in the
five southern provinces close to Malaysia. Many of them speak Malay and the
frontier between the two nations is fluid.

Wednesday's attacks took place in the Yala, Pattani and Songkhla provinces, the
country's only Muslim-majority provinces.

Muslims in the south have complained for years that they are discriminated
against in jobs and education, that they receive inadequate government
assistance and development, and that their language and culture are being
neglected and stifled.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A firefight early yesterday at a mosque near Pattani, in
southern Thailand, caused villagers to scatter. The army said the mosque was
being used as cover by Muslims who attacked police outposts in the area. (Photo
by Reuters)Map of Thailand highlighting Pattani: Thailand's Muslim population is
concentrated in the south.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); RELIGION (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (88%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (88%); AL-QAEDA (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); EYEWITNESSES (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); ASSASSINATION
(75%); SUICIDE (73%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (55%)

PERSON: Seth Mydans

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Thailand; Thailand

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1313 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

Sharon's Party Rejects His Gaza Withdrawal Plan
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's own party voted against his Gaza withdrawal plan,
according to results in Israel. A pregnant Israeli woman and her four young
daughters were killed by two Palestinian gunmen, who were later shot dead by
Israeli soldiers. Israel struck back with a pair of air assaults.   A1

American Hostage Escapes
Thomas Hamill, an American contractor taken hostage by militants last month,
escaped and ran to a group of passing American troops. He was suffering from an
infected gunshot wound but was otherwise in good condition. Meanwhile, nine
American soldiers died in violence across central and northern Iraq.   A1

An internal Army investigation found that military intelligence officers and
civilian employees may have actively encouraged acts of abuse by American
enlisted personnel against Iraqi detainees. A much broader pattern of command
failures is surfacing as the Bush administration is attempting to respond to
worldwide outrage over the issue.   A1

Street by street, neighborhood by neighborhood, Falluja is balancing on the
brink between conflict and recovery. Which way things go may be determined in
the next few days as a new Iraqi security force struggles to bring order after
the fighting that killed more than 600 people.   A10

Upset Employees Choose Home
The company whose offices in Yanbu, Saudi Arabia, were attacked by militants
announced that it gave its employees the choice of either staying with beefed-up
security or leaving. All employees on the project chose to leave within days.
Two employees remain hospitalized, at least one Saudi security officer was
killed, and up to 33 people were wounded.   A8

Concern Over Afghan Execution
The execution of a notorious mujahedeen commander, the first death sentence
carried out in the two years since President Hamid Karzai established a new
Afghan government, has raised concerns among human rights organizations.   A14

Cuba Ambassadors Withdrawn
Mexico and Peru withdrew their ambassadors from Cuba after a week-long exchange
of angry diplomatic dispatches that have pushed the relationship between former
allies to its lowest point in recent years.   A6

Elusive Freedom in China
The leadership team in China headed by President Hu Jintao that many hoped would
tolerate more open debate has instead slapped new restrictions on free speech
and the press.   A3

Son of Dictator Wins in Panama
Voters in Panama elected Martin Torrijos, the son of a former military dictator,
as Panama's next president more than 14 years after the end of authoritarian
rule. He campaigned skillfully as both a reverent son and the leader of a new
generation of Panamanian politicians.   A6

NATIONAL   A16-21

Left Out on Major Bills, Democrats Stall Others
Senate Democrats are blocking House-Senate negotiations on bills unless they are
guaranteed a voice in writing the final legislation. The tactic has infuriated
Republicans and added to election year paralysis.   A1

Safeguarding the Death Penalty
A commission appointed by Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts has come up with
what it considers to be a foolproof formula for carrying out the death penalty.
Mr. Romney is expected to try to bring back capital punishment to the state,
where it was abolished 20 years ago.   A16

Cost of Fighting Crime Rises
The cost of fighting crime in the United States, for the police, prisons and
courts, rose to a record $167 billion in 2001, the latest year for which figures
are available, according to a study by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. States
are facing record budget deficits and legislators are taking soaring prison
costs seriously.   A18

Kerry to Begin Ad Campaign
Senator John Kerry is set to introduce a major television advertising push that
will highlight his biography and service in Vietnam, which his advisers view as
his strong suits, campaign aides said.   A21

Writers and Studios Negotiate
Negotiators made progress on at least one issue dividing movie and television
studios and Hollywood screenwriters, but they failed to agree on royalties for
DVD's.   A18

Ex-Journalist Starts Liberal Site
David Brock, a former right-wing journalist, will start an Internet site that he
says will monitor the conservative media and correct erroneous assertions. He
has more than $2 million in donations from wealthy liberals.   A21

Rising Use of Secret Warrants
The government's use of secret warrants to monitor and eavesdrop on suspects in
terrorism and espionage investigations continued to climb sharply in 2003, with
more than 1,700 warrants sought, the Justice Department reported.   A17

Viewing Iraq With Vietnam Eyes
The war in Vietnam has charged back into the American consciousness as the
fighting in Iraq continues. For the 51 veterans from around the nation who
gathered in Utah for the first reunion of their unit, the 71st Evacuation
Hospital, Vietnam never entirely went away.   A16

SCIENCE/HEALTH

U.S. Science Seen to Slip
The United States is losing its worldwide dominance in critical areas of science
and innovation, say experts who point to evidence like prizes awarded to
Americans and the number of papers in major professional journals.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

9/11 Detainees Claim Physical Abuse in Suit
A federal lawsuit to be filed by a Pakistani former cable technician and an
Egyptian former restaurateur, claiming that they were physically abused when
they were picked up by federal agents during the anti-terror sweep that occurred
within weeks of Sept. 11, 2001.   B1

New York Economy Rebounds
Economists say that New York's economy is rebounding, and that it appears to be
the end of the nearly three-year recession.   B1

Taxi Fare Increased Today
The base fare for a taxi ride in New York increased for the first time in eight
years. The base fare is now $2.50. The rate for every one-fifth of a mile rose
to 40 cents. Riders will also have to pay a new $1 surcharge from 4 p.m. to 8
p.m.   B3

New Wine Bill Proposed
Wine legislation is being proposed in New York that would allow wine to be sold
wherever beer is sold.   B6

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-7

Spurs Take Game 1
San Antonio beat the Los Angeles Lakers, 88-78, in Game 1 of their N.B.A.
semifinal series.   D1

The New Orleans Hornets defeated the Miami Heat, 89-83, forcing a Game 7 in
their first-round playoff series.   D5

ARTS   E1-10

Comedy Is a Hit in L.A.
Two 30-year-old comedians have written a play, ''Jewtopia,'' out of a myriad of
stereotypes. It has become one of the most improbable theatrical hits in Los
Angeles.   E3

OBITUARIES   B8

Harold Harmatz
The owner of a Lower East Side restaurant who helped lead the fight against
Robert Moses's plan to built an expressway across Lower Manhattan, he was 91.
B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Magazine Advertising Down
Advertising pages in consumer magazines have been down for the last nine months,
despite a recovery in the advertising industry. Competition from cable and the
Web partly explain the lack of a recovery.   C1

Safeway to Name 3 Directors
The national supermarket chain is planning to announce that it will name three
independent directors. The company has been criticized by some big pension
funds.   C3

Disclosure in Tax Case
Court papers say that the law firm of Jenkens & Gilchrist marketed bogus tax
shelters to 1,100 people over five years, nearly twice the number previously
cited by the Internal Revenue Service.   C2

Using a Television Windfall
Stations across the country are finding ways to capitalize on bandwidth left
over after a push toward high-definition television, including providing premium
cable programming at a discounted price.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: The nightmare at Abu Ghraib; rule of law in Guatemala; the Fresh Air
Fund changes lives; Adam Cohen on free speech and Howard Stern.

Column: William Safire.

Autos   D8
Metro Diary   B2
Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E9
Crossword   E2
Weather   A20


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); ARMIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (77%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (76%); MILITARY RULE (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (67%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

PERSON: HU JINTAO (50%); HAMAD KARZAI (50%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); PANAMA (94%); IRAQ (93%); CHINA
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             341 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A President Beyond the Law

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis.

Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31; The Roots of Abu Ghraib

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


The question tears at all of us, regardless of party or ideology: How could
American men and women treat Iraqi prisoners with such cruelty -- and laugh at
their humiliation? We are told that there was a failure of military leadership.
Officers in the field were lax. Pentagon officials didn't care. So the worst in
human nature was allowed to flourish.

But something much more profound underlies this terrible episode. It is a
culture of low regard for the law, of respecting the law only when it is
convenient.

Again and again, over these last years, President Bush has made clear his view
that law must bend to what he regards as necessity. National security as he
defines it trumps our commitments to international law. The Constitution must
yield to novel infringements on American freedom.

One clear example is the treatment of the prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The
Third Geneva Convention requires that any dispute about a prisoner's status be
decided by a ''competent tribunal.'' American forces provided many such
tribunals for prisoners taken in the Persian Gulf war in 1991. But Mr. Bush has
refused to comply with the Geneva Convention. He decided that all the Guantanamo
prisoners were ''unlawful combatants'' -- that is, not regular soldiers but
spies, terrorists or the like.

The Supreme Court is now considering whether the prisoners can use American
courts to challenge their designation as unlawful. The administration's brief
could not be blunter in its argument that the president is the law on this
issue: ''The president, in his capacity as commander in chief, has conclusively
determined that the Guantanamo detainees . . . are not entitled to
prisoner-of-war status under the Geneva Convention.''

The violation of the Geneva Convention and that refusal to let the courts
consider the issue have cost the United States dearly in the world legal
community -- the judges and lawyers in societies that, historically, have looked
to the United States as the exemplar of a country committed to law. Lord Steyn,
a judge on Britain's highest court, condemned the administration's position on
Guantanamo in an address last fall -- pointing out that American courts would
refuse even to hear claims of torture from prisoners. At the time, the idea of
torture at Guantanamo seemed far-fetched to me. After the disclosures of the
last 10 days, can we be sure?

Instead of a country committed to law, the United States is now seen as a
country that proclaims high legal ideals and then says that they should apply to
all others but not to itself. That view has been worsened by the Bush
administration's determination that Americans not be subject to the new
International Criminal Court, which is supposed to punish genocide and war
crimes.

Fear of terrorism -- a quite understandable fear after 9/11 -- has led to harsh
departures from normal legal practice at home. Aliens swept off the streets by
the Justice Department as possible terrorists after 9/11 were subjected to
physical abuse and humiliation by prison guards, the department's inspector
general found. Attorney General John Ashcroft did not apologize -- a posture
that sent a message.

Inside the United States, the most radical departure from law as we have known
it is President Bush's claim that he can designate any American citizen an
''enemy combatant'' -- and thereupon detain that person in solitary confinement
indefinitely, without charges, without a trial, without a right to counsel.
Again, the president's lawyers have argued determinedly that he must have the
last word, with little or no scrutiny from lawyers and judges.

There was a stunning moment in President Bush's 2003 State of the Union address
when he said that more than 3,000 suspected terrorists ''have been arrested in
many countries. And many others have met a different fate. Let's put it this
way: They are no longer a problem for the United States.''

In all these matters, there is a pervasive attitude: that to follow the law is
to be weak in the face of terrorism. But commitment to law is not a weakness. It
has been the great strength of the United States from the beginning. Our leaders
depart from that commitment at their peril, and ours, for a reason that Justice
Louis D. Brandeis memorably expressed 75 years ago.

''Our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher,'' he wrote. ''For good
or ill, it teaches the whole people by its example. Crime is contagious. If the
government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for the law; it invites
every man to become a law unto himself.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); POWS & MIAS (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); TORTURE
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(88%); TERRORISM (86%); DESERT STORM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); GENOCIDE (74%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); LAWYERS
(72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); JUDGES (70%) Terrorism;
Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Citizenship  ; Terrorism; Legal Profession; Law and Legislation

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Anthony Lewis; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (90%); GULF STATES (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); United States

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             342 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogation Methods in Iraq Aren't All Found in Manual

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
TECHNIQUES

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 6


On the last few pages of Army Field Manual 34-52, the American military lists 20
acceptable tactics for interrogations of prisoners, ranging from ''emotional
love'' and ''emotional hate'' to ''pride and ego'' and ''Mutt and Jeff.'' Most
effective of all, however, is ''the direct approach'' -- the direct questioning
of a prisoner without resorting to coercion of any kind, according to the last
military intelligence manual to be made public, dated May 8, 1987.

''The direct approach is often called no approach at all,'' the manual states,
''but it is the most effective of all the approaches.'' The manual asserts that
direct questioning of prisoners was 85 to 95 percent effective during World War
II and 90 to 95 percent effective during Vietnam.

But during the American campaign against terror and, more recently, the
American-led occupation of Iraq, military intelligence experts say the direct
approach has often been met with immovable resistance, leaving interrogators to
depend on other means of eliciting responses that cannot be found in Field
Manual 34-52.

''It's a fairly obsolete manual,'' said Mike Ritz, a former Army interrogator
who runs interrogation workshops for law enforcement officials and civilians.

The manual, however, is still used as a reference guide by the Army's
intelligence school at Fort Huachucha, Ariz.

The use of hoods and sleep deprivation are ''common practice'' techniques, Mr.
Ritz said.

''You won't see that in print anywhere,'' he said. ''It's one of those things
that is understood but it's not discussed that much. It's something that has
happened over time.''

Several prisoners' rights advocates and former Army interrogators agreed that
interrogation techniques have grown more aggressive since Sept. 11, and now
include some of the coercive techniques depicted in the photographs of hooded
and nude prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison.

Techniques include the use of strobe lights and loud music, shackling prisoners
in awkward positions for long hours and manipulating the levels of pain
medication, a tactic that was reportedly used during the interrogation of Abu
Zubaydah, a member of Al Qaeda who was captured in early 2003 in Pakistan after
being wounded by gunshots.

While six American soldiers face a possible court martial, and seven others have
been reprimanded for abusing prisoners at Abu Ghraib, the commander in charge of
military jails in Iraq, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, said this week that
several interrogation techniques used by American military intelligence since
Sept. 11 will now be forbidden at all detention facilities in Iraq.

''We will no longer, in any circumstances, hood any of the detainees,'' General
Miller said. ''We will no longer use stress positions in any of our
interrogations. And we will not use sleep deprivation in any of our
interrogations.''

Exceptions to any of the new regulations would require his direct approval, he
said.

Human rights advocates and prisoners' rights lawyers said that General Miller's
acknowledgment was the first time that the American military had confirmed using
such techniques in interrogations.

''We knew about these things from press reports, but I believe General Miller's
statement was the first time anyone confirmed that these techniques are used as
a matter of routine,'' said Tom Malinowski, the Washington advocacy director for
Human Rights Watch.

''Clearly, keeping people sleep deprived for four days or forced standing -- a
notorious torture technique, though it seems very innocuous -- it is clear that
those things would be prohibited in the United States by the Eighth Amendment,''
Mr. Malinowski said. Last June, the Pentagon assured Congress in writing that
military interrogations of detainees worldwide had not violated Constitutional
stipulations against cruel and unusual punishment.

Several phone messages left Thursday at the Army intelligence school were not
returned.

From the earliest days at the Bagram military base in Afghanistan, detainees
reported that American interrogators routinely covered prisoners' heads with
hoods, stripped them of their clothing or forced them to kneel or stand in
uncomfortable positions for long periods.

The Pentagon is investigating reports that two prisoners died while in American
custody at Bagram.

Two detainees who were released from Bagram, Saif-ur Rahman and Abdul Qayyum,
told The Associated Press that during their two months in prison, they were
deprived of sleep, humiliated by taunts from women soldiers and forced to stand,
in awkward positions.

The 1987 field manual states that ''experience indicates that the use of force
is not necessary to gain the cooperation of sources for interrogation,'' adding
that force is a ''poor technique'' that nearly always ''yields unreliable
results.''

The manual also states that the ''use of force, mental torture, threats, insults
and exposure to unpleasant and inhumane treatment of any kind'' is prohibited by
the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the United Nations' Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and American military
law.

Mr. Ritz, the former Army interrogator, said that torture was ineffective as an
interrogation technique. ''The fear of the unknown is the greatest power that an
interrogator has,'' he said.

The 1987 field manual does not state when coercive tactics cross the line into
torture, however, and some experts have criticized the military for failing to
explicitly list actions that constitute torture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PRISONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(89%); TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); WAR ON TERROR (73%);
MILITARY COURTS (73%); WORLD WAR II (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); AL-QAEDA (67%);
NATURISTS & NATURISM (61%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (50%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Photography; Nudism and Nudity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Don Jr Van Natta

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             344 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Donald Rumsfeld Should Go

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30; The New Iraq Crisis

LENGTH: 497 words


There was a moment about a year ago, in the days of ''Mission Accomplished,''
when Donald Rumsfeld looked like a brilliant tactician. American troops -- the
lean, mean fighting machine Mr. Rumsfeld assembled -- swept into Baghdad with a
speed that surprised even the most optimistic hawks. It was crystal clear that
the Defense Department, not State and certainly not the United Nations, would
control the start of nation-building. Mr. Rumsfeld, with his steely grin and
tell-it-like-it-is press conferences, was the closest thing to a rock star the
Bush cabinet would ever see.

That was then.

It is time now for Mr. Rumsfeld to go, and not only because he bears personal
responsibility for the scandal of Abu Ghraib. That would certainly have been
enough. The United States has been humiliated to a point where government
officials could not release this year's international human rights report this
week for fear of being scoffed at by the rest of the world. The reputation of
its brave soldiers has been tarred, and the job of its diplomats made
immeasurably harder because members of the American military tortured and
humiliated Arab prisoners in ways guaranteed to inflame Muslim hearts
everywhere. And this abuse was not an isolated event, as we know now and as Mr.
Rumsfeld should have known, given the flood of complaints and reports directed
to his office over the last year.

The world is waiting now for a sign that President Bush understands the
seriousness of what has happened. It needs to be more than his repeated
statements that he is sorry the rest of the world does not ''understand the true
nature and heart of America.'' Mr. Bush should start showing the state of his
own heart by demanding the resignation of his secretary of defense.

This is far from a case of a fine cabinet official undone by the actions of a
few obscure bad apples in the military police. Donald Rumsfeld has morphed, over
the last two years, from a man of supreme confidence to arrogance, then to
almost willful blindness. With the approval of the president, he sent American
troops into a place whose nature and dangers he had apparently never bothered to
examine.

We now know that no one with any power in the Defense Department had a clue
about what the administration was getting the coalition forces into. Mr.
Rumsfeld's blithe confidence that he could run his war on the cheap has also
seriously harmed the Army and the National Guard.

This page has argued that the United States, having toppled Saddam Hussein, has
an obligation to do everything it can to usher in a stable Iraqi government. But
the country is not obliged to continue struggling through this quagmire with the
secretary of defense who took us into the swamp. Mr. Rumsfeld's second in
command, Paul Wolfowitz, is certainly not an acceptable replacement because he
was one of the prime architects of the invasion strategy. It is long past time
for a new team and new thinking at the Department of Defense.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); BUDGETS (79%); ARMIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); GENOCIDE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(76%); SCANDALS (74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); TORTURE (72%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); CORRECTIONS (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%);
APPROVALS (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); TERRORISM (59%) Editorials; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Suspensions,
Dismissals and Resignations; Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS (57%) National Guard (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld;
George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; United States

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             346 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1390 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Bomb Kills Chechen Leader And 13 Others at Stadium
A bomb in Chechnya killed the republic's president and 13 others. More than 50
people were reported wounded, including the Russian military commander for the
region. The explosion delivered a severe blow to President Vladimir V. Putin's
efforts to end the deadly conflict in the region.   A1

Fighting European Terrorism
Europe's new antiterrorism coordinator, Gijs de Vries, left, is scheduled to
meet with Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge in order to make assurances that
Europe is toughening its counterterrorism practices and to ask for closer
cooperation between the United States and the European Union in fighting
terrorists.   A6

First Trial for Abuse of Iraqis
A 24-year-old military policeman from a small town in Pennsylvania will be the
first American soldier to face trial in the abuse of Iraqi detainees at Abu
Ghraib prison. In an extraordinary gesture to address outrage over the abuse,
the trial will be conducted openly.   A1

Former inmates and some families of those in American custody gathered in Iraq
to voice their anger after the release of pictures showing mistreatment of
prisoners. Human rights groups and Iraqi leaders say they have been complaining
about improper treatment for months but have received little attention.   A1

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain apologized for the abuse of Iraqi prisoners
by British soldiers as his government prepared to make a statement in Parliament
about the mistreatment investigations.   A12

The American military has begun to recruit Iraqi fighters from prominent Shiite
political parties and tribal sheiks to rebuild the national security forces that
have been decimated by the uprising led by Moktada al-Sadr, a radical young
cleric.   A12

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Chasing China's Malaria Drug
World health agencies, after years of hesitation, are racing to acquire 100
million doses of a Chinese herbal drug that has proved strikingly effective
against malaria. The drug, artemisinin, is rapidly replacing quinine derivatives
and later drugs against which the disease has evolved resistant strains.   A1

Drugs that are available only by prescription in the West can often be obtained
from wandering peddlers or from shopkeepers in Africa. But people often mistake
the fever and chills of flu or other diseases for malaria and take pills without
ever being tested, and many public health officials are now suggesting home test
kits.   A4

Effort Against AIDS in China
The Chinese government warned that AIDS was continuing to spread rapidly and
announced new ''urgent measures'' to improve prevention and education efforts.
A6

NATIONAL   A14-19

Renaming a Florida Street Leaves Nerves Raw
The battle in Zephyrhills mirrors dozens that have erupted around the country
over plans to rename streets for the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., but with a
twist: the City Council is to finalize a reversal of its vote and remove Dr.
King's name. Accusations of racism are swirling, supporters of the name change
are picketing City Hall, and a white supremacist Web site is praising the
council's change of heart.   A1

A Voice for Health in Sex-Films
Sharon Mitchell, a former actress in pornographic films with a doctorate in
human sexuality, has become prominent as an outbreak of H.I.V. brings the
sex-video industry to a standstill. Actors have turned to her foundation, the
Adult Industry Medical Health Care Foundation, which tests sex-video performers
for sexually transmitted diseases.   A14

Mothers Rally for Weapons Ban
Gun control advocates used a Mother's Day rally to begin a nationwide campaign
to lobby to renew a 1994 ban on assault weapons, which is set to expire in
September. The Million Mom March attracted about 2,500 people, its organizers
said.   A14

McCain in Spotlight Once Again
As the Iraqi prisoner abuse scandal unfolds, Senator John McCain is in a unique
position as both a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee and a former
prisoner of war. Mr. McCain intends to use the committee as a platform to prod
the Bush administration into making the facts of the scandal public immediately.
A19

OBITUARIES   B7

Alan King
The stand-up comedian who parlayed a borscht-belt sense of humor, a tummler's
cheek and a big appetite for the limelight into a thoroughgoing show business
career that lasted more than half a century. Mr. King was an unabashed exemplar
of Jewish comedy, a through-and-through New Yorker whose sensibility, delivery
and accent never migrated far from their Brooklyn roots, he was 76.   B7

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Little Cellphone Tax Money Goes to 911 System
New York State has collected $440 million since 1991 in special taxes on
cellphones. But only about $30 million of that has gone to the program named on
most cellphone bills as the purpose of the tax: enhanced 911 service, which can
help emergency dispatchers locate a cellphone caller. Much of it has been drawn
for other purposes.   B1

Unlicensed Day Care Slots
Since the nation's welfare system was overhauled, New York City has received
government money intended to help women leave welfare for work and to expand the
city's child-care system for low-income workers. But instead of significantly
increasing the number of licensed day care slots, many of the slots created are
in informal care.   B1

Touch of SoHo in Binghamton
Ari Meisel, recent business school grad and son of real estate mogul Louis K.
Meisel, is turning a cluster of forgotten warehouses in Binghamton, NY, into
SoHo-style lofts. He plans to sell them for $200,000 to $250,000, about twice
the price of the average home there.   B4

Roads No Longer Traveled
Red Hook Lane, one of several forgotten or nonexistent Brooklyn streets dating
to colonial times, may become extinct if the City Planning Commission votes on a
complex downtown Brooklyn rezoning plan that would erase it from the city's map.
The street is one of many in the borough whose tales are all but gone.   B1

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-8

Nets and Lakers Bounce Back
The New Jersey Nets and Los Angeles Lakers battled back to win their first games
in their respective conference semifinal matchups. The Nets defeated the Detroit
Pistons, 82-64, at Continental Arena, while in Los Angeles, the Lakers defeated
the defending champion San Antonio Spurs, 105-81. Both the Spurs and Pistons
lead two games to one.   D1

ARTS   E1-8

Good Guys Win This Summer
Vanquishing evil, battling for freedom and dying for honor will be Hollywood's
preoccupations this summer, as big movies gestated in the insecure post-Sept. 11
world finally make their way onto screens.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Self-Censorship in Broadcasting
A series of recent decisions by the Federal Communication Commission, as well as
bills passed in Congress have forced television and radio broadcasters who are
unsure about standards to practice a form of self-censorship, swinging the
pendulum of what they consider acceptable in the direction of apparent
prudishness.   A1

Southwest Enters New Hub
Southwest Airlines, the nation's largest low-fare carrier, has added
Philadelphia to its list of hubs, setting in motion a battle for passengers
between low-fare carriers and traditional airlines that epitomizes what is
happening nationwide.   C1

S.E.C Under Pressure
The Securities and Exchange Commission has come under pressure from business and
some members of the Bush administration to water down proposed rule changes in
the way corporate boards are elected, mutual funds are governed and hedge funds
are regulated.   C1

Reality Television Infighting
A new dispute has emerged in reality television: NBC and the Fox network have
announced plans to produce similar reality shows set in the world of boxing. The
producers of NBC's ''The Contender'' have accused both Fox and Endemol, the
production company behind ''The Next Great Champ,'' of stealing their idea.   C1


Wider Role for Redstone Heir
Shari Redstone, the daughter of Sumner M. Redstone, is set to take a larger role
at Viacom Inc., the giant diversified media company that her father, Mel
Karmazin, controls.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: Killing off housing for the poor; jobs for an idle legislature;
church, state and dinner; Carolyn Curiel on the Brooklyn Museum.

Column: William Safire.

Autos   D9
Metro Diary   B2
Bridge   E5
TV Listings   E7
Crossword   E3
Weather   D10


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); MALARIA (88%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (87%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
EUROPEAN UNION (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%); POLITICS (73%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (73%); AIDS & HIV (70%); TROPICAL MEDICINE (70%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (69%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (69%); ANTI-INFECTIVES (67%);
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (67%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (66%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
(65%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (65%); HERBAL MEDICINE (63%); INFLUENZA (61%);
CITIES (54%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%); TONY BLAIR (50%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE
(94%); CHINA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);
AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             347 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chile's Military Must Now Report to One of Its Past Victims

BYLINE: By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; Editorial Observer

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


One day Michelle Bachelet stepped into the elevator of her apartment building in
Santiago and found herself face to face with Marcelo Moren Brito. Both were
stunned.

They had met nearly three decades before in Villa Grimaldi, a torture and
concentration camp established after Gen. Augusto Pinochet's coup in 1973. Dr.
Bachelet and her mother had been prisoners; Mr. Moren Brito, a secret-police
colonel who ran the camp, was their torturer.

Of all the buildings in Santiago, they ended up living in the same one. ''I felt
nauseous,'' said Dr. Bachelet, a pediatrician by training, in a recent
interview. Then again, it's Mr. Moren Brito who exits the elevator whenever she
gets on it. Their roles have changed. He has been sentenced to prison time and
faces other charges for his role in Chile's ''dirty war'' -- and Dr. Bachelet is
now the nation's defense minister.

Dr. Bachelet is a rising star in the nation's Socialist Party -- the party of
the overthrown president Salvador Allende -- and the daughter of Alberto
Bachelet, an Air Force general who worked with President Allende and died in
1974 of torture in prison.

This most unlikely defense minister has become Chile's most improbable next
president. With presidential elections scheduled for next year, she has by far
the highest poll ratings of any politician in Chile.

Her popularity is especially notable in what is arguably Latin America's most
socially conservative country, which legalized divorce only last Friday.
Remarkably, Dr. Bachelet's most serious competitor for the nomination of Chile's
center-left coalition is also a woman: Soledad Alvear, the foreign minister.

In other Latin American nations, disgust with the corruption and ineptitude of
the usual politicians has led voters to look to authoritarian outsiders, like
Hugo Chavez in Venezuela. In Chile, where the government is relatively clean and
effective, voters disillusioned with politics are tempted to turn, for the first
time, to women.

Talking with Dr. Bachelet, who has also served as Chile's health minister, is
like conversing with a lively neighbor. She is intelligent, appealing rather
than glamorous, and as defense minister has become a symbol of reconciliation
and courage.

The military has grudgingly embraced Dr. Bachelet, despite her endorsement of
efforts to prosecute officers for past crimes. Military families, who have
soundly booed previous civilian defense ministers at the annual military parade,
applaud Dr. Bachelet. When a magazine accused her of belonging to a guerrilla
organization in her youth, the armed forces defended her.

''With my background, they were expecting an avenging angel,'' she said. ''But
now I get letters from retired military men saying, I had thought your
appointment was a mistake, but I've changed my mind.''

Dr. Bachelet, who was a top student at defense universities in Chile and in
Washington, has pushed for important reforms, including better coordination
among the services. She has also worked to lessen tensions with Chile's
neighbors.

In a sense, though, her most important achievement is as a symbol. ''The leaders
of the armed forces wanted reconciliation without paying a price,'' said Raul
Sohr, a defense analyst in Santiago, ''and they perceived that she could help.''

Dr. Bachelet will need to disappoint the military far more, especially if she
does assume the presidency in the near future. Chile may no longer be in danger
of a military coup, but the armed forces retain some undemocratic privileges
amassed under the dictatorship. The military sets its own budget and receives 10
percent of Chile's receipts from copper, its major export. Commanders cannot be
fired by the president, and officers serve on a national security council that
can limit presidential powers. The armed forces can appoint four senators.

Nor has the military been willing to give up information on the dead or the
disappeared. The official line, which Dr. Bachelet echoes, is that there is no
registry of the whereabouts of the bodies -- that such information is inside the
heads of the officers who did the killing, most of them now retired. But it is
hardly credible that a military as disciplined and hierarchical as Chile's would
have no institutional records, no memory.

Dr. Bachelet's predecessors failed to fully adapt the military to Chile's
democracy. She has yet to force a confrontation, but her mere presence as
defense minister keeps the issue alive. ''There was a group of Pinochet
supporters who thought when the wives of the disappeared died off, the problem
will die with it,'' she said. ''But their children and grandchildren have taken
up the flag.''

That one of these children is now defense minister shows Chile has changed, but
her struggles show that it has not changed enough.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); VOTERS & VOTING (87%);
ARMED FORCES (87%); COUPS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); SENTENCING (76%); FAMILY (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (71%); AIR FORCES (70%); GENOCIDE (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%);
CORRUPTION (68%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (67%); MILITARY DEPENDENTS (66%);
CONSERVATISM (65%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%); PARADES & MARCHES (50%)
Elections; Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Armament, Defense
and Military Forces; Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: MICHELLE BACHELET (92%); HUGO CHAVEZ (56%) Tina Rosenberg; Michelle
(Min) Bachelet; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (94%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); LATIN AMERICA (90%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: Chile; Chile

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             349 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Terror Policy: Between Fear and Freedom

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1111 words


IN the days of relative calm before the nation went to "code orange" last month,
Asa Hutchinson, the Bush administration's point man for border protection, was
being briefed once a day on whatever terrorism threats were lurking.

But the anxiety level ratcheted up substantially in mid-December when
intelligence officials began picking up ominous tidbits indicating that a big
attack might be in the works. Once the country went to orange, or high alert, on
Dec. 21, Mr. Hutchinson's daily updates became almost hourly. Everything from
the status of grounded Air France flights to suspicious passenger names and
fragments of classified terror data flew past his desk.

"It's all been a little bit surreal, just because of the level of intensity
we've seen in these last few weeks and the urgency of it and the drama as it
unfolds," said Mr. Hutchinson, an under secretary at the Department of Homeland
Security. "There's a constant pressure mentally because you realize people's
lives are at issue -- not just their safety, but their convenience when you have
hundreds of people sitting on a runway for hours."

The events of the last three weeks -- the code orange alert, grounded planes,
fighter plane escorts, warnings of hijackings and, on Friday, a stand-down to a
nationwide code yellow -- have been a jolting reminder for many Americans about
their own fragile sense of security.

Indeed, in a war perhaps unlike any other the United States has ever fought,
waged largely on its own turf against an enemy that is invisible and without a
state, the quandary Mr. Hutchinson faces is one the entire country has wrestled
with in the last few weeks: How far can America go to make itself feel safe
again? And how much are Americans willing to give up in the way of freedoms and
convenience to get there?

For every new border protection program -- like the fingerprinting of many
foreign visitors, initiated last week -- civil libertarians and Arab-American
groups express concern about ethnic profiling. For every dire government warning
about the threat of terrorism, skeptical allies raise questions about the
strength of the intelligence the United States has used to justify its concerns.
And for every plane grounded by the threat of terrorism, travelers or airline
officials want to know who is going to foot the bill.

A study by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in fact, placed
the cost of the stepped-up security for the code orange alert at a billion
dollars a week. Tom Ridge, the secretary for homeland security, said he believes
the final cost will end up being much lower than that, but he acknowledged that
the potential toll on people day to day is a real concern.

"We always want to put safety first, but we also want to minimize the
inconvenience," he said last week in moving the country back down to a yellow
alert.

The last three weeks have seen a spasm of aggressive initiatives by the Bush
administration to secure the borders and help quell rising public concerns.
Officials issued an emergency order demanding that foreign carriers put armed
marshals on planes, if necessary. They sent military fighter planes to escort
overseas flights thought to be at risk.

They began fingerprinting and photographing tens of thousands of foreign
visitors. They picked three companies to develop military antimissile technology
to protect airliners. And they gave local police forces more than 1,000
radiation detection devices to help spot possible threats at events over the
holidays, like the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans and the Rose Bowl in Pasadena.

The result, administration officials said, is that the public should rest easier
knowing the country is safer from terrorists today than it was before Sept. 11,
2001.

But not everyone is convinced. In a report released Thursday by the World
Economic Forum and Gallup International, a majority of Americans surveyed -- 53
percent -- said they feel the country is less safe today than it was 10 years
ago.

"What I see doesn't give me any sense of comfort," said Charles G. Slepian, an
aviation security specialist who is chief executive officer of the Foreseeable
Risk Analysis Center, a private group in New York.

"What I see is an admission that the government doesn't trust the security
measures we have, and we've had to start doing things like grounding planes and
denying landing rights because we're unprepared for the threats we've seen the
last few weeks," he said.

If there is a sense of skittishness on the part of counterterrorism officials,
it is because they say the threats are both real and growing. In the nightmares
they see, the next big attack on American soil could come from almost anywhere:
a hijacked international airliner crashed into a power plant or a landmark; a
radiological "dirty bomb" detonated on a downtown street; a crude nuclear device
smuggled into a port; or perhaps a crop duster loaded with dangerous chemicals.

American officials regard Al Qaeda as a foe that is as crafty as it is
dangerous. Expeditions in Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban, for
instance, revealed translations of American newspaper articles that discussed
security vulnerabilities in federal government buildings. And Al Qaeda has
proven resilient as well, with its agents suspected in a series of recent
attacks despite the capture of numerous leaders.

To combat the threat, American intelligence has become increasingly aggressive
in collecting bits of terrorism information from around the world --
eavesdropping on suspected extremists, checking e-mail, assessing trends. The
aim, officials say, is to avoid the types of missed warning signs that preceded
Sept. 11.

The more information that is developed, the more skittish officials are likely
to become. With the United States pumping an additional $41 billion into
counterterrorism and homeland security this year, its efforts have no doubt
produced a surge in threat reports for officials to assess -- the same type of
reports that led the Bush administration to raise alert levels last month.

But some critics wonder whether the whole process has become a bit of a
self-fulfilling prophecy, with an apparatus that has an incentive to report
terrorist threats, based on solid information or not.

"Fear is a tough thing to combat," said Timothy Edgar, an American Civil
Liberties Union official who believes some of the Bush administration's
principal counterterrorism measures have gone too far. "The idea that we're
facing very specific threats against the United States has gotten a lot of
people upset. But the reality is that it's very hard for any of us to judge why
we went to code orange in the first place."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The extraordinary becomes the routine: a foreign traveler had
his finger scanned last week at Kennedy Airport in New York. (Photo by Stephen
Chernin/Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); AIRLINES (90%); HIJACKING
(90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AIRPORT RUNWAYS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM
(66%); FINGERPRINTING (61%); ARAB AMERICANS (61%); RACIAL PROFILING (61%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%) Terrorism; Public Opinion; Hijacking; Airlines and
Airplanes; Security and Warning Systems; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

COMPANY: AIR FRANCE-KLM SA (57%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

TICKER: AF (PAR) (57%); AF (AMS) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (57%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (57%)

PERSON: Eric Lichtblau

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             350 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Another Test for Qaddafi: Who Infected the Children?

BYLINE:  By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: BENGHAZI, Libya


Nesma Wershefani looks at visitors warily, with piercing black eyes.

Last fall, at age 6, she went to first grade with a backpack and a brightly
colored tunic, full of excitement about learning. Now she is back at home
because the other children teased her about having the virus that causes AIDS, a
disease she does not yet understand.

"The children and the teachers treated her very badly, and she was socially
rejected," said her father, Naji Wershefani, a truck driver in Benghazi, a port
city of 700,000. Mr. Wershefani, his wife and five children live in a tiny
apartment on a muddy street where potholes overflow with sewage and rainwater.

Across town, Suhaila Awad, 17, struggles to endure her isolation in the second
year of high school; the other students know she carries the same virus. She
hates to talk about it.

"Her best friend won't see her anymore," says her father, Muhammad Awad. "It is
making me very sick, too, but in my heart."

These victims of what is known as the Benghazi epidemic, which spread H.I.V.,
the human immunodeficiency virus, to more than 400 children here in 1997-98, are
the most visible face of one of the most difficult political problems Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi is facing as leader of Libya.

Blame has not yet been assigned, although a number of doctors and nurses,
foreign and Libyan, have been charged with negligence. Some of them -- only the
foreigners -- are in jail, facing the death penalty.

While Colonel Qaddafi's recent decision to rid his country of programs to
develop nuclear and other unconventional weapons may usher in a new era between
Libya and the West, a number of European nations also expect him to make a
strong gesture on human rights in Benghazi.

"This is a test case for us, and we are at a crucial moment," said a European
ambassador who has been working to free seven medical workers, six Bulgarians
and a Palestinian, who were arrested in 1999. European governments and rights
organizations assert that the epidemic was caused by gross negligence by Libya's
Health Ministry.

But the Libyans said the seven took part in a conspiracy by the Central
Intelligence Agency and Mossad, Israel's spy agency, to spread H.I.V. to Libya
and undermine the state.

The detainees said they were tortured and sexually abused. Libyan officials at
first denied the accusations, but later arrested senior army officers who
conducted the interrogations and charged them with torture, which diplomats here
say is routine in the prison system. (As part of their defense, the Libyan
officers assert they, too, were tortured into confessing.)

At an AIDS conference in Nigeria in April 2001, the Libyan leader referred to
the case publicly for the first time and said the foreign medical workers would
be tried in the same manner as Libyan intelligence officers implicated in the
operation that downed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.

"This is something terrible, a catastrophe, an odious crime," Colonel Qaddafi
said. "We have found a doctor and a group of nurses who possessed the H.I.V.
virus and who were asked to experiment" on the "effect of viruses of this type,
AIDS, on the children in question."

"Who charged them with this odious task? Some said it was the C.I.A. Others said
it was Mossad." The trial, he added, would be an international event, "like the
Lockerbie trial."

After nearly a dozen delays, the AIDS trial began last summer.

European governments and rights groups say the Libyan Health Ministry failed to
screen blood products adequately, and allowed poor sterilization practices by
the staff of Al Fateh Children's Hospital.

Yet when the outbreak was detected, the Libyan administrators accused the
foreign staff of conspiracy to murder, in an act of "scapegoating," as one
European ambassador called it.

"They singled out the Bulgarians because they came from a weak and isolated
country, and they assumed they would receive no help," the ambassador said. "But
they were wrong."

Help came in many forms: Italy, France and Switzerland invited hundreds of the
infected children for treatment and counseling in European hospitals, while two
of Europe's most prominent AIDS specialists, Prof. Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur
Institute, and Vittorio Colizzi, an Italian researcher, studied the epidemic and
found that the foreign medical workers were less to blame than the hospital
administration was.

The patient who set off the epidemic, they said, was already in the hospital
before the foreign medical workers arrived. In addition, they cited poor
sanitary conditions, broken sterilization equipment, the reuse of needles and
shortages of disposable syringes.

Many affected families are still willing to believe the worst of the foreigners.

Muhammad Wanis Ghadir, 50, whose 6-year-old son, Wanis, became infected when he
went to the hospital to be treated for asthma, is "100 percent certain" that the
Bulgarians and the Palestinian were testing a "manufactured" strain of H.I.V. on
an unsuspecting population.

Mr. Wershefani said, "I went to the court every day and had to look into the
face of the people who murdered my daughter."

With emotions so high, Colonel Qaddafi must now intervene and has told Western
diplomats he will do so. The trial court suspended its work in December to await
a judgment by a commission of Libyan doctors.

If Colonel Qaddafi accepts the Western judgment that Libya's negligent health
system caused the catastrophe, he will win praise in Europe, but he will be
forced to assign blame at home. That could cost him more than Lockerbie; with
more than 400 infected people asking for $10 million each, the payout would
exceed $4 billion. Libya has pledged $2.7 billion to Lockerbie survivors.

"The state has to pay, because they are responsible to us," said Mr. Wershefani.
"The children were in a Libyan hospital."

Every day he must face his daughter Nesma, already frail from a poor appetite.
"She is part of me and I am losing part of me," he said. "She is growing up to
die."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Suhaila Awad, 17, also infected with H.I.V., faces isolation at
school. "Her best friend won't see her anymore," says her father, Muhammad.;
Nesma Wershefani, left, with her father, Naji, is one of around 400 children in
Benghazi infected with H.I.V. Libya has accused foreign medical workers of
aiding a conspiracy to spread the virus. (Photographs by Abeer Allam for The New
York Times) Map of Libya highlighting Benghazi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIDS & HIV (92%); CHILDREN (90%); VIRUSES (90%); DISEASES & DISORDERS
(90%); NURSES & NURSING (90%); EPIDEMICS (89%); ARRESTS (86%); TORTURE (86%);
ESPIONAGE (84%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (78%); DISEASE AGENTS &
VECTORS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); SEWERAGE SYSTEMS (76%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (76%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (76%); CONSPIRACY (72%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (71%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%); PRISONS (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); CORRECTIONS (69%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (68%); SEX
OFFENSES (67%); ARMIES (67%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (66%); HEALTH CARE POLICY
(65%); NEGLIGENCE (64%); MILITARY WEAPONS (63%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (50%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome; Children and Youth; Hospitals; Doctors; Nursing and Nurses;
Palestinians; Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

PERSON: Patrick E Tyler; Muammar El- (Col) Qaddafi

CITY: BENGHAZI, LIBYA (93%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); EUROPE (90%);
BULGARIA (86%); NIGERIA (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: Bulgaria; Benghazi (Libya)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             352 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Follow the Money

BYLINE:   By Martin Mayer;  Martin Mayer, a guest scholar at the Brookings
Institution, is author of "The Fed."

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: SHELTER ISLAND, N.Y.


It has been exactly one month since President Bush announced the capture of
Saddam Hussein. American officials interrogating Mr. Hussein are obviously
interested in what he knows about illegal weapons programs in Iraq, human rights
violations and other crimes. Whether he will cooperate remains to be seen.

But there is another line of questioning officials might pursue -- one that
depends less on the cooperation of Mr. Hussein than on the assistance of the
United States Federal Reserve Bank. Among Mr. Hussein's possessions when he was
captured was three-quarters of a million dollars in United States currency in
crisp new bills. Whence came the gentleman's stash?

Answering this question would help our understanding of terrorist financial
networks. And if the cash is sequentially numbered, as is likely, then the
question could be easily answered.

All United States currency is printed by the United States Mint, to the order of
one of the 12 banks of the Federal Reserve system. It comes into circulation
through a bank that has an account at the Fed for which it was printed. The Fed
deducts the face value of the bills from that account, and an armored car takes
them to their new owner.

That regional Federal Reserve Bank keeps a record that identifies the purchasing
bank. And the purchaser knows how it disposed of the bills. When they are found
all together, it means that the bank that bought the bills did not feed them out
from the teller window or the cash machine, but delivered them to a single
customer.

And the bank knows who that customer was. Between, say, Philadelphia and Iraq,
there is no doubt a chain, perhaps involving banks in the Cayman or Channel
Islands, in Abu Dhabi or Dubai. Still, each bank in the chain can give the name
of the customer to which it gave these bills.

Although Saddam Hussein's government had many sanctions against it, it may well
be that no laws were broken in the passage of the Federal Reserve notes from the
mint to Tikrit. But it would be interesting to know which banks were
collaborators in getting that cash to the tyrant of Iraq.

Unfortunately, the search for these witting or unwitting collaborators cannot
even get started, because the Federal Reserve Board will not permit regional
banks to reveal the identity of the purchasers of large blocks of United States
currency. There is no law that prohibits such disclosure; it's simply a Fed
policy. Yet in this age of payroll services and electronic payments, there are
few legitimate uses outside the banking system for very large orders of
hundred-dollar bills.

The Fed has always resisted placing American banks under obligation to reveal
skulduggery, whether it involves drug smuggling, commercial fraud, terrorism or
other international conspiracy. Banks are not, the Fed insists, law enforcement
agencies. It may be that the F.B.I. has access to the Fed's records -- a
spokesman for the Fed, after checking with the main office, would not say yea or
nay -- but it is not clear that the F.B.I. has authority to continue such
searches beyond American borders.

The Fed's manual on the Bank Secrecy Act still says that "know your customer"
rules, while desirable, are "not presently required by regulation or statute" --
though the Patriot Act has spawned some rules on the identification of new
customers. At any rate, the manual says rather mysteriously, such rules "should
not interfere with the relationship of the financial institution with its good
customers."

Senators Charles E. Grassley and Max Baucus, chairman and ranking member,
respectively, of the Finance Committee, complained to the Treasury Department
last year that not enough has been done to keep the financiers of terrorism from
paying their bills through the American financial system. Perhaps Congress
should tell the Fed to release its hold on information about which banks supply
the bundles of cash that facilitate international crime.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 17, 2004



CORRECTION: An Op-Ed article on Wednesday about tracing Saddam Hussein's supply
of dollars misidentified the Treasury Department unit responsible for producing
paper currency. It is the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, not the United
States Mint.

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Tim Lane)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); CENTRAL BANKS
(90%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); TERRORISM (88%); IRAQ WAR (78%); SMUGGLING (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS
(77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (77%); AUTOMATED TELLER
MACHINES (76%); ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER (76%); COINS & COINAGE (75%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); COMMERCIAL BANKING
(71%); PUBLIC POLICY (71%); ELECTRONIC BILLING (70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%)
Currency; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US MINT (56%); FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM (56%) Federal Reserve Bank

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%) Martin Mayer; Saddam Hussein

CITY: ABU DHABI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (53%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (68%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); CAYMAN ISLANDS (79%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (68%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             354 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Something in Common: Horror;
Survivors Describe the Evils of Genocide

BYLINE:   By COREY KILGANNON

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1186 words


David Gewirtzman and Jacqueline Murekatete stood before a restless group of
students at Great Neck North High School, waiting to tell their stories. They
seemed to be an unlikely pair speaking on what seemed an unlikely topic --
genocide -- for a group of teenagers munching on sandwiches and rustling snack
wrappers.

By the time they had finished, however, the only sound that could be heard in
the room was the faint hum of a radiator.

Mr. Gewirtzman, a 75-year-old retired pharmacist who lives in Great Neck, N.Y.,
on Long Island, survived the Holocaust by spending almost two years burrowed
with other members of his family under a pigsty on a Polish farm.

Now, he visits local schools, hoping that by telling of his experiences, he can
educate students and help to prevent a killing like the Holocaust from happening
again.

When he spoke at a high school in Queens two years ago, Ms. Murekatete, then a
student, was in the audience. She said his story had made her burst into tears.
She wrote him a note relating her own horrible story, which took place in
Rwanda, in central Africa, in 1994. She narrowly escaped being hacked to death
by a rival tribe. Her family -- both parents and all six siblings -- did not.

"I finally found someone who understood what I went through because he went
through the same thing," said Ms. Murekatete, now 19 and a freshman at the State
University at Stony Brook.

Mr. Gewirtzman met the teenager, heard her story and suggested she begin
speaking to groups with him.

It would not bring her family back, he said, but it might save other families
from potential genocide. It would also help to heal her own pain.

"We are as different as can be," he told the students.

"She's black, I'm white; she's young, I'm old; she's African and Christian and
I'm a Jew from Poland. Yet we're like brother and sister, because we're bound by
the common trauma of our experience and a common history of pain and suffering
and persecution."

Now they appear regularly together, hoping that they can bring experience and
relevance to a harsh subject. But neither expected the impression they would
have on each other, and how deep their friendship would grow with the only
apparent bond being death.

Elaine Weiss, a history teacher at the high school who directs its social
science research center, said she asked them to speak because "the kids can
identify with an 18-year-old girl better than they can with a 75-year-old man."

She said, "Our kids read theories about racism and genocide in books. But when
they hear similar real-life stories from a white European man and a black
African teenager 55 years apart in age, who lived through events 50 years apart
in history, it's not a theory anymore. It's alive."

Mr. Gewirtzman grew up in a small village in Poland and in November 1942, the
family persuaded a local farmer to hide them and some relatives -- eight people
in all -- for 20 months in a small trench below a pigsty strewn with mud and pig
waste.

Day after day in the hole, they would argue whether to surrender to the Nazis,
he recalled.

"At times my father would yell at me, 'Why did you lead us here? We should have
gone to Treblinka and gotten it over with,' " Mr. Gewirtzman said. "I'd tell
him, 'You may want to die, but don't you want your children to live?' Then he
would snap out of it."

"We thought there wasn't a Jew in Europe still alive, but for some reason, I
never once doubted we would survive," he said. "Maybe I was too young and naive,
but I never lost hope."

They did not escape until July 31, 1944, when the Nazis retreated.

Mr. Gewirtzman and his family lived in Europe for several years, then came to
the United States in 1948. He served in the United States Army in Germany.

He and his wife have two grown sons and he also volunteers at the Nassau
Holocaust Memorial Center, in Glen Cove, Long Island.

As Mr. Gewirtzman spoke, the students became spellbound. Some still held back
tears as Ms. Murekatete began telling how she grew up as the second oldest of
seven children on a family farm in Rwanda. Her family were members of a Tutsi
tribe. In April 1994, when she was 9, the news came over the radio that the Hutu
president had been killed. Groups of Hutu men and boys wielding guns, machetes
and clubs began descending upon villages, killing Tutsis.

The day they reached her village, Ms. Murekatete was visiting her grandmother
Magdalene Mukasharangabo in a nearby village. Her grandmother saved her by
taking her to an orphanage.

After two months, she learned from surviving cousins that her family -- her
mother, father, two sisters, and four brothers -- had been tortured and hacked
to pieces with machetes. Most of her other relatives were also killed, including
her grandmother.

She was brought to New York in October 1995, by an uncle who legally adopted her
and applied for political asylum for her. She spoke only Kinyarwanda, but was
placed in a fifth-grade class and soon learned English and began excelling in
school.

She said she still sees her family in her dreams. Other times, though, she is
chased by the men with machetes.

"I've never gone to a counselor or a therapist," she said. "At first, I guess I
hoped it might just go away."

She said, "Some of my friends are afraid to ask me about it and I'm not a person
who talks about my problems."

Ms. Murekatete is currently writing a book about her recollections of the
genocide in Rwanda.

She also said that last September, she met the human rights advocate Elie Wiesel
at an International Day of Peace ceremony at the United Nations. After hearing
her story, he hugged her and said he would help her publish it.

With many cousins, aunts and uncles killed and only a few relatives left, Ms.
Murekatete has grown close to Mr. Gewirtzman and his wife, Lillian, a Polish
Jew, who had been sent with her family to Siberia for six years while Russia
occupied Poland. Ms. Murekatete visits their home in Great Neck and has been to
their summer home in the Hamptons. The Gewirtzmans went to her high school
graduation, and she had tears in her eyes.

"I didn't know what to do with my experience and he showed me," she said when
asked about that day.

Mr. Gewirtzman said, "In a way, we've become sort of parents to her."

"We both went through a traumatic experience," he said, "but instead of
remaining bitter and angry and seeking revenge, we both resolved to spend the
anger in a positive manner, to prevent this from ever happening again."

Ms. Murekatete shows listeners that racial hatred has outlived the Holocaust,
and that genocide was not just something that happened to an old Jewish man from
Poland, he said.

"When I go to an inner-city school, the kids might think they have nothing in
common with some Jews 60 years ago, or me with slavery," he said.

"But when they see both of us, they see the problem is the same," he said. "It
transcends race and ethnicity. People are still being taught hatred and it is
hatred that we are fighting."

Ms. Murekatete said, "Sometimes, students ask if they can help, and I say, 'The
best thing you can do for me is to educate yourselves so this doesn't continue
to happen.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 17, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on Wednesday about David Gewirtzman, a Holocaust survivor
who gives talks in the New York City schools, referred incorrectly to his
children. They are a son and a daughter, not two sons. The article also
misstated the amount of time his wife, Lillian, and her family spent in a
Siberian labor camp during the Russian occupation of Poland. It was 14 months,
not six years.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jacqueline Murekatete and David Gewirtzman often speak with
students, to describe their experiences escaping mass killings in Rwanda and
Poland. (Photo by Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); HOLOCAUST (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); HIGH SCHOOLS (90%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CHILDREN (78%); HISTORY (78%); PRIMARY &
SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); ADOLESCENTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); FAMILY (74%);
RACE & RACISM (66%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (64%); SCIENCE NEWS (60%); SCIENCE &
TECHNOLOGY (60%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Children and Youth;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe

PERSON: Corey Kilgannon; David Gewirtzman; Jacqueline Murekatete

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); POLAND (90%); AFRICA (75%); CENTRAL AFRICA (70%)

REGION: Poland; Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             355 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Judges Protest Female Singers

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 120 words


The Supreme Court protested the lifting of a ban on female singers on state
television. "This is totally against the decisions of the Supreme Court and it
has to be stopped," the deputy chief justice, Fazl Ahmad Manawi, said.

He said the court had complained to the culture minister, Sayed Makhdoom Raheen,
the main figure behind the ending of the ban, which had been in force for nearly
12 years. A broadcast by Kabul Television on Monday featured old images of
Parasto, a popular singer who now lives in the West, performing without a head
scarf. The deputy culture minister, Abdul Hamid Mubaiz, said the move was in
line with the new Constitution. "There should be no discrimination between man
and woman," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUPREME COURTS (91%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); SINGERS &
MUSICIANS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (90%); CULTURE
DEPARTMENTS (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); RELIGION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%)
Women; Apparel; Scarves; Music; Television; Politics and Government; Islam;
Constitutions; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Sayed Makhdoom (Min) Raheen; Abdul Hamid (Min) Mubaiz; Parasto (Afghan
Singer)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (91%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             367 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Jihadi Who Kept Asking Why

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Rubin.

Elizabeth Rubin is a contributing writer for the magazine. Her most recent
article was about an Iraqi architect who worked for Saddam Hussein.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 8557 words



[Intruders in the House of Saud ]
Part I
Shortly before midnight on May 12, 2003, Riyadh, the Saudi capital, was jolted
awake by a series of synchronized car bombs that ripped through three
residential compounds across the city. Twenty-five people from several nations,
including Saudis, were killed. The jolt was psychological as well as physical.
Al Qaeda, it seemed, had come home to roost, and not long after the terror
attack, Saudis began referring to May 12 as ''our Sept. 11.''

Until the bombing, denial was officially sanctioned as a collective response to
accusations that Saudi Arabia had a bit of a terrorism problem. Fifteen Saudis
were among the hijackers who turned American passenger planes into missiles?
Impossible, insisted Prince Nayef, the septuagenarian interior minister and
younger brother of King Fahd, who has been ruler of Saudi Arabia since 1982 and
is one of the dozens of sons of King Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud, who founded the
modern-day kingdom in 1932. Only the Zionists benefited from 9/11, the prince
told a Kuwaiti reporter in an interview that was later published in the Saudi
press in December 2002. Therefore Israeli intelligence must have masterminded
the plot.

When Saudi intellectuals began worrying aloud that Saudi mosques and schools
were fostering hatred of non-Wahhabists among young men, the religious
establishment -- which ensures that the kingdom follows a strictly puritanical
interpretation of Islamic law -- reacted with righteous anger, as if its social
authority were under threat. Prince Nayef defended the religious establishment
and blamed instead a foreign import -- the Muslim Brotherhood, the radical
Islamic political organization founded in Egypt in the 1920's -- for the
kingdom's problems. For years, Saudi Arabia sheltered and embraced the
Brotherhood activists, and now, Prince Nayef told the press, the Brotherhood had
turned against the Saudis and were destroying the Arab world.

As many Saudis themselves will tell you, theirs is not a society accustomed to
self-reflection. Critical thinking is discouraged. Obedience to the king is the
unwritten constitution of the land; as the clerics say, it's God's law. The Saud
dynasty and the Wahhabi clerics mutually reinforce each other's authority. It's
been that way since the 18th century, when Muhammad Ibn Saud, a tribal ruler in
the untamed deserts of central Arabia, struck a bargain with Muhammad Ibn Abd
al-Wahhab, a puritanical religious reformer. They would purge Islam of the idol
worshiping that had slipped into Bedouin religious practices, unify the
competing tribes and conquer the Arabian peninsula. The Sauds lost and regained
power over the centuries, but that religious-political covenant has endured and
is the source of today's Saudi system. The royal family rules over politics,
security and the economy. The clerics hold sway over things social and cultural
while preaching loyalty to the ruler as one of the highest duties of the good
Muslim.

Under the strains of modernization, unemployment and terrorism, that covenant is
beginning to fray. On a recent three-week journey through the kingdom, I heard
the word ''reform'' everywhere I went, though no one seemed to agree on exactly
what it meant. Much of Saudi society still clings to its conservative ways,
fearfully glancing at change as a euphemism for an American cultural invasion.
Many of the elderly princes -- the oldest brothers of King Fahd who for more
than a quarter century have controlled the Ministries of the Interior and
Defense, the National Guard and the Governorships -- are divided about how to
change their kingdom to rid it of the extremism that leads to terrorism, without
upsetting the powerful Wahhabi clerics who regard reform as apostasy and who
legitimize the royal family's power as divine will.

An unlikely group of onetime religious jihadists have recently stepped into the
midst of this debate. They belong to a larger circle of liberals, intellectuals,
professors, former Wahhabi scholars, judges and even women who are discussing
subjects in the media that were taboo before 9/11 -- questions about terrorism,
about Wahhabi discrimination toward Muslims of the Shiite and Sufi sects (whom
they consider apostates), about alcohol, about AIDS, about the rights of women
to drive and work.

The ex-jihadists are fluent in Islam and, more important, in the lingo of the
underground terrorists, and they've surfaced from the extremist subculture with
a message for the Wahhabi official clerics, the royal family and even their
complicit American allies: Wake up. It's you who created us. We are not an
aberration.

Mansour Al-Nogaidan is the most daring and idiosyncratic of these reformists. He
is a 33-year-old former radical imam and a columnist for Al Riyadh, one of the
largest daily newspapers, controlled by the government, but his writing is often
banned. The main target of Mansour's vitriolic critiques for the past three
years has been Wahhabism, which he argues is the source of the political and
cultural problems in the kingdom. Since Wahhabism is the ideology upon which the
royal family has erected its legitimacy, Mansour is indirectly denouncing them.
That's the way political dissent operates in the kingdom. If you aim directly at
the royal family in public, you are likely to lose your freedoms. But in
interviews with the foreign media, Mansour has been far more bold. He has said
that if the royal family does not put aside the ideology of Wahhabism and rule
more democratically, it will ultimately bring about its own downfall.

Mansour is a small, roundish man, with intense, protruding eyes and a gentle
voice. He pouts and broods and smiles like a child. He's the vexing kid who
never stops asking why. That constant questioning is what got him into Islamic
radicalism and got him out if it -- and landed him in prison six times during
the last 15 years.

He now lives alone in a studio in a small peach-colored building with a marble
facade in a suburb of Riyadh. It's sparsely furnished with a bed, desk and a
computer. Books that just four years ago he would have considered heretical are
now piled up along the wall -- the banned novels of Turki al-Hamad, a liberal
reformist from Mansour's hometown, Buraida; ''Religions of the World''; texts by
Nietzsche and Habermas; and a book of Michelangelo's art. He also keeps a
CD-ROM, ''Fatwas of Ibn Tamaya,'' the 14th-century scholar and eminence grise of
Wahhabism, upon whom much of Saudi law is based. Mansour is locked in an
intellectual battle with Ibn Taimaya, finding in his fatwas justification for
terrorism. Most dear to him these days, however, is a biography of Martin
Luther, which surprised and inspired him. For Martin Luther was not what Mansour
had expected -- a soft messenger of God. Instead, Mansour discovered that Luther
was tough and cruel with his enemies.

Mansour himself is attacked on all sides for his raw, brazen writing. I met him
in December, when the capital was on high alert for terrorist attacks. Police
checkpoints were sprouting up randomly in the middle of traffic. Hotels and
government ministries were ringed with concrete barricades. A few weeks earlier,
during the fasting month of Ramadan, militants sped through the gates of a
residential compound just beneath one of the hilltop royal palaces in an S.U.V.
packed with explosives. It detonated and killed 17 mostly foreign Arab workers
and their families.

Mansour had just spent five days in prison for his recent anti-Wahhabist
writing, and he told me that he often turns for strength to a story about Luther
and Erasmus during the Protestant Reformation. ''When Erasmus told Luther to
calm down and be polite,'' Mansour said, ''Luther told Erasmus: this is war.''

Mansour is in a virtual war. Jihadi sympathizers routinely flood his e-mail and
cellphone text messages with death threats and insults. Earlier last year,
Mansour replied in kind -- calling one jihadi the Arabic word for ''bitch.''
Insults are punishable by lashings under Islamic law, and the recipient of
Mansour's retort filed a complaint with the judicial authorities, who are all
Wahhabi scholars in law. In fact Mansour's curse was a pretext for the plaintiff
and judge to threaten him for his recent heretical writings. When the
confrontation came to a head, Mansour was sentenced to 75 lashes. Feeling
desperate, alone and defenseless -- Saudis in such cases have no right to an
attorney -- Mansour published an Op-Ed essay in the The New York Times. It
appeared the day after Thanksgiving, during the festival Id al-fatr, the feast
that ends Ramadan fasting. In it he told the world that though the Saudi
government was cracking down on terrorists, they were missing the real culprit.

''Saudi Arabia is bogged down by deep-rooted Islamic extremism in most schools
and mosques,'' he wrote. How can officials claim Saudi society ''loves other
nations,'' he asked, when state-sponsored preachers ''continue to curse and call
for the destruction of all non-Muslims?'' He appealed to the world ''to help us
stand up against our extremist religious culture.'' He dared his fellow Saudis
to ''see ourselves the way the rest of the world sees us -- a nation that spawns
terrorists -- and think about why that is and what it means.'' Only then ''will
we be able to take the first step toward correcting that image and eradicating
its roots.''

A few days later, the police showed up at the newsroom of Al Riyadh and ushered
Mansour to jail. Mansour had made such criticisms before in various
autobiographical essays published in the Saudi press and on popular Saudi
Internet sites. But this was different. As Mansour recalled, the judge shouted,
''How did you dare to write in the enemy's newspaper?''

Not everyone in the Saudi establishment wanted Mansour silenced. As Khalil
al-Khalil, a prominent expert on Islamic law, told me, ''Mansour has the guts to
criticize some of the unquestioned ideas here because he cares about the future
of the country.'' Jamal Khashoggi, a former editor of Al Watan, the most
progressive newspaper in the country, and now a media consultant to the Saudi
ambassador in London, explained: ''Mansour comes from the hard-core camps. He
knows their narrow minds. That's what makes the clerics so angry. Every
ideological movement hates the breakaway, the traitor.''

Mansour's views seem to be known throughout Saudi Arabia to anyone who reads.
You can hear everything about him these days: that he's a bright young hope, a
loser, an apostate. He's hated, adored, written off as an extremist who is now
simply embracing the opposite extreme. A Saudi mother with a teenage son told me
Mansour's Op-Ed had given her so much hope that she printed it out from the
Internet and carries it in her purse to ensure all her friends read it. A year
ago, three of the most radically extremist sheiks -- who are independent from
the state clergy -- put out the word on the Internet and in mosques that Mansour
al-Nogaidan rejected fate (up there with rejecting God) and believed in a new
''humanist'' Islam, and they asked God to destroy him. ''If there is Islam in
this country, he must be put to the sword,'' they decreed. Neither the Ministry
of the Interior nor the official Wahhabi clerics denounced the death threat.
Instead, they banned Mansour from writing.

Mansour is still on salary at Al Riyadh, though since his Times Op-Ed he cannot
publish there, or anywhere else in the kingdom. If he does, the authorities have
threatened to imprison him and take away his passport. So in the tradition of
dissidents from repressive countries throughout the world, Mansour has chosen to
keep his voice alive through the Western media -- both as a matter of liberal
principle and as a safeguard against being forgotten and left to languish in
prison.

In addition to Mansour, there are several writers who have left the Islamic
extremist subculture and who are criticizing Wahhabi ideology. They live all
over -- in the liberal port city Jidda, the conservative capital Riyadh and the
southern mountains of Asir province, where four of the 9/11 hijackers came from.
Among them are Khalid al-Ghannami, a cleric for 10 years who now advocates an
individual interpretation of religion. There's Abdullah Bejad al-Oteibi and
Mashari al-Thaydi, friends of Mansour's from their extremist days, who have
rejected their pasts and the terrorist subculture, but who are more loyal than
Mansour to the royal family. There's Abdullah Thabit, a poet and dreamer who
writes about the beauty of music and poetry and the idiocy of religious
restrictions against them.

But Mansour is in a category of his own. As Adel al-Toraifi, a political-science
student and friend of Mansour's, told me, ''Mansour has personally experienced
almost every role in modern Saudi society'' -- from his painful childhood, to
his long history with Islamic scholarship, to his experience as an extremist and
his political reformation. ''So if you want to understand this period of
transition in Saudi Arabia, and the debates about reform, you must study
Mansour.''

Mansour was born in 1970 in the Wahhabi heartland town Buraida, a centuries-old
prosperous trading post on the caravan route between Kuwait and Mecca, 200 miles
north of Riyadh. Today it could almost pass for an American town, with its tall
houses, leafy trees and highway strips of gas stations, furniture shops and
convenience stores -- except for the salmon-colored sand rustling through the
streets and rising into dunes that cushion one side of town. Past the dunes,
it's all shrub-dusted desert plains. As the principal town of Al-Qassim province
and an oasis rich in agriculture, Buraida has spawned some of the wealthiest,
most educated and influential people in the kingdom. Yet it's a conservative
city, and one of extremes, the hometown of both the banned liberal novelist
Turki al-Hamad and the unrepentant radical sheiks who inspired bin Laden.

Mansour grew up during the oil boom years in a typical central Arabian family --
his father, a livestock merchant, had two wives and 11 children; Mansour was a
child of the second wife. It was a time of hurtling modernization and decadent
prosperity, and Bedouin families were catapulted out of the desert age as new
multilane highways and spic-and-span metropoles sprang up, often built by
American workers.

The government promoted education to develop the mostly Bedouin nation.

The conservative Saudi society, however, was suspicious of this whirlwind of
change, and murmurings of cultural resistance were finally given extreme voice
in 1979 with the Mecca uprising, a seminal event in modern Saudi history. One
November morning, Juhayman al-Oteibi, a fundamentalist preacher helped by a band
of wild-bearded, gun-toting tribesmen, seized the Grand Mosque in Mecca and
vowed to sweep the kingdom of corruption. Juhayman's complaints had been
circulating in his Islamic manifestoes for years. The Saudi dynasty, he
declared, was desecrating Islam, making alliances with Christian infidels who
were importing their Western values, secular education and women on TV; the
royal family was squandering billions on private jets, gambling, drinking and
cavorting in loose European resorts. Even the royal governor of Mecca, cried
Juhayman, was an alcoholic and a womanizer.

The mosque siege pierced the royal family where it was most vulnerable.
Juhayman's accusations were mostly true. And the royal family's Islamic
credentials rested on its control of the holiest sites in the Islamic world. If
it couldn't secure them, who needed the royal family? After Juhayman held the
mosque for two weeks, the police raided the site, and some 200 Juhaymanis and
policemen were killed in a shootout that ended the siege. Two months later, 63
captured rebels, including Juhayman, were publicly beheaded.

Though Saudis did not forgive Juhayman for vandalizing the Grand Mosque, many
did sympathize with his preachings. And most Saudis today will tell you what I
heard from Mohammed al-Odadi, a Georgetown graduate, who is the secretary
general of the tourism board in Asir province, where many of the rebel tribesmen
hailed from: ''The royal family cut off Juhayman's head, but implemented his
entire agenda. They said what the hell: it won't mess with our power. Let the
society have what it wants.'' In effect, the royal family let the Wahhabi
clerics take back the keys to the kingdom's mores and social development.

Mansour came into his teenage years just as an officially sponsored ''Islamic
Awakening'' was flourishing. Girls and boys had always been segregated, but now
they had even less access to one another. Women were to be de-Westernized:
religious vigilantes began enforcing the black head-to-toe abaya and even the
triple-layered black veil for the face. (Today educated Saudis jokingly refer to
their female compatriots as B.M.O.'s, or black moving objects.) Up went
thousands of Koranic schools, and after-school religious-awakening classes were
organized -- in mosques, school libraries and desert camping grounds. Shops and
libraries were stacked with cassettes of famous preachers narrating stories of
the prophet Muhammad and early Islam. Boys collected the tapes by the hundreds,
trading them like baseball cards or album covers. It was called the ''culture of
the cassette.'' Meanwhile the whole country was mobilized to support the jihad
to drive the Soviets from Afghanistan. Recruiting offices offered cheap tickets
for young Saudis willing to fight the Soviet infidels. The United States, too,
encouraged the jihadis -- they knew that holy warriors were not afraid to die --
and they persuaded the royal family to match their financing of the Afghan and
Arab mujahedeen at close to half a billion dollars a year until 1989, when the
Soviets withdrew.

Mansour was a good student, but around the time he was 14, he fell into brooding
spells as he wrestled with questions about the prophet, the universe and whether
the Koran was really the word of God. He could bear no distractions as he
struggled and began withdrawing from public school, attending more lectures at
the mosque. His doubts caused him physical pain. ''I was terrified I was going
to die in doubt and go to hell,'' Mansour told me in December in the lobby cafe
of the Inter/Continental Hotel -- one of the Riyadh spots where he feels safe.
It was cold in the city, and he wore a gray wool thobe (the ankle-length shirt
worn by Saudi men), and a red-and-white kaffiyeh that he fidgeted with as we
spoke over tea and French fries.

He's soft-spoken but passionate and often ends his answers with a question. He
told me he was so disturbed in his teens by theological questions that he
plunged into books on Islam and Wahhabism. He stopped speaking to people. His
school grades dropped. He didn't care. If he could just calm his mind and reach
a state of certain faith, he'd be saved. A neighbor told him about a sheik who
gave good lectures after evening prayer. He started going twice a day.

One day in the mosque, another sheik, a well-known holy man named Abdul Karim
Ibn Saleh al-Hamid, grabbed Mansour by the arm and fixed him with his eyes. He
had been a translator at Saudi Aramco, the oil company, but had left the
business and more or less turned his back on civilization. He rode a horse and
buggy and lived in a mud house. He'd forsworn music and television and man-made
laws, international conventions and traffic rules. He had joined the Salafiyya,
a radical Islamic movement that models itself on the original followers of
Muhammad. The Salafi aspired to return to a mythical time of purity associated
with the prophet before, as they believe, Muslims deviated from God's plan. As
Muhammad promises the followers of Islam: ''I am leaving two things with you
that as long as you hold fast to them, you will never go astray: the Koran and
the Sunna of His Messenger'' -- the Sunna are the sayings attributed to
Muhammad. The Salafi, literalists and fundamentalists, find in the Koran and the
prophet's sayings a road map for life and death, and in some cases jihad.

Al-Hamid told Mansour that he had a future as a sheik. He talked to him about
God's love and told him that to enter paradise, he should abandon the public
schools, which are forbidden by God and had filled his head with heathen values.
''I was already so close to their way of living,'' Mansour said. ''They only
lived for studying. They were so simple, so reserved. They were so appealing to
me, and I thought maybe that's the way to happiness. But I was also so afraid.''

Mansour told me that he then dropped out of school and told his family he wanted
to become an Islamic scholar. His father warned Mansour he'd be on his own. His
mother wept. His brothers threatened to beat and imprison him. He was forced to
move out. But secretly proud of his son's choice, Mansour's father sent him $350
a month until he died a year later.

Mansour moved to a Salafiyya community of about 300 families in a separate
Buraida neighborhood with its own schools. Once he joined the Salafi, adopting
their modest dress and long beards, Mansour wouldn't see or speak with most of
his family members because they did not practice the true Islam. He'd also
become dirt poor. After his father's death, all the family assets went to the
first wife's sons, Mansour told me.

Mansour was a purist and epistemologist in his approach. As he wended his way
deeper into Islam, whenever he bumped into an inconsistency, he had to stop and
crush it. He was constantly skirmishing with the gray-haired government clerics.
If Islam's rules were the word of God, he thought, then they must be taken
literally. ''Our official sheiks thought my activities were madness and would
turn the people against us,'' Mansour recalled with some pleasure. ''I said if
our thoughts are right, we must tell the people.''

At 18, he published his first opinion, objecting to congratulatory ceremonies
for boys who'd memorized the Koran, or for men entering the priesthood, because
Muhammad never practiced such rituals. The state-sponsored clerics (who run the
justice system) threw the young upstart in jail for questioning their practices.
Mansour sobbed, certain he was going to be hanged, but he wasn't, and he emerged
defiant.

Mansour could not glaze over the contradictions between what was taught in the
Wahhabi creed and what was practiced in the kingdom. At 19 he published a fatwa
against the 1989 World Youth Cup in Saudi Arabia - kaffirs (infidels) should not
be allowed to compete in the Holy Land; and furthermore football is haram
(forbidden). He got 55 days behind bars. Who was he to oppose the royal family's
games?

Back in the Buraida mosque, he preached to his flock to take their children out
of the infidel public schools. And back he went to jail. By now he was making a
name for himself in Buraida and circles beyond. In a country where politics was
forbidden, religion was the great equalizer. And the mosque was a public arena
where you could prove your mettle and ''box'' with the older sheiks, as one of
Mansour's friends put it. If you had talent to move an audience, if you dared to
speak against the government, people would linger and listen.

In 1991, Osama bin Laden, who had visited Buraida to lecture on jihad, called
Mansour to Jidda. But when Mansour got there, he was apprehensive,he told me,
and had no idea whom to contact. After a week or so, he received a letter of
apology from some associates of bin Laden's, saying that their leader had to
flee the country before the government cracked down on him for fomenting
rebellion, but the associates said they hoped to keep up the connection. Mansour
was disappointed. The government had refused to give him a passport, and he
would most likely never meet the then-Saudi folk hero.

Mansour was maturing into a charismatic preacher, indoctrinating young boys and
commuting between Buraida and its Riyadh counterpart, Suweidi, a neighborhood
south of the city -- busy, dense and conservative. Cigarettes weren't sold in
shops. There Mansour met Mashari al-Thaydi and Abdullah Bejad, like-minded
Islamists whose families migrated to Suweidi when they were both 9.

Mashari is a small Buraida man like Mansour, but more cautious and guarded. Now
a rising columnist in Jidda at The Middle East Journal, a daily newspaper owned
by members of the royal family, Mashari remembers the day when a mosque
librarian handed him a recording of a famous Kuwaiti imam, who preached a
harrowing tale of massacre two years earlier in Syria. The imam told how the
secular President Hafez al Assad exacted revenge against Islamic insurgents of
the Muslim Brotherhood by slaughtering 10,000 Muslims. ''I couldn't sleep that
night,'' Mashari said. The tape and the Salafi atmosphere percolating about
Suweidi's mosques and student hangouts ''made us all Islamically excited and on
our toes,'' he recalled.

Abdullah Bejad grew up on Suweidi's streets, skipping school, getting into
fights, mocking the religious geeks for their dourness and cowardice. He had one
secret passion. He consumed novels by Alexandre Dumas and Victor Hugo, whatever
he could sneak under his thobe past his father, who thought reading made you
crazy. Until one of those mesmerizing religious teachers fixed on him. ''He was
funny and brave, not how I expected religious people to be,'' recalled Abdullah
Bejad when I met him at his home in Suweidi. Abdullah Bejad was intrigued. The
teacher made religion so easy and rewarding, and he felt specially selected. He
discovered the transporting power of the Koran. And he began to memorize God's
words. Soon he didn't need the teacher. He hooked up with Mashari and Mansour
and the flourishing Salafiyya movement, which by the late 80's was becoming
something of a cult.

The Salafiyya teachers were sweeping up young men all over the kingdom. They
went for the softest targets -- the youth in conservative central Arabia, and in
places like the southern, mountainous province Asir, which was poor and
neglected by the government. The Asiris were simple, with fierce tribal
loyalties, and practiced a moderate Islam. Men and women mingled; women wore
flowered dresses and simple straw hats or head scarves -- until the influx of
the Salafiyya teachers. The Asiris heeded their message, and as Mohammed
al-Odadi, the Asir tourism official, said, ''They became more Catholic than the
pope.'' Today Asir is best known around the world for producing 4 of the 15
Saudi hijackers.

One of those scooped up by the religious teachers in the late 80's was a poet
and novelist from Asir named Abdullah Thabet. Now he's the image of apostasy --
long sideburns, no beard, jeans, leather jacket, cigarettes. I drove with him
around the province one day as a Muzak version of Lionel Richie's ''Say You, Say
Me'' strained on his old Ford speakers. ''You can't have a girlfriend in this
society,'' he told me. ''It's too expensive to marry, and as a young man, all
you're thinking about is sex. So the 'teachers' would tell us, Don't worry, no
need now, when you kill yourself you'll have plenty of girls in heaven.'' Unlike
Mansour, who shaped his life into a narrative of intellectual evolution,
Abdullah Thabet simply remembers himself as a PlayStation character in the grip
of a sinister hand. ''If there were girls in our high school,'' he said. ''I
never would have joined those groups.''

Lost in a family of 11 siblings, Abdullah Thalbit was a lonely child dreaming of
escape. ''The religious teachers say run away with us, and go to heaven,'' he
explained. ''They lift you out of this society where it's so difficult to find
kindness and friendship. They offer you unconditional love, brotherhood, money,
cars, education and jobs -- because the religious people control all the jobs
here,'' he went on to say. ''The first year they teach you to love each other at
weekend picnics and summer camping trips, where they're looking for the talented
ones. They teach you to reject your family. Then they give you books and lessons
and program your mind to build a new country like the old Islamic caliphate.
They teach you that you're the only good Muslims, the others are not.''

Despite Islam's emphasis on modesty, what was so compelling to smart young men
like Abdullah Thabet, Mansour and the others was the idea that they among all
other Muslims were the real keepers of the faith. It gave them a feeling of
superiority. As Khalid al-Ghannami, a friend of Mansour's and a former cleric
who gave up preaching and adores Martin Scorsese films, explained to me, all of
them began to believe they were those special Strangers whom the prophet speaks
about. ''The prophet said: 'Islam began as a stranger and will return to being a
stranger. So Tuba''' -- a tree in Paradise and the best part of heaven -- '''is
for the strangers,''' Khalid said. ''The people then asked the prophet: 'Who are
the strangers?' And the prophet said, 'Those who do the good deeds when
everybody else does not.'''

As Abdullah Thabet and I were winding through Asir's jagged, rock-crested
mountains, we rounded an outcropping, and all along the stone banks there
appeared hundreds of baboons, some of them fornicating, masturbating, howling
and laughing. Thabet slowed down, lingering in their exuberance. ''I want their
life,'' he said, and drove off.

We rode on to a bleak rocky plateau between two hills where for seven years he
used to camp out with the Salafi. ''They gave me everything I wanted -- books,
travel, prayer. All the things I missed in my family I found with them. I loved
them. So I trusted them, and believed in them. I would have done anything.''

The intellectual godfather for all these young jihadis was the Egyptian
philosopher Sayyid Qutub, and the religious teachers liberally doled out Qutub's
writings. He was a prolific author and political Islamist with a simple message:
the Islamic world is in crisis. The Christians and Jews have the upper hand. We
need a small group of true Muslims who will usher in a new era of Islamic
purification. Executed for supposedly plotting to overthrow the Egyptian
president Gamal Abdel Nasser, Qutub was an Islamic Che Guevara and a model for
the young Salafi.

But it wasn't until Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990, and President Bush
vowed to drive him out and stationed American troops on Saudi soil, that the
young men embraced political violence. ''It was the first time I listened to a
radio,'' Mansour told me. ''It was like an earthquake. I began to meet different
kinds of religious men, political sheiks.'' Unlike Mansour's mentor, al-Hamid,
in his Buraida mud hut, these sheiks were from a modern Islamic political
movement. ''And they said we need to change reality now.''

The radical sheiks attracted enormous followings. They were educated men with
haunted eyes, like Safar al-Hawali, who later praised bin Laden for Sept. 11.
They skewered the royal family for allowing infidel soldiers on Muslim soil, for
seeking aid not from God but from America, who'd come to steal oil and destroy
Islam.

Abdullah Bejad and Mashari shared a house in Suweidi that became an infamous
hangout for anti-government Salafis. Mansour, who was still wretchedly poor,
stayed there on a few of his trips to Riyadh. From the roof they would watch
Iraqi Scud missiles fly overhead. In the living room they spent hours debating
what kinds of political activism were Islamically legal.

Mashari decided to take action by boarding a plane to get military training in
Afghanistan. ''We all believed that the infidels were here because the Islamic
world was militarily weak,'' Mashari said. He returned after a month and caught
up with Mansour and the others. ''We felt like everything was so polluted and
poisoned that talking and educating wasn't enough. We had to get physically
active,'' Mashari recalled.

As always, Mansour was obsessed with religious hypocrisy. ''If you ask any
sheik, he will say the Western values sold in video stores are forbidden in
Islam,'' Mansour said. ''But the government sheiks won't give you the right to
destroy them. So we decided to make our own decrees.'' In 1992, in the middle of
the night, Mashari and Mansour and several others who knew how to handle
explosives staked out the biggest and most popular video store in Riyadh and
firebombed it. Up in a blaze went all those American movies. Inspired by their
success, Mansour got the idea to destroy a women's center in his hometown that
catered to widows and the poor. ''We thought it wanted to free women, that it
was just pretending to be a charity,'' Mansour recalled. Late one night, he and
several other Salafiyya activists slipped inside the charity. Mansour rifled
through the director's office to convince himself that they were doing the right
thing. All he could find were medical supplies and aid for widows. ''I was
surprised that some of my relatives were so poor they were taking money from the
charity. I felt bad, but ideology took over.''

Partly in response to American pressure, and partly out of fear that their
radicals were getting out of control, the royal family began to crack down on
extremists while still allowing young men to be dispatched to wage jihad in
Afghanistan's civil war. Nearly a year after the firebombing, the police picked
up a Yemeni student who was sleeping in the Suweidi house where Mashari and
Abdullah Bejad lived. He was accused of smuggling weapons. Then the police
raided the place and rounded up everyone. ''For three days they beat me until
the blood ran to the floor,'' Abdullah Bejad said. ''They wanted me to confess
that we gave the Yemeni money to buy weapons to assassinate royal family members
and blow up things, that we met in the desert at a training camp where we fired
machine guns.'' Though Abdullah Bejad had nothing to do with the Yemeni or the
firebombings, he was locked up along with Mashari.

Mansour was arrested and confessed to the firebombings, which he said were a
matter of principle. He argued with the judges, quoting Islamic law and the
sheiks who preached against Western values. He invoked a fatwa of the
14th-century scholar of Wahhabism, Ibn Tamiya, who had decreed that if the
governor does not change or clean up places of corruption, the people have the
right to do so. The judge wasn't interested in Mansour's scholarship. ''They
said, 'It's not your right to make such decisions. It's up to the government.'''
And he sentenced Mansour to 16 years in prison.

In prison Mansour, Mashari and Abdullah Bejad slowly began to question their
actions, and to read books that exposed them to more moderate interpretations of
Islam. Mansour told me about a Jordanian author he read who raised the
possibility that the Koran is not a living thing, but just a book. It shocked
him. Their intellectual transformations, however, were just beginning. As
Mashari put it: ''It's like a glass of water. You can't find the first drop.''

After a year and nine months, the cells were unlocked and Abdullah Bejad,
Mashari and even Mansour were sent home. Mansour remained an imam in a Riyadh
mosque, with one foot still in the world of the jihadis who wanted him to go to
Afghanistan and be their sheik and the other in a more modern world, exploring
new ideas.

Abdullah Bejad and Mashari were lost and confused. It was the mid-90's, and the
kingdom was in the grip of an Islamist rebellion. American soldiers still hadn't
pulled out. The royal family, at the instigation of the United States,
imprisoned radical sheiks and rescinded bin Laden's Saudi citizenship. Then, in
1995, the jihadis struck back. A car bomb exploded at a National Guard training
center in Riyadh, killing five Americans and two Indians. Prodded again by the
United States, the government swept up hundreds of radicals. Among them was
Mansour.

Alone again in his prison cell, Mansour began to retrace the genesis of his
religious odyssey. When his sister came to visit, he asked her to bring books on
Sufism (a strain of Islamic mysticism considered heretical by the Wahhabis) and
by authors of Western philosophy and history, like Will Durant and Thomas
Carlyle. Mansour passed through an intellectual paradigm shift, reading books
that based their arguments on historical research. ''Before, everything we
learned was by ideology,'' he told me. Wahhabism does not believe in history
except insofar as it illuminates God's plan. Like a pathologist, he conducted a
dissection of his own thinking. He questioned two of the defining tenets of
Wahhabism: ''loyalty and dissociation,'' or loving Muslims just like you and
holding hatred in your heart for Jews, Christians and Muslims not like you; and
takfir, the practice of accusing fellow Sunnis of apostasy, which is a crime
punishable by death.

Once the doubt crept in, it took on a logic of its own, spiraling through every
stage of his life: if Salafism was flawed, then Wahhabism was flawed, and then
so, too, were Islamic history and all the assumptions he had made about the
universe. He couldn't stop.

As Adel al-Toraifi, Mansour's close friend explained, Mansour didn't change
because he wanted music and wine and women. ''There is no politics in Mansour,''
he said. ''He didn't change because he found a new ideology. He changed from
thinking deep inside Islam.''

In the wake of the 1995 Riyadh bombing, Mashari and Abdullah Bejad feared that
they, too, would be arrested. By then they knew the routine. They'd heard about
two of their friends who were chained to the prison ceilings, stripped, whipped
with handcuffs and encouraged to confess to exactly what the authorities wanted.
Mashari and Abdullah Bejad made other plans, they told me. They grabbed some
money and took off for the Yemeni border.

Abdullah Bejad showed me a selection of passport photos he had made up in
various guises -- change the headdress slightly and you're a Kuwaiti or a
Yemeni. A little creativity and anyone can disappear in this region. Especially
in Yemen, where they bought fake Yemeni passports. Off went the two newborn
Yemenis to Damascus, Aden and finally Amman, thinking they'd stay a few weeks
till the dust settled.

In fact, they had no desire to go home, they told me. They'd rented an apartment
in Amman. They admired King Hussein's internal politics. They attended lectures
by Islamic scholars who weren't Wahhabis, listened to music, read about human
rights, traveled to Qatar and Turkey. They said they'd never been so happy in
their lives.

''We were reborn in Jordan,'' said Abdullah Bejad. ''It was the first time I
could think freely with no one supervising or watching over me. I realized the
community that cultivated me had controlled my mind, always talking about
stability, stability. 'The steady man is right. The right man never changes his
mind.'''

The mantra fell apart in snow-covered Amman that winter. ''I felt a happiness
I'd never felt. I had no conflict between what I thought and what I said. I
promised if I went back to Saudi I wouldn't let it go,'' Abdullah Bejad said.
Each felt ashamed about the changes they were experiencing and hid their
activities from the other. Mashari was reading novels by Gabriel Garcia Marquez
and Naguib Mahfouz. Without telling Abdullah Bejad, he went to watch
''Braveheart'' and ''Lawrence of Arabia,'' which he adored. One scene in
particular deeply moved him, for it was so contrary to everything he'd been
taught. This is how he remembered it:

Lawrence asks Sharif Ali why they left a man behind in the desert. Sharif Ali
says they don't have enough water, and they'll die if they wait for him.
Lawrence spins around and heads back for the man, as Sharif Ali yells, ''It's
fate, Lawrence.'' Lawrence returns exhausted and dehydrated, the man in tow, and
now it's Sharif Ali's turn to ask why.

Lawrence replies, ''That is also fate.''

In 1998, Mashari and Abdullah Bejad did go home, quietly, to Suweidi, where they
lay low. Mashari told me that he wrote a narrative explaining his actions to the
Ministry of the Interior, and had to serve only 30 days for fleeing the country
illegally. Abullah Bejad appealed to his tribal chief to intervene with the
royals, and he got three months. Mansour was released around the same time. Soon
after, they began their new careers writing in the newspapers. But it wasn't
until after Sept. 11 that Mansour stepped out and broke the taboo against
attacking the state religion, naming ''Wahhabism as the source of terrorist
thinking'' and ''Salafism as the carrier of the terrorism ideology.'' The
response of the government clerics was swift. He was banned from writing.

Intellectuals and reformists in Saudi Arabia have now examined this Salafiyya
movement and used these young radicals as examples to set forth a theory that
traces the lineage of today's terrorists back to the early 20th century
''Brothers'' -- Bedouin tribesmen who embraced a Wahhabi revivalism so ferocious
they were happy to die killing or converting other tribes as they conquered the
peninsula. All Saudis know the story's ending: the Brothers revolted against the
king who'd breathed life into them, and he slaughtered most of them. But in the
80's, the royal family resurrected the spirit of those ''Brothers'' during the
''Islamic Awakening,'' and exploited the resulting Salafiyya movement to spread
Wahhabism around the world through mosques and Koranic schools and jihad. ''The
famous leaders of the foreign jihadi groups in Chechnya, Afghanistan, Bosnia
were Saudi,'' Adel al-Toraifi maintained. Bin Laden's top lieutenant, Ayman
al-Zawahiri ''depends on fatwas from Wahhabi ideology. We must be honest.
Wahhabism was a creator of violence since the beginning of its history.''
Yesterday's pious heroes are today's terrorists.

As unfathomable as it may be given the horrific events of Sept. 11, many Saudis
-- even those who are progressive -- feel an ambivalent sympathy for this jihadi
generation left over from Afghanistan -- militants, not unlike the Vietnam
veterans, who have been hung out to dry by their government, unable to readjust
to civilian life and left to stew in their habits of violence.

''The strange thing,'' Abdullah Bejad said, ''is that the bombers are victims
and killers at the same time.''

Mashari and Abdullah Bejad have evolved into accepted voices in the media -- too
accepted, some intellectuals and reformists say. Abdullah Bejad now belongs to a
liberal Islamist circle of intellectuals, judges and former radicals who are
trying to position themselves as a bridge between the government and the radical
sheiks who rebelled against the royal family in the 90's. Mashari has found a
role at The Middle East Journal as a critic of radicalism but a loyalist to the
government.

In private, say Western-educated elites, reformists, Islamist reformers and even
conservatives outside the cities, it is the royal family that must change. The
leaders are old and out of touch with one of the fastest-growing populations in
the world, most of whom are under 25. The princes are siphoning off the
country's riches. There is no accounting of public funds. The welfare state --
or rather the royal dispensation system -- is collapsing, crime and unemployment
are rising. ''It's an old political system like the Soviet system,'' one critic
told me. ''We have one party, one ruler, corrupt judges, and all we're supposed
to do is praise the government.''

Many in the royal family are aware that the kingdom must evolve. In December,
Crown Prince Abdullah, the king's half brother and the royal thought to be the
most reform-minded, convened a National Dialogue on extremism in Mecca -- an
unusual event at which Wahhabi clerics were forced to listen to Shiites, Sufis
and even women. But the royal family works in opaque ways. Crown Prince
Abdullah, who is the most likely heir to the throne, talks about the need to
change the education system, while Prince Nayef, the interior minister, finances
both the much-loathed religious police, who drive around in new American jeeps
preventing vice and promoting virtue, and those in the interior ministry who
keep a vigilant eye on the universities, ensuring they toe the Wahhabi line. Are
the princes working at cross-purposes?

Few know. What is known is that every prince has his fief, while the kingdom, as
Mansour put it, is like an orchestra without a conductor. King Fahd suffered a
stroke in 1995 and has been a mostly absent leader. By all accounts he can
barely recognize his family members. Yet the question of succession is
unresolved. And as long as the kingdom has no conductor, little will change,
except that the religious radicals embedded within the establishment will keep
seizing more ground -- a reality confirmed by engineers, religious professors
and civil servants whom I met in Buraida, Asir, Jidda and Riyadh.

Shortly before Crown Prince Abdullah held his National Dialogue, a petition
written primarily by Islamic reformists advocating a constitutional monarchy was
submitted to the crown prince and signed by about 300 people -- mostly
Islamists, including Abdullah Bejad, along with some liberals. Some of the
princes were apoplectic and called the petition a treason. The signers responded
with their own outrage. ''Seventy-five percent of countries in the world
participate in planning their future,'' an angry professor who was one of the
petition's authors ranted to me one night. ''All we are saying is we must have a
role in our future. The royal family wants us just to drink camel's milk, ride
dune buggies and sit by the fire. After a time you begin to go mad. When people
realize no conferences or resolutions will get any results, they are going to do
something primitive. And if things go worse here, America will be in trouble,
too.''

The reformists urged Mansour to sign the petition, but he refused. He objected
to the fact that the Islamists had infused the document with far too much
religion, that it was weak on human rights and democracy and women. Though he
complains of feeling like a pariah, Mansour has chosen to fight alone for his
principles. Other Saudis who abandoned the Salafiyya movement share the
isolation. Abdullah Thabet, the poet in Asir, told me that back in the late
90's, after years of training him to become part of the new generation of
religious organizers, the Salifiyya teachers discovered through informers (his
friends) that he was reading Hemingway and Hugo and an Arabic Communist
philosopher and that he was writing and reading love poetry -- absolute heresy.
They beat him mercilessly. ''They said choose: poetry or us.'' He cried for
days, not wanting to lose that solidarity. But Abdullah Thabet needed music and
poetry more than the harsh Wahhabi creed. Now that he has broken the spell and
criticizes Wahhabism, openly writes poetry, advocates women's rights and the
teaching of music and painting in school, his parents say they think he's an
infidel, and his former Islamic brothers threaten to kill him -- as they did
when they saw him with me outside an Asir restaurant.

Khalid al-Ghannami, a former cleric, is constantly harassed by other teachers
and education officials who accuse him of spreading secular ideas and art forms
(like music) at the school where he teaches in a poor suburb of Riyadh. His son
is taunted for his father's ''fall'' from cleric to secularist. It's true,
Khalid now reads books like Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness,'' where he has
discovered metaphors for individualism in Kurtz's rejection of the colonial
project.

In mid-December, when the authorities released Mansour from prison for
publishing his Op-Ed essay, they made one demand: that Mansour not publicize the
incident. That night he went home and posted the whole affair in dramatic prose
on a popular Arabic Internet site. But that is the last word he has published,
because he doesn't want to return to jail.

With anti-American sentiment at its apex, Mansour has suffered from the
perception that he was looking to America for help when he published his Op-Ed
essay. ''I wanted the world to stand beside us and bring the mirror close up,''
he told me. ''But the community doesn't want this.''

The isolation is bruising for Mansour. ''I feel like I am in a community where
everyone hates me,'' he explained. His mother, who adores him, is silently
disappointed by his transformation, he says, and by his Sufi understanding of
Islam that ''it's enough to have the spiritual flame inside our hearts.'' In
other words, organized religion is not necessary, nor can he stand its
hypocrisy. ''If you ask our sheiks, Can we marry a Christian or Jewish woman,
they will say, 'Yes, and you can live together in love, but deep in your heart
you must hate her.' How can you divide your heart? Human beings cannot accept
such contradictions. Yet that is at the core of our culture.''

Mansour has paid a heavy personal price for his unbridled tongue. ''I wanted to
marry a girl who was close to me, so beautiful, so intellectual,'' he said.
''She begged me not to publish my thoughts until we married. I said there's no
difference. But she was afraid her brothers would be shocked and refuse, and
that's what happened. I haven't heard from her since the New York Times
article.''

When I asked Mansour if he envisions some kind of democracy in Saudi Arabia, he
thought for a while and said: ''A Buraida philosopher once said: 'If you bring
Queen Elizabeth to rule in Yemen, she will rule like Imam Ahmad, one of the most
radical religious leaders of Yemen. And if you bring Imam Ahmad to England, he
will rule like Queen Elizabeth.' The culture and society will dictate the way
you rule. We hear talk about democracy. But if we apply democracy now, we'll
ride it like we ride camels. Democracy needs a liberal culture. In the beginning
we need freedom, we need different parties to have their rights and a culture
that allows people to be represented.'' He implies that the only way to ensure
that parties do not bring about a Taliban-like government is to separate state
and mosque. ''As Voltaire said, 'No freedom to the enemies of freedom.'''

When he was still allowed to publish, Mansour advocated rights for women and the
persecuted Shiites and Sufis. All of these issues, he argues, hark back to the
battle he has been waging since his days as a religious extremist. ''The core of
what I used to write is that no one owns the truth,'' he said. His fight is with
the uncritical, ideological religious education inculcated in Saudi society.

For all the thousands of children who have memorized the holy book at Koranic
schools, it can make for a wonderful companion to carry through life. But it's
also a dangerous tool. The emotional power of those divine lyrics, the soaring
language chanted in half tones and minor-key strains can be overwhelming. As one
of the younger generation of princes desperate for reform told me, ''Without the
proper guidance it can get out of control.'' And what if you deliberately do not
teach a child critical thinking, if you stress only the verses of rage, threats
of damnation and the awe that compels men to kill the infidels? ''Who is guilty,
the son who stabs his neighbor?'' Mansour asked. ''Or the father who everyday
told the son that his neighbor is a devil with no human values, that he must be
killed?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Conversion Experience: For Mansour al-Nogaidan, the road away
from extremism led to this studio in Riyadh and to books he once considered
heretical.
Heir Apparent: Crown Prince Abdullah, seated, convened a National Dialogue on
extremism. He is thought to be the most reform-minded of the Saudi royals.
Mansour: today and, above left ,as a child. His life story has been the story of
Saudi Arabia during this period of transition. Will the country take the next
step with him? (right photograph by Mansour Al-Nogaidan)
Growing up: in Saudi Arabia can mean either studying the Koran (left, in Asir,
the province that was home to 4 of 15 Saudi 9/11 hijackers) or shouting across
the lines of official sex segregation (male teenagers driving by a family picnic
outside Riyadh).
Houses of Saud Above: Prince Muhammad with his children at their home in Riyadh.
Right, top: Prince Sultan bin Muhammad bin Saud al-Kabir, a cousin of the king.
Bottom: Prince Faisal bin Satam, 30, a nephew of the king and a Harvard
graduate, checking his text messages.
 The Newer Finer Things: Abdullah Bejad, a former radical Islamist who now
espouses moderate views, at his mother's house with his niece. (All other
photographs by Lynsey Addario/Corbis for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); POLITICS
(86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); HIJACKING (76%);
INTERVIEWS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (68%); TEXT
MESSAGING (59%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT (54%) Islam; Biographical
Information; Terrorism; News and News Media

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (55%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (55%)

PERSON: ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ (79%) Elizabeth Rubin; Mansour Al- Nogaidan

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (91%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); GULF STATES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL
(79%); EGYPT (79%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             371 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 11, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Washington Bank In a Global Mess

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY O'BRIEN

SECTION: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3027 words


EACH January, in honor of Gen. Robert E. Lee's birthday, a group of Washington's
movers and shakers gather to rub elbows at the Alfalfa Club dinner. Wizened,
impressive and until recently entirely male, the Alfalfa roster includes
presidents, politicians, diplomats and business impresarios, all bound together
by being either formidably influential or fabulously rich.

Attendees have included luminaries like Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's
ambassador to the United States; Jack Valenti, the president of the Motion
Picture Association of America; and others with surnames like Greenspan,
Kissinger and Rehnquist. President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney made
their first joint public appearance after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks at the
Alfalfa gathering in 2002.

And each and every year, after dinner winds down, a dynamic Alfalfan from
Mississippi, standing just over 5 feet tall, is host for a late-night cocktail
party or a brunch the following day. These events are more than mere codas to an
evening of networking. They are reminders that in a town long on political
heavyweights and short on full-blown business tycoons, the 79-year-old host, Joe
L. Allbritton, is a corporate titan.

Upon arriving in Washington in the mid-1970's, Mr. Allbritton cemented his ties
to the city's high and mighty by assembling a gaggle of businesses: a newspaper,
television stations and the faded banking jewel of Washington's financial
establishment, the Riggs National Corporation. Along the way, he has given
generously to charitable causes, helped to endow institutions as diverse as the
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and the George Bush Presidential
Library and Museum, and relished the international cachet that Riggs conveyed
despite its middling fortunes.

Today, however, Mr. Allbritton and Riggs National Bank, which provides banking
services to most of Washington's foreign embassies and to American consulates
worldwide, are swept up in controversy. Federal law enforcement officials,
Congressional investigators and banking regulators are scouring Riggs accounts
in a wide-ranging investigation revolving around the netherworlds of terrorist
financing, money laundering and the seamier geopolitics of Big Oil.

Neither Mr. Allbritton nor Riggs have been charged with any crime, although
regulators say they are considering levying large fines against the bank for
possible violations of statutes meant to thwart money laundering. One former
Riggs executive, Simon P. Kareri, is the target of a grand jury investigation
related to the inquiry.

The bank has been cooperating with an F.B.I. investigation of Saudi Arabian
accounts at the bank, some controlled by Prince Bandar. The investigation began
as federal officials tried to track funds used by the Sept. 11 hijackers; as the
investigation wore on, banking regulators became increasingly alarmed by Riggs's
practices. Last July, they publicly rebuked the bank for failing to comply with
anti-money-laundering standards.

Although Riggs said it has made great progress in overhauling its practices, it
has suffered yet another setback. In recent months, according to people with
knowledge of the investigation, the bank's own examiners revealed to regulators
that Mr. Kareri failed to adequately supervise accounts held by officials and
the government of the oil-rich West African nation of Equatorial Guinea.

Until late February, Riggs managed $360 million worth of Equatorial Guinean
accounts that federal investigators say were controlled by that country's
dictator. The accounts were largely funded by proceeds from deals with Exxon
Mobil, the oil company. Federal investigators say they are scrutinizing those
accounts to see if they involve the proceeds of political graft or were used to
bribe executives of any American companies, according to an individual with
direct knowledge of the investigation. The problems with the Equatorial Guinean
accounts also prompted the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency last month
to warn Riggs that it plans to label it a ''troubled'' institution, meaning that
the bank would have to cede significant managerial authority to the government.

RIGGS, meanwhile, decided to close all of its Saudi accounts in early March
after huge cash transfers by Prince Bandar in and out of his personal accounts
aroused fresh concerns at the bank about the nature of the transactions. A
spokesman for the Saudi Arabian Embassy said that the F.B.I. recently assured
the embassy that there were no concerns that any Saudi accounts at Riggs
involved terrorist funds or money laundering. The Equatorial Guinean Embassy did
not respond to repeated interview requests.

Amid this turmoil sits Mr. Allbritton, Riggs's controlling shareholder and until
2002 its chief executive. For more than two decades, he has held the reins of a
bank that is a highly personal, extraordinarily quirky institution. Riggs is
deeply rooted in the history of Washington: Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis
held accounts there. Today, despite anemic profits and an elfin footprint that
would make it a backwater bank in other locales, Riggs has maintained its
stature by catering to the glamorous, chauffeur-and-Champagne set that is
Washington's elite political and diplomatic corps.

Although Mr. Allbritton and Prince Bandar share a fascination with expensive
racehorses, frequent the same spots on the cocktail circuit, and have each
courted the Bush family, they do not have a close personal relationship,
according to Mr. Allbritton's friends. Even so, friends and banking analysts say
that it would have been unusual for Mr. Allbritton and Prince Bandar not to have
had regular business contacts, because the Saudis are among Riggs's biggest
clients. Until the Sept. 11 attacks, Saudi officials often rolled into a Riggs
branch on a Friday and withdrew millions of dollars for, say, a weekend splurge
in London, according to individuals familiar with the transactions. Even after
the attacks, when Saudi institutions were criticized by federal officials for
possibly financing terrorism, it took Riggs more than a year to begin tightening
its oversight. A year ago, the bank says, it cautioned the Saudis, as well as
embassies from other countries, that the no-questions-asked era was coming to an
end.

Mr. Allbritton, who declined to be interviewed, is described by friends as
whip-smart and honest. ''In business, Joe is one of the most astute people I
know,'' said Lloyd N. Hand, a Washington lawyer and a friend of Mr. Allbritton
for 44 years. ''He has excellent judgment and is a person of unquestionable
integrity.''

Over the years, various corporate suitors have had an interest in buying Riggs.
But Mr. Allbritton maintained its independence because he coveted the bank's
unique entree into foreign affairs and international finance, say banking
analysts and others close to him.

As he courted embassies, however, banking analysts say he missed other
opportunities to expand the bank's franchise. Riggs has invested in ill-starred
ventures close to Mr. Allbritton's heart, such as the thoroughbred breeder
Calumet Farms, and failed high-technology deals. Deepening its links to the
Bushes, Riggs also bought a money management firm owned by Jonathan Bush, the
former president's brother, in 1997.

Mr. Allbritton, now Riggs's vice chairman, retains a seat on the bank's board,
which is stocked with company insiders and longtime Allbritton acquaintances
like Mr. Valenti. The Allbritton family holds about 53 percent of Riggs's stock,
a stake worth about $264 million, and Mr. Allbritton's son, Robert, 35, has been
the bank's chairman and chief executive since 2002.

So is Riggs well managed? ''Unequivocally, no,'' responded Henry J. Coffey Jr.,
a banking analyst at Ferris, Baker, Watts in Washington.

Other analysts agreed. ''This is a bank that constantly has had regulatory
problems, and it's had them for years,'' said Bert Ely, a banking consultant in
Alexandria, Va. ''This investigation is going to draw attention from the highest
levels of the U.S. government because it raises questions about how all the
embassies in the U.S. are doing banking business here and what kind of money
laundering or corruption vulnerabilities exist.''

Mr. Allbritton, who was born into humble circumstances in D'Lo, Miss., went on
to become a debate champion at Baylor University in Waco, Tex., where he earned
a law degree. He grew wealthy as a lawyer and as a bank, insurance, real estate
and funeral home investor in Houston and Los Angeles before setting up shop in
Washington in 1974.

He discovered Washington's attractions decades after a coterie of ambitious
young Texans came to town on Lyndon B. Johnson's coattails -- men like Robert
Strauss, Leon Jaworski, Mr. Hand and Mr. Valenti, all of whom were or remain
close to him.

''The only fair way to describe him politically is to say he has friends who are
Republicans and friends who are Democrats, and many of them have ended up in
very high places in government,'' said Gibson Gayle, a retired Houston lawyer
who attended Baylor with Mr. Allbritton.

Politics, however, were Mr. Allbritton's secondary passion; business deals were
his first. He made a splash when he bought The Washington Star in 1974, but he
lost money on the newspaper before selling it to Time Inc. four years later,
according to an individual with direct knowledge of the sale.

But Mr. Allbritton held on to three television stations in that deal, one of
which, WJLA, is now the centerpiece of Allbritton Communications. Acquaintances
say the communications company, privately held, is Mr. Allbritton's most
valuable asset - meaning that his likely total net worth is far more than $500
million.

THE sale of The Star left Mr. Allbritton on the hunt for another prized local
property, which he found in Riggs. He joined its board as an outside investor in
1980 and, wasting little time, took over the bank a year later. During his
tenure, Riggs was always well funded, allowing it to weather a real estate
lending bust in the early 1990's.

But Riggs's Washington location and its international reach sometimes landed it
in the middle of messes that most midsize banks elsewhere would never dream of
encountering. The investigation of the C.I.A. spy Aldrich Ames in 1994 turned up
Riggs accounts flush with funds from Mr. Ames's Russian handlers. The bank also
bought and later sold a stake in a Channel Islands company called Valmet that
helped move funds for the jailed Russian oil billionaire Mikhail B.
Khodorkovsky, transactions that became fodder in the sprawling money-laundering
investigation of the Bank of New York in the late 1990's.

None of these problems, however, are anything like the firestorm now engulfing
Riggs. Besides the F.B.I., the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Governmental
Affairs and two Treasury Department agencies are investigating Riggs's Saudi
Arabian and Equatorial Guinean accounts for possible improprieties.

A Riggs spokesman said the bank has been cooperating with all of the
investigations, has not ''willfully'' violated any laws and ''has no indication
that we are or ever were the target of an F.B.I. investigation.''

The investigation was prompted by an examination of transactions of Riggs
accounts controlled by Prince Bandar and his wife, Princess Haifa, in 2002. At
the time, F.B.I. officials were investigating whether money from the accounts of
the princess helped finance the hijackers responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks.
The F.B.I. told The New York Times in late 2002 that it had found no evidence
that the money went to the hijackers.

Nonetheless, Prince Bandar's banking habits soon became the focus of attention
again, according to individuals with direct knowledge of the transactions. One
of the prince's representatives deposited several million dollars in foreign
currency drafts in the prince's personal Riggs accounts in December, then
immediately withdrew half of the amount in cash and half in cashiers' checks,
these individuals said. The next day, they said, the same person returned with
$500,000 in cash, redeposited it into the prince's account and then wired the
money to the prince's European bank accounts.

When Riggs officials asked Prince Bandar to disclose more information about the
transactions, he declined, according to people with direct knowledge of the
events. In early March, Riggs closed all of its Saudi accounts. Saudi officials
declined to discuss the matter, other than to say it was their choice to end the
relationship with Riggs.

Riggs, under regulatory supervision, began overhauling its monitoring systems a
year ago. It hired new staff members and retained Eugene A. Ludwig, a
well-regarded former comptroller of the currency, to help modernize its
compliance systems.

''Riggs generally, especially in terms of its back office, has been like a good
reliable Oldsmobile when in the post-9/11 world you need a Maserati,'' said Mr.
Ludwig, who also observed that many others have struggled to keep up with
stricter financial monitoring guidelines enacted after the Sept. 11 attacks.

While many of the suspect transactions besetting Riggs might have been small
enough to escape easy notice, some were quite large and should have raised
alarms, according to two people with direct knowledge of them. And many of those
involved Equatorial Guinea, a poor country plagued by human-rights abuses and
ruled by a dictator named Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo.

Mr. Obiang assumed power in 1979 after his uncle was killed in a military coup.
The United States ended diplomatic relations with his government in the
mid-1990's but rekindled relations last year as the Bush administration moved to
support efforts to tap new oil supplies outside the Middle East. Equatorial
Guinean officials opened government and personal accounts at Riggs in 1995.

EXXON MOBIL entered into a profit-sharing arrangement with Mr. Obiang's
government in order to secure drilling rights there. A company spokesman said
that Exxon could not discuss ''specific components'' of the contract because it
is confidential, but that it pays the regime income taxes, oil royalties and
undisclosed ''legal obligations'' as part of the agreement. About $360 million
derived from that contract was deposited into what Exxon Mobil and Riggs
describe as a government treasury account at Riggs. The account requires
multiple signatories, according to an individual with direct knowledge of it,
but a federal investigator said that Mr. Obiang exercises authority over it.

Others also have concerns about the accounts. ''Were these actually treasury
accounts and, if so, why does the government have treasury accounts in a private
bank abroad?'' asked Sarah Wykes, a spokeswoman at Global Witness, a British
environmental and human rights advocacy group that has written a critical study
of Mr. Obiang's government and its relationship with Exxon Mobil.

Last fall, and again earlier this year, troubles within the Obiang government's
Riggs accounts boiled over. In September, bank officials identified millions of
dollars in questionable funds that flowed through a Riggs account opened under
the name of a corporation called Otong starting in 1999, according to a report
dated Jan. 30 that Riggs filed with federal regulators. Mr. Obiang controls
Otong, according to a federal investigator briefed on the matter.

Mr. Kareri, the Riggs executive overseeing all of the Equatorial Guinea accounts
at the time, told the bank's own investigators last September that money in the
Otong account had come from overseas accounts that Mr. Obiang had closed -- an
explanation that Riggs and federal investigators have found unsatisfactory.
Federal officials are looking into the possibility that Otong funds were used to
bribe employees of American companies or involved the proceeds of political
graft.

In January, matters became worse. Riggs investigators discovered that Mr. Kareri
approached Mr. Obiang's son in Washington last year and solicited money to buy a
car, according to three people with direct knowledge of the event. Mr. Obiang's
son gave Mr. Kareri an undated, signed $40,000 check with no payee designated,
these people said. Mr. Kareri, they said, then altered the check to change its
value to $140,000, wrote a friend's name on the payee line, and then maneuvered
to have the funds redirected to his wife.

Mr. Kareri was questioned about the transaction in January, suspended and then
fired a few weeks later. A grand jury has been convened to weigh fraud evidence
against him. He could not be reached for comment.

DURING the bank's investigation of Mr. Kareri, Riggs officials discovered that
some funds from Equatorial Guinea's oil accounts at Riggs were transmitted to
Luxembourg and the Canary Islands, suggesting that money was being diverted for
questionable reasons. They contacted Mr. Obiang in Equatorial Guinea, and he
traveled to Washington in February to meet with them. After being questioned
further, he refused to discuss the matter, according to people with direct
knowledge of the meeting.

Riggs closed all of Equatorial Guinea's accounts at the bank shortly thereafter,
but not soon enough for regulators disenchanted with the bank's vulnerabilities.

''Riggs told regulators that had Kareri not overseen the accounts this wouldn't
have happened,'' said an individual involved in the investigations. ''But that's
like saying, 'Other than that, Mrs. Lincoln, how was the play?'''

The Obiang debacle led regulators to consider fines against the bank and to
label it a ''troubled institution,'' according to this same individual.
Moreover, this person said, the Obiang problem erased whatever good will Riggs
had earned by righting its monitoring woes over the last year.

Now Mr. Allbritton and his bank are left to face whatever results from the
continuing investigations of Riggs accounts. ''Riggs resembles a garden auger,''
said Gary Townsend, a banking analyst at Friedman Billings Ramsey. ''They dig
themselves further underground with each turn of the screw.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Prince Bandar bin Sultan, ambassador from Saudi Arabia, which
had Riggs accounts until March. (Photo by Associated Press)
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, ruler of Equatorial Guinea. His accounts are
under investigation. (Photo by Agence France-Presse/Getty Images)
Joe L. Allbritton, Riggs's controlling shareholder, courted embassies as
clients. (pg. 8)Drawing (Illustration by The New York Times)(pg. 1)Chart:
''Trouble at the Bank''An investigation of accounts at Riggs Bank has been under
way for about a year and a half. The parent company's profits have declined for
most of the last six years, and its stock price has been languishing.Graph
tracks net income/loss at Riggs Bank from 1998 to 2003.Graph tracks the daily
closing price of Riggs Bank shares since 1998.(Sources by Company reports
 Bloomberg Financial Markets)(pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); MONEY
LAUNDERING (89%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (86%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION
(86%); DEREGULATION (86%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (85%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (85%); REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (85%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (85%);
POLITICS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (71%);
FILM (70%); ENDOWMENTS (69%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (69%); HIJACKING (69%);
FINANCIAL CRIME COUNTERMEASURES (67%); GRAND JURY (66%); ENERGY & UTILITY
DEREGULATION (66%); CHARITIES (64%); PERFORMING ARTS CENTERS (64%); VISUAL &
PERFORMING ARTS (64%); LIBRARIES (63%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (60%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (60%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (56%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (50%) Regulation and
Deregulation of Industry ; Money Laundering; Terrorism; Oil (Petroleum) and
Gasoline; Biographical Information

COMPANY: PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC (66%); PNC BANK NA (53%)

ORGANIZATION: MOTION PICTURE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (57%) Riggs National; Riggs
National

TICKER: PNC (NYSE) (66%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (66%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (66%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION
COMPANIES (53%); SIC6021 NATIONAL COMMERCIAL BANKS (53%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%); DICK CHENEY (57%) Timothy O'Brien; Joe Allbritton

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); EQUATORIAL GUINEA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             374 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 11; Column 1; Real Estate Desk; Pg. 5; Corrections

LENGTH: 118 words


The Your Home column last Sunday, about renting out an apartment in a house,
referred imprecisely to the effect of antidiscrimination laws.

While city and state laws against discrimination apply to buildings with three
units or more, and to single-family homes offered for rent, the laws do not
always apply to two-family buildings. In New York City, a two-family house is
exempt from the city's Human Rights Law if occupied by the owner or a member of
the owner's family and if the rental is not offered to the general public.
Outside the city, a two-family home is exempt from the state's Human Rights Law
if the building is owner-occupied unless local laws are more restrictive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION LAW (91%); REAL ESTATE (90%); MULTIFAMILY REAL ESTATE
(90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (88%) Housing; Correction
Stories; Renting and Leasing; Discrimination

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: New York City; New York State

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             376 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clash of Civilizations

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD.

E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Testifying before the Senate yesterday, General Richard Myers admitted that
we're checkmated in Iraq.

''There is no way to militarily lose in Iraq,'' he said, describing the
generals' consensus. ''There is also no way to militarily win in Iraq.''

Talk about the sound of one hand clapping. And they say John Kerry is on both
sides of issues.

Sounding like Mr. Kerry, General Myers summed up: ''This process has to be
internationalized. The U.N. has to play the governance role. That's how we're,
in my view, eventually going to win.''

The administration's demented quest to conquer Arab hearts and minds has
dissolved in a torrent of pornography denigrating other parts of the Arab
anatomy. George Bush, who swept into office on a cloud of moral umbrage, now has
his own sex scandal -- one with far greater implications than titillating cigar
jokes.

The Bush hawks, so fixated on making the Middle East look more like America,
have made America look un-American. Should we really be reduced to defending
ourselves by saying at least we don't behead people?

Gripped in a ''I can't look at them -- I've got to look at them'' state of mind,
lawmakers grimly filed into private screening rooms on the Hill to check out the
1,800 grotesque images of sex, humiliation and torture.

''They're disgusting,'' Senator Dianne Feinstein told me. ''If somebody wanted
to plan a clash of civilizations, this is how they'd do it. These pictures play
into every stereotype of America that Arabs have: America as debauched, America
as hypocrites.

''Cheney and Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz act like they know all the answers, almost
like a divine right,'' she said. ''They don't have a divine right, and they are
wrong.''

After 9/11, America had the support and sympathy of the world. Now, awash in
digital evidence of uncivilized behavior, America has careered into a war of
civilizations. The pictures were clearly meant to use the codebook of Muslim
anxieties about nudity and sexual and gender humiliation to break down the
prisoners.

Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell said some photographs seemed to show Iraqi women
being commanded to expose their breasts -- such debasement, after a war that
President Bush partly based on women's rights.

The problem, of course, is that the war in Iraq started with lies -- that
Saddam's W.M.D. were endangering our security and that Saddam was linked to Al
Qaeda and 9/11.

In a public relations move that cheapens the heroism of soldiers, the Pentagon
merged the medals for the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, giving the G.W.O.T.
medal, for Global War on Terrorism, in both wars to reinforce the idea that we
had to invade Iraq to quell terrorism. The truth is that our invasion of Iraq
spurred terrorism there and around the world.

That initial deception -- and headlong rush to throw off international
conventions and old alliances, and namby-pamby institutions like the U.N. and
the Red Cross -- led straight to the abuse of Abu Ghraib. Now the question is
whether the C.I.A. tortured Al Qaeda operatives.

Officials blurred the lines to justify ideological decisions, calling every
Iraqi who opposed us a ''terrorist''; conducting rough interrogations, perhaps
to find the nonexistent W.M.D. so they would not look foolish; rolling all
opposition into one scary terrorist ball that did not require sensitivity to the
Geneva Conventions or ''humanitarian do-gooders,'' to use the phrase of Senator
James Inhofe, a Republican.

Senator Fritz Hollings made it clear yesterday that Rummy has left us
undermanned and undertrained in Iraq -- another factor in the torture scandal.
''Now, in a country of 25 million, you're trying to secure it with 135,000,'' he
scolded Mr. Rumsfeld, adding: ''We're trying to win the hearts and minds as
we're killing them and torturing them.'' At least, he said sarcastically, Gen.
William Westmoreland never asked a Vietcong general to take the town, ''like we
have for Falluja. We've asked the enemy general to take the town.''

The hawks, who promised us garlands in Iraq, should have recalled the words of
the historian Daniel Boorstin, who warned that planning for the future without a
sense of history is like planting cut flowers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%);
EVIDENCE (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); GENOCIDE (75%); PORNOGRAPHY (74%);
SEX SCANDALS (74%); SCANDALS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); WOMEN (73%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(69%); TORTURE (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (60%);
AL-QAEDA (60%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (60%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS
(60%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Atomic Weapons; Biological and Chemical Warfare

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%); JOHN KERRY (79%); DIANNE
FEINSTEIN (58%) Maureen Dowd; George W (Pres) Bush; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             378 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Manhattan Store Owner Accused of Underpaying and Sexually Harassing Workers

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 711 words


Three immigrant women yesterday filed a federal lawsuit that accused a Manhattan
store owner of paying them far less than the $5.15-an-hour minimum wage and
telling them he would not grant them raises unless they had sex with him.

The lawsuit asserts that the women, who worked as cashiers and stocked
merchandise, were paid as little as $30 for a 10-hour day, or $3 an hour, and
were told they were to blame for their low pay because they refused to have sex
with the boss.

The lawsuit, brought against three jointly owned stores in Upper Manhattan,
describes a pervasive atmosphere of sexual harassment, with the owner telling
the women that he kept a bed in the basement of one store for sex.

Deyanira Espinal, 38, a Dominican immigrant, said in court papers that when she
asked for a raise last October, the stores' owner ''told me he would give me a
raise only if I had sex with him.''

She added, ''I did not have sex with him, and therefore I did not receive a
raise.''

Ms. Espinal said in an interview: ''I felt bad, bad, bad. I have two daughters,
and here he was making this proposition, and I needed the job.''

Ms. Espinal said the owner once grabbed her in the store basement in an attempt
to assault her sexually.

Later, he reduced her schedule to three days a week from six days to punish her
for spurning his advances, she said.

The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, was brought against
the three stores -- two Ramco stores and a National Discount store -- and
against their owner, Albert Palacci.

Mr. Palacci denied the accusations. ''That's not true,'' he said. ''We don't
have those things here.''

He insisted that the harassment charges were baseless. ''This is the worst thing
you can hear,'' he said. ''It's a lie 100 percent.''

He said that some people have worked at his stores for more than two decades.
''We pay top money,'' he said. ''Some people will say things because they want
to get money from you.''

The Women's Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union filed the
lawsuit after the women approached the group to complain that they were being
underpaid, harassed and not receiving overtime.

''We were abused very unjustly on the job,'' said Maria Araceli Flores, 22, a
Mexican immigrant who worked at the stores. ''I had to put up with it out of
necessity. I have a 5-year-old daughter to support.''

The lawsuit accuses Mr. Palacci of false imprisonment, alleging that he once
took two of the women to a house, locked the door and ordered them to undress.
The suit further alleges that when the women refused, he took off his clothes,
told the women to look at him and do whatever he told them. When they refused,
the lawsuit asserts, he grabbed the women and threw them on the bed, but they
again refused to submit.

Jennifer Arnett, a staff lawyer with the Women's Rights Project, said these
abuses were far too common in New York City.

''This is not an isolated instance, especially in this area, where there are a
lot of immigrant workers,'' she said. ''This sort of abuse is running rampant,
with workers being paid $30, $40 for 10-, 12-hour days and a lot of sexual
harassment.''

In the court papers, Angela Berise Peralta, a Dominican immigrant, said that
once when she went into a store basement to seek some merchandise, she saw a bed
there and Mr. Palacci asked her to have sex with him, but she refused.

On another occasion, she alleged, she accompanied him to a trade show in
Manhattan, and he asked her to go to hotel, adding, ''I can give you what the
young guys cannot.''

Patricia Smith, director of the Attorney General's Labor Bureau, said, ''Sexual
harassment happens in a lot of small retailers because there aren't a lot of
people around to witness it.''

Ms. Peralta, 22, said she was paid $30 for working 10-hour days, while the other
two women said they were paid $40 for 10-hour days.

''It was too much work and very little money,'' Ms. Peralta said.

Ms. Espinal said she was fired in March for refusing the owner's advances. ''Mr.
Palacci threatened me by telling me that I should do what he wanted me to do
because I had children to support,'' Ms. Espinal said in the lawsuit.

She now works for another retailer in Upper Manhattan, she said, that pays her
$40 for 11-hour days.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maria Araceli Flores, left, and Deyanira Espinal, with their
daughters, are two of three women filing the suit. (Photo by Rebecca Cooney for
The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); LITIGATION (91%); SEXUAL
HARASSMENT (91%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); MINIMUM WAGE (90%);
WAGES & SALARIES (90%); WOMEN WORKERS (78%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WOMEN (78%); CIVIL FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); OVERTIME
(78%); RETAILERS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (73%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (73%); DISCOUNT & CLUB STORES (73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS
(73%); CRIMINAL HARASSMENT (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%); INTERVIEWS
(66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%) Retail Stores and Trade; Hispanic-Americans;
Immigration and Refugees; Sexual Harassment; Women; Wages and Salaries; Labor;
Suits and Litigation

PERSON: Steven Greenhouse; Albert Palacci

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (96%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Complaint Filed By a Lawyer Against Britain

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
SADDAM HUSSEIN

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 13


A French lawyer said Thursday that he had filed a war crimes complaint against
Britain at the International Criminal Court in The Hague for abuse of prisoners
in Iraq. But there were immediate questions about whether the court would ever
have jurisdiction in the case.

Jacques Verges, a Paris-based lawyer who also says he is representing Saddam
Hussein, said he was unable to file a complaint against the United States
because it does not recognize the court and ''has put itself above international
law.''

But he said he filed the suit against the British government, which does
recognize the court's jurisdiction, because there was ample evidence that
British nationals had committed war crimes and had abetted crimes committed by
American troops.

Mr. Verges, who is often accused of being a publicity seeker, has made a
specialty of taking up shocking or sensational cases. He said he was acting on
behalf of relatives of his imprisoned clients, Saddam Hussein and Tariq Aziz,
Iraq's former foreign minister.

The International Criminal Court in The Hague declined to comment. ''As a matter
of policy, the office of the prosecutor does not comment on communications, not
even if they arrive or not,'' a court spokesman said by telephone.

Mr. Verges made available a copy of the complaint, a 16-page document that
accuses Britain of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions and of the laws and
customs of war. It quotes extensively from press reports and from reports by
Amnesty International and the International Red Cross. ''I just faxed it this
afternoon,'' Mr. Verges said by telephone.

Mr. Verges said that he had filed the suit at the request of relatives of his
two clients, Mr. Hussein and Mr. Aziz, because they may also be victims of
abuse. ''We don't know, because they are kept in a secret place,'' he said,
adding that Mr. Hussein's rights as a prisoner of war had already been violated
by the release of degrading pictures of him, in contravention of a stricture of
the Geneva Conventions.

It is not clear whether the International Criminal Court has jurisdiction in the
case against Britain. The court, created by the Rome Treaty in 1998, became
effective July 2002 with the mandate to try ''the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community.'' But in essence it is a court of last resort
and has jurisdiction over grave crimes only if a nation's own courts are
unwilling or unable to act.

Britain's own announced investigations into charges of abuse and killing of
Iraqi prisoners therefore will take precedence over any possible inquiry by the
court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); LAWYERS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); LAW OF WAR
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); JURISDICTION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); GENOCIDE (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (64%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) Marlise Simons; Jacques Verges; Saddam (Pres)
Hussein

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); FRANCE (90%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             395 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Afghan Abuse Inquiry

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, May 15


The United States military has opened its second investigation in a week into
accusations of prisoner abuse in Afghanistan, a spokesman said on Saturday.

On Monday, the military opened a criminal investigation into complaints of
mistreatment from a former Afghan police officer who said that he was beaten and
sexually assaulted during 40 days in custody last summer.

An American military spokesman, Lt. Col. Tucker Mansager, said leaders of the
American-led coalition had been notified on Thursday of ''another allegation of
detainee abuse'' and had begun an investigation.

He gave no further details of the allegation, saying only that the information
had come from a third party.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TORTURE (88%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); SEX OFFENSES
(85%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (85%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights; United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Prisoners of War; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             396 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld and Aide Backed Harsh Tactics, Article Says

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
INTERROGATIONS

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld and one of his top aides authorized the
expansion of a secret program that permitted harsh interrogations of detained
members of Al Qaeda, allowing these methods to be used against prisoners at the
Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, according to an article in The New Yorker.

The article, by Seymour M. Hersh, reported that Mr. Rumsfeld and Stephen A.
Cambone, the undersecretary of defense for intelligence, approved the use of the
tougher interrogation techniques in Iraq in 2003 to extract better information
from Iraqi prisoners to counter the growing insurgency threat in the country.

Mr. Hersh's account, to be published in the May 24 issue of the magazine, said
that the expansion of the ''special access program'' allowed authorities in
charge of Abu Ghraib to engage in degrading and sexually humiliating practices.
It was posted on Saturday on The New Yorker's Web site.

''According to interviews with several past and present American intelligence
officials,'' Mr. Hersh wrote, ''the Pentagon's operation, known inside the
intelligence community by several code words, including Copper Green, encouraged
physical coercion and sexual humiliation of Iraqi prisoners in an effort to
generate more intelligence about the growing insurgency in Iraq.''

Mr. Hersh's reporting focuses new attention on an important question in the
prisoner abuse scandal -- whether senior military or civilian officials ordered
the mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners. Mr. Rumsfeld, who has apologized for the
abuses, has said that they were carried out by lower-level forces without the
approval of senior commanders.

The article suggested that Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Cambone had, in effect, shifted
the blame for the abuses away from top civilians at the Pentagon to lower-level
military police guards who are facing disciplinary proceedings in military
courts.

On Saturday, officials in the Bush administration disputed several of the
critical details of Mr. Hersh's article. They said that they were aware of no
high-level decision to use highly coercive interrogation techniques on Iraqi
prisoners.

A military official who worked in Iraq on detention issues said on Saturday that
a covert task force of military and intelligence officers had operated in Iraq,
but that it had appeared to limit its contact with the jailers at Abu Ghraib.

The official said that the covert operators worked out of their own highly
secret and well-guarded compound in Baghdad, where they held captives
incommunicado and questioned them for relatively short periods of time before
turning them over to the jailers at Abu Ghraib.

''They had their own mission,'' the official said. ''They picked up their own
people. They were operating under their own rules. So we had nothing to do with
that. It would have been a huge security violation for anyone else to be in
there.''

The official said the group was no longer working in Iraq.

The official said the Baghdad compound where the team worked was so closely
controlled that other military and intelligence personnel could not enter it
without having clearance or the authorization of the commander of American
forces in Iraq, Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez. The official declined to discuss
what interrogation techniques the covert team used, but said it generally turned
over prisoners to Abu Ghraib after 72 hours.

The official said that Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, then the commander of the
military detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, visited the covert compound
last September, during a trip to assess the problems with detention and
interrogation efforts in Iraq. General Miller was accompanied by a detention
expert, who made suggestions about the security of the compound.

Bush administration officials pointed to testimony before Congress in which
several administration officials acknowledged that the Geneva Conventions
applied to detainees in Iraq and therefore did not permit coercive tactics.

But some officials acknowledged that as the insurgency worsened in Iraq last
summer, there was rising concern about how to improve intelligence about future
attacks.

One solution to these concerns, Mr. Hersh wrote, ''was to get tough with those
Iraqis in the Army prison system who were suspected of being insurgents.'' Mr.
Rumsfeld and Mr. Cambone went a step further, the article said, expanding the
scope of a secret program by ''bringing its unconventional methods to Abu
Ghraib. The commandos were to operate in Iraq as they had in Afghanistan.''

At the Pentagon, the chief spokesman, Lawrence Di Rita, vigorously denied the
allegations that Mr. Cambone directed a covert program to encourage the coercion
and sexual humiliation of Iraqi prisoners.

''It's pure, unadulterated fantasy,'' Mr. Di Rita said in a telephone interview.
''We don't discuss covert programs, but nothing in any covert program would have
led anyone to sanction activity like what was seen on those videos.''

''No responsible official in this department, including Secretary Rumsfeld,
would or could have been involved in sanctioning the physical coercion or sexual
humiliation of Iraqi prisoners,'' Mr. Di Rita said.

Some elements of the New Yorker article have been previously reported, including
the special interrogation program for Qaeda prisoners captured in Afghanistan.
That program, authorized by government legal opinions that said that Qaeda
prisoners were ''illegal combatants'' not protected by the Geneva Conventions,
included coercive methods, although it barred the use of torture as defined by
federal statutes and international conventions.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld in Iraq on Thursday.
(Pool photo by David Hume Kennerly)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); SCANDALS (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); PRISONS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); LITIGATION (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TORTURE (77%); APPROVALS (76%); SEX SCANDALS (73%); MILITARY
COURTS (73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (71%); ARMED FORCES (69%) Terrorism;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; Torture  ; Intelligence Services; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) New Yorker (Magazine)

PERSON: David Johnston; Tim Golden; Seymour Hersh; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld;
Stephen A (Under Sec) Cambone; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             398 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Security With Liberty

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE.

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The draft of a report of great importance to our personal lives as well as our
nation's security has been floating around Congress and the administration for
the past two months.

Because ''Safeguarding Privacy in the Fight Against Terrorism'' is not stamped
secret -- and because it is intended to prevent a future body blow to our system
rather than expose a past scandal -- the 119-page document commissioned by the
Department of Defense has not surfaced until now.

Cast your mind back about 18 months to revelations of a ''Total Information
Awareness'' project under way in the Pentagon. Adm. John Poindexter, a brilliant
mind with no common sense, headed a team of top technicians assembling a
''centralized grand database.'' Its Latin motto translated as ''Knowledge Is
Power.''

But the government's knowledge of everything we say and do -- from our bank
accounts and credit charges, medical and academic records, travel plans and
Internet visits, e-mail and cellphone bills, added to police, F.B.I. and C.I.A.
raw files -- concentrates too much power and invites abuse. Congress, aroused by
the press, wisely refused to fund it.

The Pentagon responded sensibly. The dangerous idea of programming computers
with the likely or even far-fetched plans of terrorists, and then ''mining''
databases both commercial and governmental to fit those patterns -- thereby to
turn up suspicious movements and potential suspects -- is curiously creative.

But how could it be done without turning the U.S. into a police state? As
originally set up, the civil liberties canary in the data mine died for lack of
safeguards.

A year ago, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld decided that this thinking
''outside the box'' had to be rethought outside the Pentagon. He appointed a
Technology and Privacy Advisory Committee, unique in this administration, of
heavy hitters in the law. Newt (Vast Wasteland) Minow is the chairman; members
are Floyd Abrams, Zoe Baird, Griffin Bell, Gerhard Casper, William Coleman,
Lloyd Cutler and John Marsh.

These are serious old pros, mostly Democrats, who are not bedazzled by the
ever-changing techiedegook. When the supersnoops described ''a series of
increasingly powerful configurations that can be stress-tested in operationally
relevant environments using real-time feedbacks,'' Abrams dismissed such foo-foo
dust as ''simply not comprehensible.''

In plain language, the Minow committee finds that the defunded program ''was a
flawed effort to achieve worthwhile ends.'' It concludes that laws covering data
mining are ''disjointed and often outdated, and as a result may compromise the
protection of privacy, public confidence and the nation's ability to craft
effective and lawful responses to terrorism.''

Then the panel tells the administration, in constructive detail, how to go about
tracking terror without destroying all privacy. It includes calls for: written
findings by top officials before undertaking any mining; appointing a
policy-level privacy officer; making data anonymous; creating an audit trail;
court authorization; oversight by a single committee of Congress; developing
''technological and other tools for enhancing privacy protection''; and ''a
culture of sensitivity to . . . privacy issues.''

Is this enough? Not quite. The committee is too trusting of judges; in 35 years,
federal and state courts have approved 29,250 wiretap orders and turned down
only 32. It also thinks that the main flaw in the original proposal was an
insensitive presentation. But this is a good-faith attempt to strike a balance,
and Bill Coleman's objections supporting Poindexter and paying lip service to
privacy underscore the majority's attempt to satisfy civil libertarians.

In obtaining actionable antiterror intelligence, there is a connection between
(1) today's concern for protecting a prisoner's right to humane treatment and
(2) tomorrow's concern about protecting free people's right to keep the
government from poking into the most intimate details of their lives.

Must we wait until intrusive general searches mushroom into scandal, weakening
our ability to collect information that saves lives? Congress should debate this
Pentagon report balancing personal liberty and national security now, exercising
foresight, rather than years from now, in the high dudgeon of hindsight.

Bob Herbert is on vacation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%); DATA MINING (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); SCANDALS
(77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (52%) Terrorism;
Privacy; Freedom and Human Rights; Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (55%)

PERSON: William Safire

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             399 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Panel Urges New Protection On Federal 'Data Mining'

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


A federal advisory committee says Congress should pass laws to protect the civil
liberties of Americans when the government sifts through computer records and
data files for information about terrorists.

''The Department of Defense should safeguard the privacy of U.S. persons when
using data mining to fight terrorism,'' the panel says in a report to Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. The report, expected to be issued in about two
weeks, says privacy laws lag far behind advances in information and
communications technology.

The eight-member panel, which includes former officials with decades of
high-level government experience, found that the Defense Department and many
other agencies were collecting and using ''personally identifiable information
on U.S. persons for national security and law enforcement purposes.'' Some of
these activities, it said, resemble the Pentagon program initially known as
Total Information Awareness, which was intended to catch terrorists before they
struck, by monitoring e-mail messages and databases of financial, medical and
travel information.

The Pentagon program, later renamed Terrorism Information Awareness, was flawed
from the start, though its goal was worthwhile, the panel said. ''Our nation
should use information technology and the power to search digital data to fight
terrorism, but should protect privacy while doing so,'' it concluded. ''In
developing and using data mining tools, the government can and must protect
privacy.''

Data mining is defined in the report to mean ''searches of one or more
electronic databases of information concerning U.S. persons, by or on behalf of
an agency or employee of the government.''

The panel, the Technology and Privacy Advisory Committee, said the Pentagon
program was ''not the tip of the iceberg, but rather one small specimen in a sea
of icebergs.''

Although the panel was created by Mr. Rumsfeld to scrutinize Pentagon programs,
it offers sweeping recommendations for privacy safeguards throughout the
government.

''The privacy issues presented by data mining cannot be resolved by the
Department of Defense alone,'' the panel said. ''Action by Congress, the
president and the courts is necessary as well.''

One of the panel's most important recommendations is to involve the courts in
deciding when the government can search electronic databases.

In general, it said, the Defense Department and other federal agencies should be
required to obtain approval from a special federal court ''before engaging in
data mining with personally identifiable information concerning U.S. persons.''

To obtain such approval, the government would have to show that it needed the
information to prevent or respond to terrorism. In an emergency, the government
would not have to get approval in advance, but would need to seek a court order
within 48 hours of beginning the search.

Lawyers who work with the panel said its report was sent to the printer earlier
this month and would probably be issued within two weeks. A copy was obtained by
The New York Times.

Senator Ron Wyden, the Oregon Democrat who led opposition to the Pentagon
program, said Sunday that he had not seen the report but that it sounded like
''a very constructive step.''

''This confirms what I've been saying as a member of the Senate Intelligence
Committee,'' Mr. Wyden said. ''It's possible to fight terrorism ferociously
without gutting civil liberties. The challenge in striking that balance is to
have ground rules. I've introduced a bill to set rules for data mining by the
federal government. I suspect that federal agencies are doing an immense amount
of data mining.''

The panel said existing laws on information privacy were so disjointed and out
of date that they threatened ''efforts to fight terrorism and the
constitutionally protected rights of U.S. persons,'' defined as citizens and
permanent resident aliens.

''Government access to personal data can threaten individual liberty and invade
constitutionally protected informational privacy rights,'' the panel said, and
these risks will grow as the government amasses data on United States citizens
who have done nothing to warrant suspicion.

Under the panel's recommendations, a federal agency could search an electronic
database of publicly available information without a court order. But the head
of the agency would still have to certify in writing that the data mining was
necessary and appropriate for a lawful purpose. This requirement would apply to
electronic databases of ''information that is routinely available without charge
or subscription to the public -- on the Internet, in telephone directories or in
public records.''

The panel, headed by Newton N. Minow, a former chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission, acknowledged that its proposals would ''impose
additional burdens on government officials.'' But, it said, the requirements
would enhance personal privacy and national security by clarifying the rules.

''Good privacy protection in the context of data mining is often consistent with
more efficient investigation,'' the panel said.

The greatest risk of data mining by the government is that it ''chills
individual behavior,'' so people become more likely to follow social norms and
less likely to dissent, the panel said. The report traces the tension between
security and liberty to the earliest days of the Republic. ''Those who trade
liberty for safety all too often achieve neither,'' it says, echoing Benjamin
Franklin.

One member of the panel, William T. Coleman Jr., who was transportation
secretary in the Ford administration, filed a lengthy dissent, asserting that
the proposed restrictions could cripple the fight against terrorism. The
proposals, he said, go far beyond what is required by the Constitution, federal
laws or Supreme Court decisions.

But the panel insisted its proposals would not interfere with searches based on
''particularized suspicion about a specific individual, including searches to
identify or locate a suspected terrorist.'' Federal agents could still review
passenger lists for airlines and cruise ships without new regulatory
requirements.

Mr. Rumsfeld appointed the panel in February 2003 to quell a political uproar
over the Pentagon data mining program, headed by John M. Poindexter, a retired
rear admiral. Congress cut off money for the program in September 2003, with
certain exceptions described in a ''classified annex'' to the 2004 military
spending law.

Members of the panel, besides Mr. Minow and Mr. Coleman, were Floyd Abrams, a
leading First Amendment lawyer; Zo<3> Baird, president of the Markle Foundation,
which focuses on information technology; Griffin B. Bell, who was attorney
general under President Jimmy Carter; Gerhard Casper, former president of
Stanford University; Lloyd N. Cutler, who was White House counsel under Mr.
Carter and President Bill Clinton; and John O. Marsh Jr., an aide to President
Gerald R. Ford who later served as secretary of the Army.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); DATA MINING (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATION (78%); EMPLOYEE PRIVACY (78%); PATIENT PRIVACY
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERNET PRIVACY (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%);
LAWYERS (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); ELECTRONIC MAIL
(72%) Terrorism; Privacy; Law and Legislation; Freedom and Human Rights;
Computers and the Internet; Terrorism

PERSON: Robert Pear; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             402 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Spain: 300 Extremists Identified

BYLINE: By Dale Fuchs (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 90 words


An Interior Ministry spokesman confirmed a newspaper report that said the
ministry had identified 300 ''potentially dangerous'' Islamist militants
organized in a dozen sleeper cells throughout the country. The newspaper, El
Pais, whose account did not name any group or suspects, also said that
counterterrorism specialists were lobbying for legal changes that would allow
the authorities to arrest or expel suspected extremists. Islamic extremism is
blamed for the train bombings in Madrid that killed 191 people in March.   Dale
Fuchs (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); RELIGION
(85%); BOMBINGS (85%); COUNTERTERRORISM (84%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights; Islam

PERSON: Dale Fuchs

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (90%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Spain

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             405 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 78 words


An article on Saturday about immigrants who were refugees from torture overseas,
and their reactions to photographs of Iraqi prisoners being abused by American
soldiers, attributed a distinction incorrectly to the Center for Victims of
Torture, in Minneapolis. Established in 1985, it is the oldest center in the
United States for victims of torture. The world's oldest is the Rehabilitation
and Research Center for Torture Victims, founded in Copenhagen in 1982.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (93%); IMMIGRATION (91%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); TERRORISM (84%) United States International Relations;
Freedom and Human Rights; United States Armament and Defense; Correction
Stories; Torture; Immigration and Refugees; Terrorism

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (87%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             407 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2004 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Screening of Prison Officials Is Faulted by Lawmakers

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD and ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE CONGRESS; Pg.
9

LENGTH: 970 words


The use of American corrections executives with abuse accusations in their past
to oversee American-run prisons in Iraq is prompting concerns in Congress about
how the officials were selected and screened.

Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, sent a letter yesterday to
Attorney General John Ashcroft questioning what he described as the ''checkered
record when it comes to prisoners' rights'' of John J. Armstrong, a former
commissioner of corrections in Connecticut.

Mr. Armstrong resigned last year after Connecticut settled lawsuits brought by
the American Civil Liberties Union and the families of two Connecticut inmates
who died after being sent by Mr. Armstrong to a supermaximum security prison in
Virginia. One of the inmates, a diabetic, died of heart failure after going into
diabetic shock and then being hit with an electric charge by guards wielding a
stun gun and kept in restraints.

In his letter, Mr. Schumer requested that the Justice Department conduct an
investigation into the role of American civilians in the Iraqi prison system.
Mr. Armstrong is assistant director of operations of American prisons in Iraq,
and Mr. Schumer said he was apparently working under contract for the State
Department.

State Department officials had no comment on the case and could not confirm
whether Mr. Armstrong worked for the department in Iraq or not. Mr. Armstrong,
who has an unlisted phone number, could not be reached for comment.

Another official, Lane McCotter, who was forced to resign as director of the
Utah Department of Corrections in 1997 after an incident in which a mentally ill
inmate died after guards left him shackled naked to a restraining chair for 16
hours, was dispatched by Mr. Ashcroft to head a team of Americans to reopen
Iraq's prisons.

After his resignation in Utah, Mr. McCotter became an executive of a private
prison company, the Management and Training Corporation, one of whose jails was
strongly criticized in a Justice Department report just a month before the
Justice Department sent him to Iraq. The report found that the jail, in Santa
Fe, lacked adequate medical and mental health care and had no suicide prevention
plan, which had contributed to an inmate's hanging himself.

In Iraq, it was Mr. McCotter who first identified Abu Ghraib as the best site
for America's main prison and who helped rebuild the prison and train Iraqi
guards, according to his own account, given to Correction .com, an online
industry magazine

Officials at the Justice Department would not say who decided to give Mr.
McCotter the assignment or whether the Justice Department was aware of his
history when Mr. Ashcroft announced his appointment.

''The contractors were all vetted in the normal process,'' said a senior Justice
Department official, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity. ''They all
came highly recommended by corrections experts.''

Speaking of the two cases in an interview, Mr. Schumer said: ''One might be an
aberration. Two is getting awfully close to a pattern.''

He said, ''Of all the people who have experience running prisons in this country
and haven't run into trouble, how did they pick these guys?''

Vincent Nathan, an expert on prison management, said ''I find it somewhat
mystifying that the Justice Department failed to involve its own professional
administrators in the federal Bureau of Prisons'' in running the prisons in
Iraq.

The Bureau of Prisons, Mr. Nathan noted, is part of the Justice Department and
has long experience in running prisons that hold foreigners, including illegal
immigrants.

The Justice Department official said Mr. McCotter's role in overseeing prison
operations in Baghdad was limited to what are regarded as civilian prisoners,
rather than military ones. But the unclear chain of command at Abu Ghraib has
made it difficult to distinguish between the two groups.

''What is the civilian side?'' Mr. Schumer asked. ''Many of the people who were
abused were civilians.''

Mr. Armstrong returned from Iraq last week to attend his daughter's graduation
and has not decided whether to go back, said a Michael Lawlor, the chairman of
Connecticut's House Judiciary Committee and a neighbor in West Haven.

During his eight years as commissioner of corrections in Connecticut, Mr.
Armstrong was also criticized by the guards' union and the National Organization
for Women for failing to deal with repeated complaints by female guards that
they were being sexually harassed by male guards.

But his most difficult time came when he sent more than 200 Connecticut inmates
to Wallens Ridge, a supermaximum security prison in Big Stone Gap, Va.

One inmate, Lawrence Frazier, the diabetic, died after being hit with an
electric charge. Another, David Tracy, who had been diagnosed with mental
illness, jumped off his bunk with a makeshift rope around his neck in plain
sight of a guard who did nothing to come to his aid, said David Fathi, a senior
staff counsel for the A.C.L.U.'s National Prison Project.

Mr. Fathi, who oversaw a lawsuit against Connecticut and Mr. Armstrong, said the
state had deprived the prisoners at Wallens Ridge of their constitutional right
against cruel and unusual punishment.

Inmates at Wallens Ridge were frequently strapped down in four point restraint,
meaning their arms and legs were fastened down, and were then hit by stun guns
''for trivial things,'' Mr. Fathi said. The guards, who were all white, often
used racial slurs in talking to the prisoners, he said.

Mr. Lawlor, who visited Wallens Ridge, said the warden's office had been
decorated with photographs of Confederate generals and Confederate battle flags.

Connecticut in two separate out-of- court settlements agreed to remove all of
their inmates from Wallens Ridge and to pay $1.9 million to the families of the
inmates who died.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 27, 2004



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about
Congressional concern over American correctional executives who were assigned to
Iraq despite prior accusations of prisoner abuse misstated the name of an online
magazine that carried a first-person account by one such person, Lane McCotter.
It is Corrections.com, not Correction.com.



Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Congressional concern
over American correctional executives who were assigned to Iraq despite prior
accusations of prisoner abuse misstated the name of an online magazine that
carried a first-person account by one such person, Lane McCotter. It is
Corrections.com, not Correction.com.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Lane McCotter was sent to Iraq to help reopen prisons. (Photo by
The Salt Lake Tribune)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (93%); PRISONS (92%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); WAR CRIMES (76%); RESIGNATIONS (75%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); PRISON
PRIVATIZATION (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (72%); HEART
DISEASE (69%); MENTAL ILLNESS (69%); HEALTH CARE (67%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING
(66%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (66%); MENTAL HEALTH (64%); NATURISTS & NATURISM
(64%); SUICIDE (60%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (50%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisons and Prisoners; Guards; Mental
Health and Disorders; Nudism and Nudity

COMPANY: MANAGEMENT & TRAINING CORP (65%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%) Justice Department

PERSON: CHARLES SCHUMER (91%) Fox Butterfield; Eric Lichtblau; Lane McCotter;
John J Armstrong; Charles E (Sen) Schumer; John (Atty Gen) Ashcroft

STATE: UTAH, USA (94%); CONNECTICUT, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Connecticut; Utah; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             413 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Treatment of Prisoners

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 159 words



To the Editor:

The Pentagon-approved interrogation techniques that deprive prisoners of sleep
and force them to stand in ''stress positions'' for extended periods (front
page, May 15) are both disturbing and illegal.

In 1999, a federal court of appeals ruled that conditions intended to prevent a
prisoner from sleeping would violate the Constitution. In 2002, the Supreme
Court held that handcuffing an Alabama prisoner to a hitching post and making
him stand with his arms raised for seven hours was ''obvious cruelty'' and
''antithetical to human dignity.''

While the military has now stated, as a result of public pressure, that these
illegal techniques are banned in our prisons in Iraq and Afghanistan, they are
still allowed in other military prisons like Guantanamo Bay. It is time for the
military to unequivocally bar such officially sanctioned abuse of prisoners.

ELIZABETH ALEXANDER
Director
A.C.L.U. National Prison Project
Washington, May 18, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (87%); SETTLEMENTS
& DECISIONS (87%); SUPREME COURTS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(71%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (71%); APPEALS COURTS (71%); APPEALS (71%); TERRORISM
(59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%);
NATIONAL PRISON PROJECT (56%) American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Elizabeth Alexander

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (51%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             414 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 91 words


A Political Memo article on May 7 about partisan recriminations in Congress over
the abuse of Iraqi prisoners referred incorrectly to a comment by Representative
John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat, who criticized the Bush
administration's Iraq policy. He indeed applied the word ''unwinnable'' -- as
the Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call reported -- to the Bush administration's
strategy: ''The whole point is, this thing's got to -- the direction's got to be
changed or it's unwinnable, in my estimation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (87%); TERRORISM (86%) Correction Stories; Prisoners
of War; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: JOHN P MURTHA (90%) John P (Rep) Murtha

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             417 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi-Born Swede Says U.S. Returned Him to Prison for No Reason

BYLINE: By DANNY HAKIM

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: FORMER DETAINEE;
Pg. 12

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, May 22


Nearly two decades after he says he was tortured in Saddam Hussein's Abu Ghraib
prison, an Iraqi-born Swede claims that the American military returned him to
the prison only to be abused again.

''Saddam took our money and our profits and our life, and now the American Army
is doing the same thing,'' said the man in an interview, speaking through an
interpreter at a relative's house here. He insisted that he be identified only
by his last name, Saleh.

Mr. Saleh's lawyer, Shereef Akeel, has filed a claim with the Army seeking more
than $100,000 as repayment for money his client says was confiscated, as well as
compensation for emotional damages.

Mr. Saleh, 42, says he is a Shiite Muslim who fled Iraq after the first Gulf war
and wanted to return to set up a business. He says he was randomly picked up by
American soldiers and taken last October to Abu Ghraib prison, where he was a
victim of sexual abuse.

His most serious accusation is that American soldiers shot and killed five
detainees toward the end of Ramadan during a riot.

Such stories are difficult to confirm. The military's news media office in
Baghdad did say on Friday that a man with Mr. Saleh's full name, and with the
prisoner identification number he provided to a reporter, had been a prisoner at
Abu Ghraib. The officials also said the prisoner was first brought to the prison
on Oct. 4, the date printed on an identification bracelet Mr. Saleh showed to a
reporter.

Claes Thorson, media counselor at the Swedish Embassy in Washington, said the
Swedish government had been ''aware of a Swede being in an Iraqi prison, but not
Abu Ghraib, during the autumn of 2003,'' but declined to release his name. Mr.
Saleh said that he spent more than a week at two other locations before being
transferred to Abu Ghraib.

''I can't say if this person was transferred to Abu Ghraib,'' Mr. Thorson said.

Mr. Saleh says he was imprisoned at Abu Ghraib from 1980 to 1985 under the
Hussein regime and says his house was demolished by the government. He wanted to
return, he said, because he thought the American government wanted Iraqis to
come back to help rebuild.

He returned last August, he said, leaving his wife and five children in Sweden
and carrying with him $79,000 in savings and money from relatives. He said he
was a mechanic and car dealer who wanted to set up shop in Najaf.

In September, he says he was stopped on a road to Najaf by two American soldiers
and a translator. They pointed guns at him, confiscated his passport, his
Mercedes and his cash, which was in a suitcase, and put a hood over his head. He
says he was not carrying a weapon and does not know why he was detained.

By Oct. 4, he was back in Abu Ghraib.

''The size of it is like the city of Dearborn,'' he said, referring to the
Michigan city near Detroit that has one of the largest Arab-American
populations.

He described the prison as a series of fenced tent compounds surrounded by
towers and said torture sessions during both of his stays were conducted at a
large building. Among other things, he says he was kept naked for as long as a
day and a half, given electric shocks, made to carry buckets of feces and
sodomized with a stick.

''They took all my clothes off,'' he said in his interview. ''They made me lay
on another prisoner. They tied my neck with a rope and pulled me like an animal.
They lined up the prisoners and tied up their penis heads together and then
pushed them down to the floor.''

He said a riot began in his tent compound at the end of Ramadan, when many
prisoners began screaming ''God is Great'' in Arabic.

''The Americans were shouting, saying, no talking, no talking,'' he said. ''At
the beginning, they shot plastic bullets,'' he said, adding that the prisoners
began to shout more, ''so they started shooting for real.''

He said he saw one prisoner from his tent die and heard about four others who
died.

Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba's report mentions an incident in which a dozen
detainees were shot and three killed during a riot at Camp Ganci, the particular
encampment where one of Mr. Saleh's two identification bracelets says he was
being held at the time. According to the report, the incident occurred on Nov.
24, as Ramadan was ending.

Mr. Saleh says he was released in December when he managed to get an American
guard to locate his passport. The guard, he said, told him to sneak out his
identification bracelets under his armpit and ''go to America to tell everyone
what had happened.''

''I consider this man the hero of the United States, who is representing the
United States in Iraq,'' he said.

He took a cab to a relative's house in Iraq, he said, and was given money to
travel to Syria and eventually back to Sweden, before he came to Michigan in
March to press his claim.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DESERT STORM (90%); ARMIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); RIOTS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); SEX
OFFENSES (72%); SHOOTINGS (72%); INTERVIEWS (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (70%);
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS (69%); RAMADAN (69%); TERRORISM (67%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(63%); NEW CAR DEALERS (60%) Prisoners of War; Torture; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Suits
and Litigation; Persian Gulf War; Sex Crimes; Suits and Litigation; Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%) Danny Hakim; Saleh (Prisoner)

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); SWEDEN (90%); GULF STATES (78%)

REGION: Iraq; Sweden; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Detroit (Mich)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             420 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spain Finding Muslim Rights A Tough Issue

BYLINE: By DALE FUCHS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: MADRID, May 22


After the train bombings here on March 11, the new Spanish government is
struggling to find ways to prevent Islamic militants from operating through the
country's many tiny, makeshift mosques without violating Spain's religious
freedom.

Early this month, the new interior minister, Jose Antonio Alonso, ventured a
possible solution: set up a mandatory registry of clergy members and places of
worship for all religions, and monitor all sermons.

Church groups in Spain said the idea was unconstitutional. Angel Acebes, the
interior minister in the former government, said it amounted to ''prior
censorship'' and would be ineffective in fighting terrorism.

An editorial in El Mundo took issue with the fact that the proposal would apply
to all religions. The editorial said Mr. Alonso apparently was trying to avoid
being accused of discrimination against Muslims.

Mansur Escudero, secretary general of the Islamic Commission of Spain, said,
''Terrorism is not born in the mosques, it is born out of hate and resentment.''
The notion of supervising sermons at Friday Prayer, he said, was ''surreal.''

But not all of Spain's Muslims agree. ''You need a degree to teach at a
university, but right now anyone can enter a mosque and preach whatever they
like,'' said Mustafa el-Mrabet, president of the Moroccan Immigrant Workers'
Association, which will report to the government on the proliferation of what he
called ''garage-based mosques.''

Mr. Mrabet said roughly 200 unlisted prayer sites had sprouted throughout the
country. He recalled that, according to investigators, Sarhane Ben Abdelmajid
Fakhet, the Tunisian identified by the former Spanish government as the
coordinator of the train bombings, led prayers in one of those sites. ''We have
to open our eyes,'' Mr. Mrabet said.

The government already keeps a voluntary registry of worship sites, including
235 mosques, in Spain. Law enforcement officials who have identified 300
''potentially dangerous'' Islamic militants in Spain support monitoring the
mosques.

But the opposition to the new proposal was so strong that the interior minister
retracted it at a recent meeting with Muslim leaders, said Mr. Escudero of the
Islamic Commission, which is recognized by the government as the official voice
of Spain's more than 500,000 Muslims.

He said he would meet monthly with government officials to find a way to satisfy
safety concerns and respect religious freedom.

Money is likely to figure prominently in negotiations. While the government
provides some financial support to the Roman Catholic Church, the Muslim and
Jewish populations get nothing.

Mr. Escudero said that Muslims in Spain must seek money from Saudi Arabia, which
backs a ''more rigorous Islamic message'' that clashes with the values of most
of Spain's Muslims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); DISCRIMINATION
(77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (72%); CHURCH
& STATE (72%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%);
INVESTIGATIONS (64%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (64%); IMMIGRATION (50%) Terrorism; Bombs
and Explosives; Railroads; Islam; Discrimination; Freedom of Religion;
Church-State Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Identification Devices

PERSON: Dale Fuchs; Jose Antonio (Min) Alonso

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (99%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Spain; Madrid (Spain); Spain

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             425 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The President and the War: American Voices

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 77 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof (column, May 22) says that ''we are as appalled by our own
war crimes as by Saddam's.'' I am appalled that Mr. Kristof could possibly
equate the cruel mischief inflicted by a dozen or so misguided, poorly trained
soldiers with the horrible torture, poison gas deaths and countless other
murders that Saddam Hussein is guilty of. Let's get some sense of perspective on
this issue.

DAVID V. ACASTER
Saddle River, N.J., May 22, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); TERRORISM (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) David V Acaster; Nicholas D Kristof; Saddam Hussein

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             427 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Colonel Risked His Career By Menacing Detainee and Lost

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG; Ian Fisher contributed reporting from Baghdad for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
INTERROGATIONS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2607 words

DATELINE: PLANTATION, Fla.


In western Broward County, where Lt. Col. Allen B. West, 43, is preparing to
start life over as a high school social studies teacher, the grass is green, the
air is moist and the pressure is barometric. Iraq seems very far away, as does
the night last August when Colonel West used his gun to coerce an Iraqi police
officer during an interrogation.

Intent on foiling a reported plot to ambush him and his men, Colonel West, a
battalion commander, made a calculated decision to intimidate the Iraqi officer
with a show of force. An interrogation under way was going nowhere, Colonel West
said in an interview, and he chose to take the matter into his own hands.

''This could get ugly,'' he told his soldiers. But, he said, he imposed limits:
''This man will not be injured and he will not have to be repaired. There will
be no blood and no breakage of bones.''

Still, Colonel West wanted the Iraqi policeman, Yehiya Kadoori Hamoodi, to think
''this was going to be the end'' if he did not divulge what he knew. So Colonel
West presided over what he considered a time-sensitive interrogation that grew
steadily more abusive until he himself fired a pistol beside Mr. Hamoodi's head.

A strait-laced, by-the-book senior officer, Colonel West deliberately
disregarded Army rules and regulations, gambling -- and eventually losing -- a
successful 22-year military career that seemed destined for further advancement.

''There are rules and regulations, and there's protecting your soldiers,''
Colonel West said, sitting by a man-made waterway behind his family's new home
in a Florida subdivision. ''I just felt I'd never have to write a letter of
condolence home to a 'rule and regulation.' ''

''The fact is, I made a choice, the choice had consequences and I accept that,''
he continued.

But, he added, the events of that hot, dusty night still disturb him: ''I'm not
some bully who goes around threatening men's lives. Certain things we have to do
in war are outside our character.''

Many months before the Abu Ghraib prison scandal raised questions about whether
the military was permitting or tolerating the mistreatment of detainees, the
Army pointedly rejected Colonel West's aggressive tactics during that single
interrogation.

Expressing concern that his behavior could send the signal that abuse was
acceptable as a means to an end, the Army relieved Colonel West of his command
and contemplated court-martialing him on assault charges.

When Colonel West's case became public last fall, it, too, provoked a debate
about appropriate conduct during wartime. But that debate had a far different
tenor than the much larger one raging now.

No one is suggesting now that the abuse of the Abu Ghraib detainees was
justified or that the military is being overzealous in policing itself. Then,
however, Colonel West's many defenders argued that the military should have
viewed Colonel West as a hero who did not disobey rules so much as rise above
them.

The conservative media personalities and Web sites that raised money for his
legal defense portrayed a military hamstrung by concern for the human rights of
Iraqi detainees. The more than 2,300 letters and e-mail messages that he
received were mostly ''thank you'' notes for putting his men first and resisting
the pressure to treat suspects with kid gloves.

Ninety-five members of Congress signed a letter to the secretary of the Army
supporting the colonel.

Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, a Republican and chairman of the Armed
Services Committee, who has pressed for accountability in the Abu Ghraib affair,
expressed empathy for the colonel in a letter to constituents. ''As a former
Marine Corps officer, I support Colonel West's judgment,'' he wrote. ''I
understand the colonel was well-intentioned and his efforts appear solely
intended to protect the lives of troops under his command.''

In his letter, Senator Warner stated that one potential attacker was apprehended
and potential ambush sites were identified and avoided as a result of Mr.
Hamoodi's interrogation. Colonel West notes that there were no further attacks
on him or his men after the interrogation.

But the record of his case is unclear on whether the Iraqi officer provided
valuable information, and Mr. Hamoodi said in an interview that he did not,
because he knew nothing.

Neal A. Puckett, a lawyer who represented Colonel West and now represents Brig.
Gen. Janis Karpinski, who oversaw Abu Ghraib and other prisons, said the
intelligence officers he interviewed in Iraq last fall were highly frustrated
with their inability to extract information.

''The detainees would regularly treat interrogators with contempt, spit on them,
laugh at them and say, 'We don't have to answer your questions,' '' he said.
''They would turn our humanity and our following of the Geneva Conventions
against us.''

The information-gathering system was not running efficiently, either, Mr.
Puckett said. The interrogation specialist at Colonel West's base was a ''nice
young gal oblivious to all things Arab,'' like the common phrase ''inshallah,''
or ''God willing,'' Mr. Puckett said. Information collected was not
systematically compiled, he added.

''Problems like that, I've got to believe, put pressure to bear on folks tasked
with gathering information,'' he said.

Colonel West was not tasked with that duty. Before that August night he had
never conducted or witnessed an interrogation. He was a commander, overseeing an
artillery battalion of some 650 soldiers and officers.

He had started in such a role early in life, as an R.O.T.C. battalion commander
at an Atlanta high school. His father, a World War II veteran, encouraged him to
pursue a career in the military ''because he felt that it was a good place to be
for a young black man,'' Colonel West said.

Commissioned as an officer even before he graduated from the University of
Tennessee, he steadily climbed the ladder, serving in Italy, South Korea and the
Middle East, during the 1991 gulf war, while winning medals and gaining
parachuting proficiency and master's degrees. He is married to a financial
planner, and they have two young daughters.

Colonel West said he could remember one time before last summer that he
committed an infraction: he got a traffic ticket in 1990 in Kansas ''right after
they changed a sign.''

He is the very picture of clean cut. In the interview, he wore wire-rim glasses,
pressed jeans, a neat yellow shirt and tassled loafers without socks. His Army
dog tag and a Christian shield hung on a chain around his neck. Several times he
exclaimed, ''Aw, jeepers!''

It was in April 2003 that Colonel West's Second Battalion, part of the Fourth
Infantry Division, arrived in Iraq and set up camp at Taji, a former Iraqi air
force base north of Baghdad. ''We experienced contact from hostile forces from
the time we got there,'' he said in a hearing last November.

Colonel West said he spent much time searching for weapons caches and trying to
disrupt the arms market in the area. He would advise his soldiers to keep alert
at all times. ''You ride along and say to yourself, 'Is that dead sheep a dead
sheep, or is it a dead sheep stuffed with a bomb?' '' he said.

He also tried to kick-start some projects, engaging Iraqis in repaving roads,
restoring drinking-water supplies and rebuilding the police station, he said.
Twice a week, he traveled to the nearest big town, Saba al-Boor, for community
meetings.

''There I'd be, an inner-city kid from Atlanta sitting on the floor like
Lawrence of Arabia, with 30 Arab sheiks,'' he said.

The first time, the sheiks challenged him about America's intentions in Iraq
and, he said, he pulled out a family photograph and told them that the only land
he wanted to occupy was the plot his house sat on in the United States.
Eventually, platters of lamb and rice came out and he ate with his fingers like
everybody else, he said. (He also ended up so ill from the meal that he had to
be hooked up to an intravenous drip, his wife, Angela, interjected.)

In August, Colonel West learned from an intelligence specialist of a supposed
plot to assassinate him, which would endanger the soldiers who traveled with
him, too. The plot reportedly involved Mr. Hamoodi, a police officer who
occasionally worked for the Americans. Although Mr. Hamoodi is a Shiite Muslim,
and most attacks against Americans were carried out by Sunnis loyal to Saddam
Hussein, some police officers do cooperate with the insurgents and several have
been accused of attacking foreigners.

Colonel West said he initially thought ''the information was a joke.'' But a
week later several of his officers were ambushed when he was supposed to be
traveling with them. A roadside bomb sheared off the back panel of a Humvee, and
a firefight ensued. None of his men were seriously hurt, but Colonel West began
taking the risk of an assassination seriously.

On Aug. 20, he asked his men to pick up Mr. Hamoodi and bring him to the base.
''There was a sense of urgency because I felt in the next couple of days,
something was going to happen,'' Colonel West testified at his hearing.

In an interview in Baghdad, Mr. Hamoodi, a thin, bespectacled 31-year-old, said
aides to Colonel West stopped by his police station and asked him to join them
on patrol. Mr. Hamoodi climbed into the back of their open Humvee, he said, and
the vehicle soon jerked off the road.

Soldiers testified later that Mr. Hamoodi appeared to go for his weapon and
needed to be subdued. Mr. Hamoodi said that one soldier punched him several
times, and that he was handcuffed, shackled and blindfolded.

At the base, he said, they threw him, still bound, off the Humvee, then led him
into the jail and eventually into an interrogation room. They pressed him for
the details of an assassination plan, about which he knew nothing, he said.
During the interrogation, he said, the translator kicked him in the shin and
told him he needed to confess before Colonel West showed up to kill him.

Mr. Hamoodi said he felt relieved to hear the colonel was expected. He
considered Colonel West to be ''calm, quiet, clever and sociable.'' When the
colonel first entered the interrogation room, Mr. Hamoodi said, he thought,
''Here is the man who will treat me fairly.''

Then, he said, Colonel West cocked his gun.

Colonel West said that he did not then put a round in the gun's chamber but that
he did place the pistol in his lap. He asked Mr. Hamoodi why he wanted to kill
him. Mr. Hamoodi said that he protested, ''I've worked with you, I like you,''
but that Colonel West silenced his protest. Colonel West pressed for the names
and locations of those involved in the supposed plot, and he got no answers.

Soon, the soldiers began striking and shoving Mr. Hamoodi. They were not
instructed to do so by Colonel West but they were not stopped, either, they
said. ''I didn't know it was wrong to hit a detainee,'' a 20-year-old soldier
from Daytona Beach said at the hearing. Colonel West testified that he would
have stopped the beating ''had it become too excessive.''

Eventually, the colonel and his soldiers moved Mr. Hamoodi outside, and
threatened him with death. Colonel West said he fired a warning shot in the air
and began counting down from five. He asked his soldiers to put Mr. Hamoodi's
head in a sand-filled barrel usually used for clearing weapons. At the end of
his count, Colonel West fired a shot into the barrel, angling his gun away from
the Iraqi's head, he testified.

According to the interpreter, Mr. Hamoodi finally ''admitted there would be
attacks, and called out names.'' Mr. Hamoodi said that he was not sure what he
told the Americans, but that it was meaningless information induced by fear and
pain.

At least one man named by Mr. Hamoodi was taken into custody, according to
testimony, and his home was searched. No plans for attacks on Americans or
weapons were found. Colonel West testified that he did not know whether ''any
corroboration'' of a plot was ever found, adding: ''At the time I had to base my
decision on the intelligence I received. It's possible that I was wrong about
Mr. Hamoodi.''

When the interrogation was over, a physician's assistant checked Mr. Hamoodi and
found ''swelling but no bruises,'' according to a hearing transcript. He was
detained another 45 days and released without being charged, he said.

Mr. Hamoodi said he did not really blame the Americans for ''arresting and
torturing me.'' Obviously, someone had informed on him, he said, and they had to
act on the information they obtained. Still, he trembles now when he sees a
Humvee and he no longer trusts or works with the Americans.

After the interrogation, Colonel West woke up his superior officer to recount
what had occurred. The superior officer testified that he did not remember
Colonel West's offering specifics, beyond saying that he had discharged his
weapon during an interrogation and that no one was hurt.

Indeed, it is possible that the abusive interrogation might never have come to
light if a sergeant in another battalion had not subsequently written a letter
of complaint about the ''command climate'' under Colonel West's superior
officer. In that letter, the sergeant mentioned almost as an aside, according to
Mr. Puckett, that Colonel West had interrogated a detainee using a pistol. An
investigation was set in motion.

In the fall, a helicopter arrived at the Taji base to ferry Colonel West to
Tikrit for the duration of the investigation. As he looked down at the soldiers
gathered to see him off, he said, he knew his career was over.

The hearing in November was meant to determine whether Colonel West would be
court-martialed. News accounts described a highly emotional scene in which the
colonel fought back tears as he testified, saying he would ''go to hell with a
gasoline can in his hand'' to protect his troops. His soldiers filled the
hearing room and greeted him with hugs and words of support during breaks.

Soldiers testified that they felt safer when Colonel West was in charge. The
interpreter, who works for a private contractor, said that ''the American
soldiers were protected by the tribes'' in the area because of Colonel West's
good relationship with the community, and that the situation became more
dangerous and chaotic after he left.

The military decided against court-martialing Colonel West. He was fined $5,000,
and he submitted his resignation, which becomes effective this summer, when he
will retire with full benefits.

Colonel West said he had spent many months grappling with disorientation,
wondering, ''What is my purpose now, my reason for being?'' Shortly after he
arrived back in the United States, he got a lucrative job offer from a private
contractor to return to Iraq, he said, but he was not interested. Instead, he
decided to start again in the world of education.

He is awaiting placement in a high school in Broward County and, he said, he
prays that God will see to it that he gets a spot in one of the low-performing,
predominantly black schools, where he can try to make a difference. Ever the
striver, he plans to begin studying for a master's in education so he can
advance into administration ''within five years.'' he said.

In an e-mail message, Colonel West described a recent motorcycle trip through
affluent Palm Beach County, with its smells of ''fresh air, green grass, ocean
salt air and suntan oils,'' and then back through a depressed, poor strip where
the air reeked of ''garbage, smoke and alcohol.''

''Sorry for the pontification,'' he added, ''but you must understand. I lived in
a sort of 'Matrix' world for 22 years and now I have been unplugged.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: THE PRISONER -- Yehiya Kadoori Hamoodi, a policeman, at his
station in Baghdad. He says that since his detention, he does not trust
Americans and will not work for them. (Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York
Times)
 THE INTERROGATOR -- Lt. Col. Allen B. West, at home in Florida. He is preparing
for a job teaching high school after his unplanned retirement from the Army this
summer. (Photo by Barbara P. Fernandez for The New York Times)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMANITIES &
SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARMIES (89%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); MEN (76%); SHOOTINGS (76%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%);
POLICE FORCES (71%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (64%); CRIMINAL FINES (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (60%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Courts-Martial; Fines (Penalties)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: ALLEN WEST (88%) Deborah Sontag; Allen B (Lt Col) (Ret) West; Yahiya
Kadoori Hamoodi; John W (Sen) Warner

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             430 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeking the Roots Of Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 92 words



To the Editor:

The lines may be blurred between humiliation and abuse and between abuse and
torture, but death is unequivocal.

We still do not know the number or identity of Iraqi prisoners who died in
American custody or under interrogation, but from the information that has come
out, these details will be at least as graphic as any of the photographs we have
seen.

And so, too, the question of accountability remains.

BEREL LANG
Hartford, May 26, 2004

The writer, a professor of humanities at Trinity College, is the author of books
about the Holocaust.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HOLOCAUST (85%); TERRORISM (84%); HUMANITIES
& SOCIAL SCIENCE (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (50%) United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Berel Lang

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (71%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             431 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeking the Roots Of Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 143 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Abuse of Captives More Widespread, Says Army Survey'' (front page, May 26):

As the Iraqi prisoner abuse scandal grows, the American people must face an
uncomfortable truth: the tone of abuse was set at the very top of our
government.

When the president publicly declares, ''Either you are with us or you are with
the terrorists''; indiscriminately depicts our opponents as ''evil''; boasts
that we will track them down ''dead or alive''; and in his State of the Union
address in 2003 slyly observes of suspected terrorists who have been arrested or
''met a different fate,'' ''Let's put it this way, they are no longer a problem
for the United States and our friends and allies,'' it should be no surprise
that those below him in the chain of command take their lead from the commander
in chief.

PATRICIA U. BONOMI
Irvington, N.Y., May 26, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SCANDALS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); TERRORISM (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARRESTS (68%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Patricia U Bonomi; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             435 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesian Unapologetic On Expulsion

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 31


President Megawati Sukarnoputri, in a rare appearance at a news conference, made
no apologies on Monday for her government's decision to expel a leading American
expert on Indonesia's terrorist groups.

Mrs. Megawati, persuaded to face reporters because of her low standing in
opinion polls as the election for president in July approaches, also fielded
questions about her economic policies and her opponents in the race.

The terrorism expert, Sidney Jones, heads the Jakarta office of the
International Crisis Group, which is based in Brussels. She wrote a series of
reports on the inner workings of the militant Islamic group Jemaah Islamiyah
that received wide attention.

Law enforcement and intelligence officials in Washington had praised the
detailed reports, which describe the background and workings of Jemaah
Islamiyah, which has links to Al Qaeda. The reports, filled with the names of
the group's members, their rank and duties, were based on court documents from
the Suharto era as well as on interviews with disaffected members.

But Mrs. Megawati suggested that Indonesia's willingness to fight against
terrorists, and the matter of Ms. Jones, were separate. ''We are fighting
terrorism,'' she said, insisting that technically she had not expelled Ms.
Jones.

The government informed Ms. Jones on Friday that her residence visa would not be
renewed, Ms. Jones said Monday. Earlier, the government refused to renew her
work permit.

Ms. Jones, who speaks Indonesian and studied here in the early 1980's, said
Monday, ''I have to be out by June 10, and I can't come back in a working
capacity.''

The director of the State Intelligence Agency, Gen. Hendropriyono, a political
ally of Mrs. Megawati, publicly complained last week about Ms. Jones's reports.
Though he has been leading the charge against Ms. Jones, other cabinet members,
including Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda, have also criticized her work.

In an interview published Monday in Tempo, the nation's leading news magazine,
General Hendropriyono is quoted as saying of Ms. Jones: ''She's been working
here drawing attention to human rights. Then she writes reports and sends them
abroad, even though they are not all true.'' He added, ''There must be steps
taken against people who are not liked by the people of Indonesia.''

General Hendropriyono was one of the Bush administration's favorite Indonesian
officials after 9/11, in large part because he was one of the few senior
officials who appeared to take terrorism seriously. His star in Washington was
somewhat eclipsed after the Bali bombing in 2002, when the Indonesian police did
much of the investigative work. Still, he visited Washington earlier this year
and had a meeting at the C.I.A.

During the three-decade authoritarian Suharto government, independent work like
that of the International Crisis Group was banned. The Jakarta Post, the English
language daily newspaper, titled an editorial condemning the moves against Ms.
Jones ''Back to the Suharto Years.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); TERRORISM (92%); INTERVIEWS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (74%); BOMBINGS (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(71%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (70%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (69%);
LICENSES & PERMITS (65%); ECONOMIC NEWS (56%); RELIGION (55%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (83%); AL-QAEDA (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP
(57%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (97%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             440 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1239 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-9

Some Fear Power Vacuum At Central Intelligence
Some in the government are worried about a possible power vacuum at the Central
Intelligence Agency caused by the departure this summer of George J. Tenet, the
director, and James L. Pavitt, the clandestine services chief, the top two
generals who have steered the nation's covert war on terrorism since the Sept.
11, 2001 attacks.   A1

Ambassador to U.N. Named
President Bush named former Senator John C. Danforth, a prominent Republican
moderate, to the post of American ambassador to the United Nations.   A7

Iraqi Premier Defends Troops
Iraq's new prime minister defended the presence of American and British forces
on Iraqi soil and warned that their departure would amount to a ''catastrophe''
for the country.   A7

The top human rights official for the United Nations said that the mistreatment
of Iraqi prisoners by American soldiers could constitute a war crime, and he
called for the immediate naming of an international figure to oversee the
situation.   A6

The Army has opened a criminal investigation into the shooting death of an Iraqi
civilian by an American soldier in Kufa. The man was a driver killed during a
high-speed chase involving rebels.   A6

American commanders worked out a new cease-fire in southern Iraq with Moktada
al-Sadr, the rebel Shiite cleric, agreeing to the second truce in about a month.
In Baghdad, five American soldiers were killed in an attack on their convoy.
A7

Pope John Paul II, with President Bush at his side, reiterated his unhappiness
over the invasion of Iraq and urged the president to speed the restoration of
sovereignty. The pope mixed praise with a diplomatically worded but unmistakable
expression of displeasure with the war and its aftermath.   A8

Algeria Detains Terror Suspect
Algerian forces took custody of a man believed to be one of North Africa's most
powerful Islamic terrorists. He is wanted in connection with many crimes,
including his suspected role in the killing of 43 Algerian soldiers and the
kidnapping of 32 European hostages, both last year.   A9

Sharon Fires Cabinet Ministers
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon fired two hard-line conservative ministers in a
risky move that should give him a cabinet majority for his Gaza withdrawal plan,
but which could also break apart his right-wing coalition government. Neither
minister agreed to go graciously.   A9

Distress Over U.S. Troops
The report that thousands of American troops based in Germany and elsewhere in
Europe will likely be redeployed did not come as a surprise in Europe, but it
has enhanced deep worries that the plans would widely be seen as a sign of a
weakened American engagement in Europe.   A8

NATIONAL   A10-13, 16

Questioning of Cheney Is Said to Have Taken Place
Vice President Dick Cheney has been interviewed by federal prosecutors who asked
whether he knew of anyone at the White House who improperly disclosed the
identity of an undercover C.I.A. officer, people who have been involved in
official discussions about the case said.   A1

Spain Objects to U.S. Methods
Spanish law enforcement officials involved in the investigation of the Madrid
bombing are challenging key aspects of the American version of events,
describing F.B.I. officials as rejecting evidence that they had wrongly arrested
a Portland, Ore., lawyer in the case.   A1

California Coast Deal Reached
The State of California and the owners of the 82,000-acre Hearst Ranch announced
a tentative deal to protect much of the scenic property on California's central
coast from any future development.   A10

Charities to Profit From Death
Caroline Rose Hunt, the 81-year-old oil heiress who built a second fortune in
hotels and resorts, has joined groups of other elderly, wealthy donors who have
allowed insurance companies, hedge funds and other investors to insure their
lives in exchange for a promise that part of the death benefits will flow to
their favorite charities.   A10

Candidate Pays Herself to Run
Stephanie Herseth, who won a seat in the House this week, is the first
successful candidate to pay herself a salary to run for Congress. Ms. Herseth
capitalized on changes to campaign finance rules, which allow candidates to pay
themselves a wage from their campaign treasury.   A10

American P.O.W.'s Lose Award
A federal appeals court in Washington threw out an award of almost $1 billion
won last year by 17 former American prisoners of war for abuse they suffered in
Iraq during the Persian Gulf war of 1991.   A16

Change Proposed for Anthem
A psychiatrist from California wants to lower the key of the national anthem
from B flat to G major. He argues that the simple change would make the anthem
accessible to even the tonally challenged.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Officials Urge a Review Of Suffolk's E.M.S. System
Critics say it is time to re-examine Suffolk County's emergency response
network. The council that monitors it is pushing for big improvements and
greater oversight, and emergency medical technicians are venting their
frustrations.   A1

Environmental Law Setback
A New York judge threw out the state's tough new acid rain rules on a
technicality, providing a reprieve to owners of 10 old coal-fired power plants
and derailing, at least temporarily, measures that were to have been a high
point of Governor Pataki's environmental record.   B1

New Convention Security
A top New York police officer defended plans to use four-sided barricades to
control demonstrators at the Republican National Convention, saying the police
want to keep streets open to allow for an emergency evacuation of the area.   B3


Beliefs   B6

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

EDUCATION

School Officials Suspended
The inquiry into financial wrongdoing at a Long Island school district has
widened with the suspension of two employees, including the superintendent, and
district officials have said that both employees were linked to companies that
had billed the district.   B1

OBITUARIES   C16

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-15

A Resignation in Protest
Kenneth Maxwell, the chief Latin American expert at the Council on Foreign
Relations, quit as a protest, accusing the council of stifling debate on
American intervention in Chile during the 1970's as a result of pressure from
former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Employers Increase Jobs
Employers added 248,000 workers in May, while the unemployment rate remained at
5.6 percent, unchanged from April.   A1

Phone Competition Ruling
A federal appeals court rejected a request by the Federal Communications
Commission and the nation's two largest long-distance telephone providers to
extend regulations that give the companies discounts for leasing the network
equipment of the four Bell operating companies.   C1

Ex-Chairman Leaves Company
The former chairman and chief executive of Computer Associates, Sanjay Kumar,
cut all ties to the company as a federal criminal investigation enters its final
stages.   C1

Salesforce Offering Delayed
Salesforce.com, which helps sales people track customers and prospective
clients, said it might buy back shares it planned to sell in an initial offering
if the company is found guilty of violating federal rules.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Jobs and the recovery; the taxing merry-go-round; a victory for
abortion rights; Carol E. Lee on Philadelphia's love for Smarty Jones.

Columns: David Brooks, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Bridge   A18
TV Listings   A23
Crossword   A20
Weather   A14


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (77%); WAR ON TERROR
(76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
IRAQ WAR (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); HOSTAGE TAKING (76%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); SHOOTINGS (71%);
RELIGION (65%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%)

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DICK CHENEY (56%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (93%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%); AFRICA (79%); GERMANY (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (52%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             441 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

IRAQ UPDATE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 125 words



RIGHTS CONCERNS -- The top human rights official for the United Nations said the
mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners by American soldiers could constitute a war
crime, and he called for an international monitor for the situation.

The Army said it had opened a criminal investigation into the shooting death of
a wounded Iraqi man last month by an American soldier after a chase in Kufa.
[Page A5]

SOLDIERS KILLED -- Five American soldiers were killed and five were wounded in
an ambush in eastern Baghdad, the military said. [A5]

NEW PREMIER'S APPEAL -- In his first public address, Iraq's new prime minister,
Iyad Allawi, defended the presence of American and British forces in Iraq
despite polls showing that most Iraqis want them to leave immediately. [A6]


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); ARMIES (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); TERRORISM (70%);
SHOOTINGS (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (51%) United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (57%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             446 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Regarding the Torture of Others

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 57 words



Sontag's penetrating comments on the abuses and torture of Iraqi and other
prisoners of the United States is a requiem for what once was America.

Additionally, it lays bare the erosion of our national leadership and its
respect for human rights.

Thank you for publishing this important and solemn chastisement.

Waddell F. Robey
Harrisburg, Pa.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Tanya Hajjar; Susan Sontag

CITY: HARRISBURG, PA, USA (64%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             449 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ashcroft Says the White House Never Authorized Tactics Breaking Laws on Torture

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: QUESTIONS IN
CONGRESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


Attorney General John Ashcroft, whose subordinates have written confidential
legal memorandums saying the administration is not bound by prohibitions against
torture, told a Senate committee on Tuesday that President Bush had ''made no
order that would require or direct the violation'' of either international
treaties or domestic laws prohibiting torture.

Appearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Mr. Ashcroft was questioned
about a cascade of recently disclosed memorandums in which lawyers from his
department as well as those from the Defense Department and other agencies
provided legal arguments that inflicting pain in interrogating people detained
in the fight against terrorism did not always constitute torture.

In heated exchanges with Democrats on the committee, Mr. Ashcroft refused to
provide several of the memorandums, saying they amounted to confidential legal
advice given to the president and did not have to be shared with Congress.

For the nearly three hours of Mr. Ashcroft's appearance, the committee room
became the stage for a debate that has ranged across all three branches of the
government since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, about the proper reach of a
president's power in wartime.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, a Massachusetts Democrat who is a committee member,
challenged Mr. Ashcroft on his unwillingness to release the memorandums and said
that the reported abuses of Iraqi prisoners at the Abu Ghraib prison were the
inevitable outcome of the administration's efforts to find ways to evade legal
responsibility.

Mr. Kennedy cited one of the memorandums reported in newspapers on Tuesday that
concluded President Bush was not bound either by international treaties
prohibiting torture or by federal anti-torture law because as commander in
chief, Mr. Bush was responsible for protecting the nation.

''In other words, the president of the United States has the responsibility,''
Mr. Kennedy said, holding up a photograph of prisoners cowering before American
guards and dogs at Abu Ghraib. ''We know when we have these kinds of orders,
what happens. We get the stress test, we get the use of dogs, we get the forced
nakedness that we've all seen on these and we get the hooding. This is what you
get with those kind of memoranda out there.''

The administration has responded to the memorandums by saying they were merely
legal opinions offered as policies were being formulated.

''First of all,'' Mr. Ashcroft said, ''this administration opposes torture,''
adding that the ''kind of atrocities displayed in the photographs are being
prosecuted by this administration.''

Mr. Ashcroft strove to make a distinction between memorandums that may have
provided theoretical legal justifications for torture and his assertion that
there had never been any directive that actually authorized its use.

But the memorandums, by their numbers and their arguments -- aimed at justifying
the use of interrogation techniques inflicting pain by spelling out instances
when this did not legally constitute torture and the inapplicability of
international treaties -- have produced outrage from international human rights
groups and members of Congress, mostly Democrats.

Over the past few weeks, The New York Times, Newsweek, The Washington Post and
The Wall Street Journal have disclosed memorandums that show a pattern in which
administration lawyers set about devising arguments to avoid constraints against
mistreatment and torture.

Mr. Ashcroft's appearance before the committee had been scheduled before most of
the memorandums were disclosed, and he looked deeply uncomfortable under the
harsh questioning.

He said several times that critics consistently failed to take into account that
the United States was at war.

Mr. Kennedy challenged Mr. Ashcroft, telling him he could not withhold the
memorandums from Congress unless there was an invocation of executive privilege,
something only the president himself can do. Mr. Ashcroft seemed uncertain when
he was asked if he had spoken to the president about invoking it.

He eventually said he was not invoking the privilege but that it was simply not
good policy to openly debate what powers a president had in wartime.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, in a heated exchange with Mr.
Ashcroft, asked him if he believed torture was ever justified. When he first
declined to answer, Mr. Biden accused him of being evasive, and Mr. Ashcroft
replied: ''You know I condemn torture. I don't think it's productive, let alone
justified.''

But Mr. Biden persisted, saying: ''There's a reason why we sign these treaties:
to protect my son in the military. That's why we have these treaties, so when
Americans are captured they are not tortured. That's the reason in case anybody
forgets it.''

One of the recently published memorandums, dated March 6, 2003, provides
elaborate and tightly constructed definitions of torture in an effort to to
allow interrogators to avoid being charged with that offense. For example, if an
interrogator ''knows that severe pain will result from his actions, if causing
such harm is not his objective, he lacks the requisite specific intent even
though the defendant did not act in good faith,'' the report said. ''Instead, a
defendant is guilty of torture only if he acts with the express purpose of
inflicting severe pain or suffering on a person within his control.''

Another memorandum, written in August 2002 and disclosed Tuesday by The
Washington Post, appeared to establish a basis for the use of torture for senior
Al Qaeda operatives in custody of the C.I.A. That memorandum was written by Jay
S. Bybee, then the associate attorney general. Mr. Bybee, now a federal appeals
court judge in California, did not respond to telephone messages.

Mr. Ashcroft said proof that the administration was opposed to torture in
practice, despite any legal memorandums, could be seen in the establishment of a
task force to prosecute charges of abuse against United States contractors and
soldiers.

While most Republican committee members defended Mr. Ashcroft, Senator Larry
Craig, an Idaho Republican, told Mr. Ashcroft that he was disturbed by the
growing power of the executive branch.

''I hope that in the end,'' Mr. Craig said, ''Saddam Hussein will not have taken
away from us something that our Constitution, in large part, granted us, and
that we have it taken away in the name of safety and security.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Attorney General John Ashcroft, left, under questioning
yesterday from the Senate Judiciary Committee. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, a
panelist, shows photos of Iraqi detainees. (Photo by Associated Press)
 (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CORRECTIONS (86%); LAWYERS
(79%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (79%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); DOGS (72%); GENOCIDE (60%)
Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Geneva Conventions; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Law and Legislation; Terrorism; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Treaties; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); TED KENNEDY (90%) John (Atty Gen) Ashcroft; George
W (Pres) Bush; Edward M (Sen) Kennedy; Joseph R Jr (Sen) Biden; Neil A Lewis

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             450 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Will the Kurds Go Home?

BYLINE: By Bartle Breese Bull.

Bartle Breese Bull is the author of ''Around the Sacred Sea: Mongolia and Lake
Baikal on Horseback.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq


While the United Nations Security Council wrangled over military chains of
command in Iraq and the violence in Arab cities like Karbala and Falluja grabbed
the headlines, a story far more important to the country's future has been
largely ignored: the growing unease of the Kurdish minority.

So while the United Nations congratulates itself on the resolution passed last
night, the Kurds see only a further undermining of the conditions that make a
unified Iraq acceptable to them. And we should not take lightly their threats of
boycotting the government and even seceding. While the West has gone to great
lengths to appease the country's Arabs, both Shiite and Sunni, the Kurds are the
only players at the table with the ability and the mettle to walk away. If they
do, hopes of a democratic, multiethnic Iraq go with them.

The other day at a military hospital here, I visited a former Kurdish guerrilla
who had been working as a guard at the Baghdad offices of the Kurdish Democratic
Party, one of two main Kurdish political groups. His name is Saadar Khajakadir,
and he says he fought Saddam Hussein's troops in the mountains for more years
than he can remember. Last week a Russian-built rocket exploded through the roof
of the building he was guarding, killing one of his comrades and wounding him
and four others.

I asked him if the wounds were worth it, if the political process in Baghdad was
something he was happy to bleed for. ''If Baghdad is where we must achieve our
freedom, these wounds are an honor,'' he told me. ''But if we do not win our
freedom here, we will go home to the mountains and give up much more than blood
to win it there.''

That attack went entirely unreported. (One of the party's senior military
commanders, Muhammad Qazi, told me they don't want to reward terrorists with
publicity.) The same day, a suicide bomber killed a high-ranking member of the
other Kurdish party, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, at its Baghdad
headquarters. As a double attack on Kurdish offices, it was a grim echo of the
twin suicide bombings that killed 101 people in the northern Kurdish city of
Erbil in February.

In addition, smaller attacks on Kurdish targets have been occurring with greater
frequency than the world knows. Three Kurdish officials were assassinated in
Kirkuk in separate incidents in May; when I was there last week, I visited a
Kurdish family whose house had just been hit by a rocket. While I was in Erbil
over the weekend, a pipe bomb in the bazaar killed one and wounded about 20. Mr.
Qazi, the military commander, told me that in Irbil an ''action in progress,''
like a suicide bomber trying to drive through barriers outside the Interior
Ministry, is foiled about once a month.

This violence comes in the context of remarkable freedom, prosperity and order
in the Iraqi Kurdish entity -- a calm forged during the 12 years American jets
in the no-flight zone kept Saddam Hussein's troops out of the region. While
Kurdish politics continues to be heavily dominated by the two main parties,
there are scores of other groups in the region, including several each for the
Communists, the Turkmens and the various Christian sects. Dozens of newspapers
in the Kurdish area frequently criticize the two provincial administrations.
Salaries for teachers, drivers and office workers have risen in the past couple
of years to $200 or more a month from $20.

Of the 4,500 villages the Baathists are said to have destroyed, 4,000 have been
rebuilt since 1991. Much of the mountainous countryside is dotted with young oak
trees reclaiming the hills Saddam Hussein denuded. In Sulaimaniya, unmarried
young men and women sit together at the outside tables of the MaDonal burger
restaurant on the main street. Ready to defend all of this are 40,000 Kurdish
militiamen, or peshmerga, drilled and in uniform, the only coherent domestic
armed force in Iraq.

With all of this political and personal freedom long established, can the Kurds
really want to be a part of a fledgling Iraq? Until now, the answer has been
yes. They made a series of compromises -- concessions in the interim
Constitution over the oil-rich city of Kirkuk; acceptance of a new government
with no Kurds in top positions -- to help put the country back together.

But how much more are they willing to give up? After all, the Kurds have fought
against every incarnation of the Iraqi state since the British mandate of 1920.
It is almost impossible to meet a Kurd who does not have some personal horror to
relate about suffering under Saddam Hussein. And now they see the chaos to the
south every night on Al Jazeera. ''We are the only people in Iraq with
experience of functional government and democracy,'' Bruska Shaways, a Kurd who
is deputy defense minister in the new Iraqi government, told me. ''We want to
export it to the rest of Iraq, but never at the expense of all we have earned.''

This sentiment was echoed by Nesreen Berwari, a Kurdish woman who is minister of
public works in the new government: ''Why would we ever accept less today than
we had for the last 12 years under Saddam?''

The Security Council was well aware of the situation. Yet it passed a resolution
that not only explicitly fails to guarantee a federal Iraq, but also abandons
the interim Constitution and its commitment to a Kurdish veto over the permanent
Constitution. These guarantees have long been conditions for the Kurds' willing
participation in the project of iraqi unity.

Is it too late to mend the rift? Perhaps not. Assuming the worst about the
United Nations resolution, some of the Kurdish leaders have told me they might
be open to an alternative: having their rights enumerated in parallel statements
from the United States, the United Nations and the new Iraqi government.
Washington would do well to press ahead on this.

The alternative is for the Kurds to head back to their lands and -- even in the
face of a potential invasion of the Turks -- set about building one of the
Middle East's only prosperous democracies. The Kurds hold strong cards, and one
of the strongest is that everybody else knows they have always stuck up for
themselves in the past. If they don't receive their guarantees, soon there may
be no Iraq -- just a free Kurdistan and a burning Arabistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (88%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (85%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); MILITARY
HOSPITALS (73%); BOYCOTTS (70%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (68%); MOUNTAINS (66%)
Kurds; United States International Relations; Politics and Government;
Constitutions; Freedom and Human Rights; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Bartle Breese Bull

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Detainees Sue Companies For Their Role In Abuse Case

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: CONTRACTORS; Pg.
12

LENGTH: 324 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


Lawyers representing former detainees who say they were sexually humiliated,
beaten, and tortured at Abu Ghraib prison said Wednesday that they have sued two
private companies that provided translators and interrogators at the prison.

The lawsuit, filed by the Center for Constitutional Rights and a Philadelphia
law firm, accuses the Titan Corporation and CACI International Inc. of
conspiring to abuse detainees in order to secure more contracts from the United
States government.

It alleges that the two companies and three men who worked for them directed and
participated in illegal conduct at the prison to squeeze information from
detainees in an effort to prove that the companies should be awarded more
contracts.

The plaintiffs say they were hooded, raped, stripped naked and kept in
isolation, and subjected to repeated beatings with chains and boots.

Two of the men, Stephen A. Stefanowicz and John B. Israel, worked as
interrogators for CACI; a third, Adel L. Nakhla, was a translator for Titan.

''It is patently clear that these corporations saw an opportunity to build their
businesses by proving they could extract information from detainees in Iraq, by
any means necessary,'' Susan Burke, of the Philadelphia law firm of Montgomery,
McCracken, Walker, & Rhoads, said in a statement.

A Titan spokesman, Ralph Williams, called the lawsuit ''frivolous.''

Jody Brown, a CACI spokeswoman, said the allegations were ''irresponsible and
malicious'' and noted that no charges had been filed against any of the
company's employees.

''As we have said before, we do not condone, tolerate or endorse any illegal
behavior by our employees in any circumstance or at any time,'' she said in a
statement. ''We will act forcefully if the evidence shows that any of our
employees acted improperly. But we will not rush to judgment on the basis of
slander, distortion, speculation, innuendo, partial reports or incomplete
investigations.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); LITIGATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); LAWYERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGAL SERVICES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); LIBEL & SLANDER
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CONSPIRACY (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); CONTRACT AWARDS (71%); TERRORISM (59%) United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Translation; Suits and
Litigation; Torture  ; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Terrorism

COMPANY: L-3 COMMUNICATIONS TITAN GROUP (84%); CACI INTERNATIONAL INC (84%);
MONTGOMERY MCCRACKEN WALKER & RHOADS LLP (68%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)
Titan Corp; Caci International; Center for Constitutional Rights

TICKER: CACI (NYSE) (84%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (84%); SIC3571
ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (84%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES
(84%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (84%); SIC7373 COMPUTER
INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (84%); NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (68%); SIC8111
LEGAL SERVICES (68%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Steven Stefanowicz; John B Israel; Adel L Nakhla

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             453 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

White House Reconsiders Its Policy on Crisis in Sudan

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1402 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya, June 11


The Bush administration is considering toughening its policy toward the
government of Sudan over the events in Darfur, the western region where
thousands of people have been killed and more than a million driven from their
homes by Arab militias that many in the region say are linked directly to the
Sudanese Army.

Bush officials say they are considering whether what is happening in Darfur
amounts to genocide. So far, the administration has only used the term ethnic
cleansing. The officials say they are also considering sanctions on individual
Sudanese officials tied to the displacement.

In a telephone interview on Friday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said the
link between the militias, known as the Janjaweed, and the Sudanese government
was strong, and that many people are still at risk of dying in Darfur and across
the border in Chad.

''Without having a full intelligence report in front of me, what I am confident
of saying is, clearly, we believe that the government of Sudan did provide
support to these militias,'' he said.

Mr. Powell steered clear of the term genocide in describing the events in Darfur
but said that administration lawyers had begun a review to determine whether the
conditions for genocide have been met.

Such a determination would increase the pressure on the United States, a
signatory to the United Nations Convention on Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, to more actively intervene in the region. The treaty
describes genocide as ''acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in
part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group.''

There is disagreement within the administration on whether the situation in
Darfur rises to the level of genocide. Some of the opposition is based on a
legalistic reading of the definition and a desire not to overstate the case.
There is also concern about the diplomatic fallout of such a declaration, since
the Sudanese government has made significant progress in negotiating an end to
the war with southern rebels, a conflict that has stretched on for the last 21
years.

Ten years ago, Clinton administration officials were hesitant to use the word
genocide to describe the events in Rwanda, and former President Clinton later
apologized for the delay. Mr. Powell has privately expressed his desire to
prevent a similar incidence of mass death on his watch, officials said.

''I'm not prepared to say what is the correct legal term for what's happening,''
Mr. Powell said. ''All I know is that there are at least a million people who
are desperately in need, and many of them will die if we can't get the
international community mobilized and if we can't get the Sudanese to cooperate
with the international community. And it won't make a whole lot of difference
after the fact what you've called it.''

Mr. Powell said the administration was studying whether to impose sanctions on
individual Sudanese officials. The United States House of Representatives
recently approved a resolution urging the administration to freeze the personal
assets of individuals involved in the displacement in Darfur and ban them from
traveling to the United States.

This week the leaders at the Group of 8 summit issued a communique calling on
Sudanese officials to disarm the militias that ''are responsible for massive
human rights violations in Darfur.'' On Friday, the United Nations Security
Council called for a halt to fighting in Darfur and urged the creation of a
peacekeeping force in southern Sudan once a final peace deal is reached there.

Mr. Powell said he remained confident that the peace negotiations in Kenya,
which have reached a series of significant accords, would be successful in
ending a separate conflict between the Sudanese government and a group of
southern rebels.

The United States has pushed hard for an end to that war and has dangled the
possibility of a peace dividend if a final deal is struck. But Mr. Powell said
his message to Sudanese officials is ''don't think that when you have that
comprehensive agreement all of the benefits that you expected from that
comprehensive agreement will flow in light of the continuing problem in
Darfur.''

Sudanese officials have expressed befuddlement at the strong American criticism.
''It's calm here now,'' a Sudanese official from Nyala said recently.

When visitors have come to Darfur, Sudan's government has put on an elaborate
show to prove it. At a recent meeting, for instance, a United Nations entourage
was treated to a dance performance.

Drummers came onto the stage at the government guesthouse and pounded away as
women in billowy robes gyrated around them. First came the Fur, one of the
ethnic groups that has been under attack by pro-government militias. Then other
ethnic groups danced their traditional dances, too.

The government portrayed the evening as a sign of how harmonious things really
are in Darfur. ''What you saw here is very different from what you expected in
Darfur,'' a government official told the visitors with a smile.

But a recent visit to some of the camps for internally displaced people that
have been set up across Darfur made clear the gravity of the situation. The
desperate squatters, numbering a million or more across Darfur, tell stories of
murder, rape and harassment. Aid workers speak of growing sickness and looming
death.

Even with government officials standing within earshot, the displaced residents
said government soldiers had attacked them in tandem with Janjaweed.

The government denies any links with the Janjaweed. It also dismisses the notion
that ethnic cleansing or genocide has been committed in Darfur.

The Sudanese president, Omar el-Bashir, told the foreign minister of Egypt,
Ahmed Maher, in Khartoum this week that the situation in Darfur was quiet and
normal, and that foreign governments were blowing the events there out of
proportion, according to the Egyptian news agency MENA.

But when a government supporter made a similar contention to the United Nations
delegation that visited Darfur recently, his words almost started a brawl.

At a camp outside Nyala, elders in white robes told Tom Eric Vraalsen, the
United Nations special envoy for humanitarian affairs in Sudan, about the
desperate conditions they were facing.

''There is not enough water,'' said one of them. ''There is not enough medicine.
There's a large number of people here and there's not enough food.''

But after the descriptions of suffering had stretched on for a while, a man
jockeyed his way to the front and told Mr. Vraalsen that the complaints were
exaggerated.

''Many things said are not correct,'' said Mohammed A. Rahman, an Arab who has
loyalties to the government in Khartoum. ''The government is taking care of
us.''

Angry villagers surrounded Mr. Rahman a short time later, denouncing him for not
telling the truth and ripped the neckline of his robe.

Police officers and soldiers then moved in to disperse the gathering. Some of
the security forces were in uniform. Others were in civilian dress. They carried
a variety of weapons, including automatic rifles, sticks, whips and knives. At
the sight of them, the villagers ran for safety.

Janjaweed fighters could be seen roaming Darfur's rugged landscape, riding
horses and camels and carrying guns. Government officials have branded them as
outlaws and deny any links between these men and the army.

''The government didn't give anybody arms to fight on behalf of it,'' Jadain
Jud-Allah Dagage, the minister of social affairs in south Darfur, insisted in an
interview.

But another official provided a more complicated version of events the next day,
one that did not correlate with Khartoum's stance.

Ahmed Angabo Ahmed, the commissioner of the Kas region in south Darfur, said
that to control attacks by anti-government rebels within his jurisdiction, he
had sought permission last year, and received it, from the central government in
Khartoum to enlist some of the armed robbers into the police and army forces.

''We put these bandits as soldiers and they said they would never rob again,''
he said.

Many were already armed when they joined the government, so Mr. Ahmed said he
exchanged weapons with them. ''I said, you come and give me your gun and I'll
give you a government gun,'' he explained.

The recruits needed jobs, Mr. Ahmed said ''They are not carpenters or drivers,''
he explained. ''All they know is how to use a gun.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mohammed A. Rahman, an Arab with loyalties to the government,
was attacked by villagers in South Darfur for expressing his viewpoint.
 At a camp outside Nyala, South Darfur, villagers tell Tom Eric Vraalsen, the
United Nations special envoy in Sudan, of a lack of food and water. (Photographs
by Guillaume Bonn for The New York Times)Map of Sudan highlighting the Darfur
region: At least a million people in the Darfur region have lost homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); LEGISLATION (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); POLITICS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); RELIGION (50%) United States International
Relations; Arabs; Armament, Defense and Military Forces; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (73%) Marc Lacey; George W (Pres) Bush; Colin L (Sec)
Powell

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); KENYA (92%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             457 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudi Gunmen Kill American; New Claims Of Qaeda Role

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


Suspected militants killed an American in the Saudi capital on Saturday,
shooting him in the back as he parked in his home garage, and the United States
Embassy said it was searching for an American who was missing.

A statement attributed to Al Qaeda posted on an Islamic Web site late Saturday
claimed the terrorist group had killed one American and kidnapped another in
Riyadh. It threatened to treat the captive as United States soldiers treated
some Iraqi prisoners.

The killing and apparent abduction were the latest attacks in a campaign of
anti-Western violence in the kingdom.

The United States Embassy identified the dead man as Kenneth Scroggs, the third
Westerner slain in the kingdom in a week. It did not identify the missing
American, but said it was working with Saudi officials to find him. The
statement on the Web site showed a passport-size photo of a brown-haired man and
a Lockheed Martin business card bearing the name Paul M. Johnson. It said he was
born in 1955. The statement said the terror group would deal with Mr. Johnson
just as ''the Americans dealt with our brothers in Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib''
-- a reference to sexual and other alleged abuses of Iraqi and Muslim prisoners
by American soldiers.

A Lockheed Martin spokesman confirmed that Mr. Johnson was a Lockheed employee
but declined to say what his job was. The spokesman also said Lockheed Martin
was not aware of any employees who had been killed in Saudi Arabia.

Several Islamic Web sites on Saturday carried links to a videotape, also
attributed to Al Qaeda, that claims to show the killing of an American, Robert
C. Jacobs, who was shot at his Riyadh home on Tuesday. The video, less than two
minutes long, begins with men running in a garage and a voice yelling in
English, ''No, no, please!'' A shot is fired, and the body of what appears to be
a Western man falls to the ground. Two gunmen fire at least 10 more shots at the
fallen man. There was no way to confirm the authenticity of the statements or
the video.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%);
RELIGION (77%); INTERNET & WWW (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); WEB SITES (72%) Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Kidnapping; Computers and the Internet

COMPANY: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP (84%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Orgn);
Lockheed Martin Corp

TICKER: LMT (NYSE) (84%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (84%);
NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS334511 SEARCH, DETECTION,
NAVIGATION, GUIDANCE, AERONAUTICAL & NAUTICAL SYSTEM & INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING
(84%)

PERSON: Kenneth Scroggs; Paul M Johnson

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (90%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (98%); UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Riyadh (Saudi Arabia); Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Saudi
Arabia

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             459 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1043 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

13 Die in Suicide Attack In Baghdad; Blasts Kill 8
A suicide bomber in Baghdad rammed a truck packed with explosives into a convoy
of foreign contractors, killing at least 13 people during morning rush hour.
Around the same time, two more bombs went off, one south of the capital, one
north, claiming eight more lives.   A1

Officials with human rights and aid groups say that if the United States
government does not bring charges against Saddam Hussein relatively soon it will
be technically required, because of his prisoner-of-war status under the Geneva
Conventions, to release him after the restoration of limited sovereignty.   A8

Four British soldiers are to be tried in a military court on charges of
seriously abusing civilian Iraqi prisoners by assaulting them and forcing them
to engage in sexual acts.   A8

Dispute Over Israeli Barrier
Israel is preparing to build new segments of its separation barrier around
settlements that would mark the deepest penetration yet into the West Bank, a
move that drew criticism from the Palestinians.   A11

Focus on Iran Nuclear Program
The International Atomic Energy Agency demanded that Tehran provide a full
accounting of its nuclear program. Diplomats are meeting in Vienna to review
Iran's compliance with an agreement with the agency, and the country is likely
to be sharply criticized.   A11

Effects of Cable Theft in Africa
Cable theft is widespread throughout southern Africa, with some companies
posting losses in the millions. Theft-related blackouts idle businesses, snarl
traffic, delay trains and rob the power companies of revenue. Thieves are often
electrocuted in the act, and there have been deaths related to the effects on
trains.   A3

Rebels Ambush Police in Nepal
Hundreds of Maoist rebels ambushed two police trucks in Nepal, killing 21 police
officers and wounding 12 in stepped-up violence that analysts said dimmed hopes
for early peace talks.   A12

NATIONAL   A16-21

Court's Decision on Pledge Leaves Religion Issue Open
A decision by the Supreme Court left ''under God'' in the Pledge of Allegiance
while keeping the issue alive for possible resolution in a future case. All
eight justices who took part in the case agreed that a federal appeals court had
ruled incorrectly that the reference to God turned the daily recitation of the
pledge into a religious exercise.   A1

The Supreme Court set guidelines for assessing an employer's liability for
working conditions that become so unendurable as to lead a reasonable employee
to resign.   A19

A Call for Change in NASA
NASA needs to thin out its bureaucracy and give private industry a much larger
role in space if the agency is to carry out President Bush's new vision to
explore the Moon and Mars, a presidential commission has concluded.   A1

Terror Suspect Indicted
A Somali citizen living in Ohio has been charged in a plot by Al Qaeda to bomb a
shopping mall in Columbus, according to an indictment unsealed by federal
prosecutors.   A16

Guilty Plea in Smuggling Case
A 26-year-old Honduran immigrant pleaded guilty to being the ringleader of the
nation's deadliest smuggling case, which left 19 immigrants dead after being
jammed in a tractor-trailer that was abandoned in South Texas last spring.   A16


Immigration Raids Criticized
Southern California Latino communities far from the Mexican border have been
roiled in recent days by a series of sweeps by Border Patrol agents that have
led to scores of arrests.   A17

Kerry on the Economy
Senator John Kerry served notice that he still considers the economy a central
vulnerability for President Bush, despite strong employment growth in recent
months.   A18

Among Mr. Kerry's potential running mates for the Democratic ticket, four
senators have one thing in common: Like him, they are millionaires.   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Hearing Is to Decide Question of Killer's Sanity
A sanity hearing has begun in the case of Daniel Rakowitz, an East Village man
who killed and dismembered his girlfriend in 1989 and was said to have cooked
her remains into a soup that he served to the homeless. In 1991, he was found
not guilty by reason of insanity and sentenced to a psychiatric center, but his
lawyer says he is no longer mentally ill and should go free.   B3

Train Fanatic Arrested
Darius McCollum, a train buff who has spent more than a third of his life in
jail for transgressions related to his posing as a transit worker, has been
arrested again, this time for entering a Queens railyard and pretending to be a
safety consultant, officials said.   B1

Transfer for Embattled Judge
A Queens judge who is accused of helping a robbery suspect avoid arrest outside
her courtroom agreed to a transfer out of criminal court, pending an
investigation of her conduct.   B1

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Health & Fitness   F5

FASHION   B8

SPORTSTUESDAY   D1-7

OBITUARIES   C17

ARTS   E1-12

Reorganization at the Met
Pledging to increase its commitment to modern and contemporary art, the
Metropolitan Museum is planning a major reorganization of its departments of
European painting and modern art, it announced.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

A Move to Register Drug Tests
A group of top medical journals is considering a proposal that would require
drug makers to register clinical trials at their start in a public database in
order for results, whether successful or not, to be later considered for
publication, said three people working with the group.   A1

Boeing Gets Navy Contract
The Navy awarded one of the Pentagon's biggest military contracts of the year to
the Boeing Company by instructing it to replace a fleet of submarine-hunting
airplanes from the Lockheed Martin Corporation at a potential cost of $23
billion.   C1

Scrutiny of Casino Merger
The proposed merger of MGM Mirage and Mandalay Resort Group, which the companies
revived over the weekend and are expected to approve today, will come under
intense scrutiny from regulators, who could require the combined company to sell
some of its properties to receive approval.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: California leads on warming; the C.I.A. and Iraq; recording police
questioning; Angola's elusive oil riches.

Columns: Paul Krugman, David Brooks.

Crossword   E9
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); DEATHS (89%); SPACE & AERONAUTICS AGENCIES
(87%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT
(77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); INDICTMENTS
(75%); POWS & MIAS (75%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (75%); BUSINESS FORECASTS
(75%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (75%); MILITARY COURTS (74%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(74%); SUPREME COURTS (74%); LITIGATION (74%); BUSINESS LIABILITY (72%);
ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (71%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (71%); NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (71%);
COMPANY LOSSES (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); APPEALS COURTS (69%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); PEACE PROCESS (68%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY
(66%); RELIGION (66%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (64%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (64%);
EMPLOYER LIABILITY (60%) Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism; Electric Light and
Power; United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (55%) General Electric Co

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Jeffrey Gettleman; Mark (Gen)
Kimmitt; Iyad (Prime Min) Allawi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

STATE: EARTH'S MOON (75%); MARS (65%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%); NEPAL (92%); AFRICA (92%); ISRAEL (92%); IRAN (79%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); SOMALIA (79%);
SOUTHERN AFRICA (72%); FRANCE (64%); CENTRAL EUROPE (57%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq; Philippines; France; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             465 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 21, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Said to Overstate Value Of Guantanamo Detainees

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN and DON VAN NATTA Jr.; Tim Golden reported from New York
and Washington for this article, and Don Van Natta Jr. from Guantanamo Bay.
Reporting was contributed by Carlotta Gall, David Rohde, Lizette Alvarez,
Clifford Krauss, Raymond Bonner and Jason Horowitz.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 6092 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba, June 19


For nearly two and a half years, American officials have maintained that locked
within the steel-mesh cells of the military prison here are some of the world's
most dangerous terrorists -- ''the worst of a very bad lot,'' Vice President
Dick Cheney has called them.

The officials say information gleaned from the detainees has exposed terrorist
cells, thwarted planned attacks and revealed vital intelligence about Al Qaeda.
The secrets they hold and the threats they pose justify holding them
indefinitely without charge, Bush administration officials have said.

But as the Supreme Court prepares to rule on the legal status of the 595 men
imprisoned here, an examination by The New York Times has found that government
and military officials have repeatedly exaggerated both the danger the detainees
posed and the intelligence they have provided.

In interviews, dozens of high-level military, intelligence and law-enforcement
officials in the United States, Europe and the Middle East said that contrary to
the repeated assertions of senior administration officials, none of the
detainees at the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay ranked as leaders or
senior operatives of Al Qaeda. They said only a relative handful -- some put the
number at about a dozen, others more than two dozen -- were sworn Qaeda members
or other militants able to elucidate the organization's inner workings.

While some Guantanamo intelligence has aided terrorism investigations, none of
of it has enabled intelligence or law-enforcement services to foil imminent
attacks, the officials said. Compared with the higher-profile Qaeda operatives
held elsewhere by the C.I.A., the Guantanamo detainees have provided only a
trickle of intelligence with current value, the officials said. Because nearly
all of that intelligence is classified, most of the officials would discuss it
only on the condition of anonymity.

''When you have the overall mosaic of all the intelligence picked up all over
the world, Guantanamo provided a very small piece of that mosaic,'' said a
senior American official who has reviewed the intelligence in detail. ''It's
been helpful and valuable in certain areas. Was it the mother lode of
intelligence? No.''

In September 2002, eight months after the detainees began to arrive in Cuba, a
top-secret study by the Central Intelligence Agency raised questions about their
significance, suggesting that many of the accused terrorists appeared to be
low-level recruits who went to Afghanistan to support the Taliban or even
innocent men swept up in the chaos of the war, current and former officials who
read the assessment said.

Nearly two years later, military officials said, the evidence against many of
the detainees is still so sparse that investigators have been able to deliver
cases for military prosecution against only 15 of the suspects, 6 of whom have
already been designated as eligible for trial by President Bush. Investigators
are now preparing 35 to 40 other cases for the military tribunals, those
officials said.

In interviews, officials at Guantanamo and in the Pentagon defended the
intelligence-gathering effort and said it continued to produce useful
information. ''Every single day we get some piece of information that's relevant
to now,'' said Steve Rodriguez, who oversees the interrogation teams at the
base.

Officials said the intelligence had allowed them to piece together a more
detailed picture of Al Qaeda before Sept. 11, 2001, including how young jihadis
were recruited and screened, how the organization moved funds and how it related
to other militant groups. They said some were important Qaeda operatives,
including financiers, a bodyguard for Osama bin Laden and -- a recent discovery
-- a militant who they say helped recruit 9/11 hijackers.

Yet even as he argued the importance of that information, the commander of the
task force that runs the Guantanamo prison, Brig. Gen. Jay W. Hood, acknowledged
disappointment among some senior officials in Washington.

''The expectations, I think, may have been too high at the outset,'' he said.
''There are those who expected a flow of intelligence that would help us break
the most sophisticated terror organization in a matter of months. But that
hasn't happened.''

In recent weeks, the Pentagon has initiated a broad study of prison operations,
including an examination of the criteria used to determine which detainees are
held there, officials at Guantanamo said. ''Everything is on the table,'' said
Col. Tim Lynch, the chief of staff at Guantanamo.

The Pentagon's determination to hold the detainees as ''enemy combatants'' --
beyond the reach of United States law and unbound by the Geneva Conventions on
treatment of prisoners of war -- has also come under renewed scrutiny in the
wake of the scandal over abuses at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. Defense Department
officials have acknowledged that American jailers in Iraq, under pressure to
produce better intelligence, adapted some new, more aggressive interrogation
techniques that were approved by Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld for use
at Guantanamo.

While refusing to discuss specifics, Pentagon officials called the interrogation
methods used at Guantanamo humane and said they had applied more severe methods
only sparingly. In at least one of those cases, they said, the techniques
prompted an important Qaeda member to give up vital information.

But new details of that case, which involved a 26-year-old Saudi man who
apparently tried unsuccessfully to enter the United States as the 20th hijacker
in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, call some of those assertions into question.

Several officials familiar with the case said that for months, no one at
Guantanamo even knew who the detainee, Mohamed al-Kahtani, was and that he was
identified only after the Federal Bureau of Investigation stepped in. The
officials also said that the harsher interrogation methods used against him were
largely unsuccessful, that he had little sense of other Qaeda plots, and that he
had been most forthcoming under more subtle persuasion.

Even now, officials acknowledge that they have been unable to get any
information from at least 60 detainees -- including in some cases their
identities. Those uncertainties, the officials said, leave open the possibility
that more serious terrorists may be among Guantanamo's detainees.

''We weren't sure in the beginning what we had; we're not sure today what we
have,'' said Gen. James T. Hill, the head of the Army's Southern Command.
''There are still people who do not talk to us. We could have the keys to the
kingdom and not know it.''

The problems of collecting information about the detainees have also hampered
their screening for possible release. As a result, some of the men are being
held apparently as much for what officials do not know about them as for what
they do.

Officials said they had cautiously vetted the 146 detainees who have been freed,
including the 16 who had been transferred to the custody of their home
governments. Even so, at least a handful of serious mistakes have already been
made.

New accounts from officials in Afghanistan and the United States indicate that
at least 5 of the 57 Afghan detainees released have returned to the battlefield
as Taliban commanders or fighters. Some of the five have been involved in new
attacks on Americans, officials in southern Afghanistan said, including a
notorious Taliban commander, Mullah Shahzada, who was reportedly killed in a
recent accident.

American and foreign officials have also grown increasingly concerned about the
prospect that detainees who arrived at Guantanamo representing little threat to
the United States may have since been radicalized by the conditions of their
imprisonment and others held with them.

''Guantanamo is a huge problem for Americans,'' a senior Arab intelligence
official familiar with its operations said. ''Even those who were not hard-core
extremists have now been indoctrinated by the true believers. Like any other
prison, they have been taught to hate. If they let these people go, these people
will make trouble.''

First Wave
Initial Screenings Were Flawed

 As the Taliban government crumbled, American officials braced themselves for
what they expected would be waves of hardened terrorists captured in the
Afghanistan war. Military officials said they had culled the most dangerous of
the roughly 10,000 prisoners caught there and shipped them to Guantanamo Bay.

''These are people who would gnaw through hydraulic lines at the back of a C-17
to bring it down,'' Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said as the first 20 shackled prisoners arrived in Cuba on Jan. 11, 2002.

The first makeshift prison at Guantanamo, called Camp X-Ray, was built and run
accordingly. Inmates were dressed in Day-Glo orange jump suits and shackled
whenever they were moved, their eyes covered by blacked-out goggles or hoods.
Fearing that the terrorists among them might somehow seek revenge, officials
instructed military police guards to cover their name badges and avoid any
mention of their families, hometowns or outside jobs.

''We really didn't have a good feel for who we were dealing with,'' Gen. Rick
Baccus, who took over command of the military police units two months after the
camp opened, said in an interview. ''We had to err on the side of security.''

But almost immediately, questions began to emerge -- in Afghanistan, at
Guantanamo and eventually in Washington -- about the pedigrees of some of the
men and why they had been selected to go to Cuba.

At a sprawling detention camp at the airport in Kandahar, Afghanistan, military
intelligence officers, F.B.I. agents and others scrambled vainly to keep up with
the torrent of prisoners, officers who served there said, making it nearly
impossible to weed out the most dangerous.

''It was like trying to catch guys as they ran by,'' a former Kandahar
interrogator recalled. ''Some you were going to miss.''

C.I.A. operatives took their pick of prisoners turned over by commanders of the
Afghan Northern Alliance. They also took custody of some military prisoners in
whom they had interest, military officers said.

''Anybody who we thought was going to have significant value we had priority in
debriefing,'' said a former senior C.I.A. official. ''We focused on the
individuals we got in Afghanistan and elsewhere who we thought were linchpins in
the process. D.O.D. got stuck processing the rest.''

Officials of the Department of Defense now acknowledge that the military's
initial screening of the prisoners for possible shipment to Guantanamo was
flawed. It was not until hundreds of detainees had arrived here that the
classified criteria even referred directly to the threat that they might
represent, military officials said.

But some clues were obvious. Some of the detainees were elderly or infirm. One
of those was Faiz Muhammad, a genial old man with a long wispy beard whom
interrogators nicknamed ''Al Qaeda Claus.'' Another, who was able to make the
trip only after extensive medical care from Army doctors in Afghanistan, quickly
became known as ''Half-Dead Bob.''

''You had a group of people who didn't come with ID cards, who weren't wearing
uniforms, who were of all kinds of different nationalities, gathered up off
various parts of the battlefield in a very chaotic environment,'' General Hill,
the Southern Command chief, recalled. ''We were all in very uncharted waters.''

A former secretary of the Army, Thomas E. White, who supervised a team of senior
Pentagon officers at Guantanamo, said he was told by a senior military official
at the base on an early visit that only a third to a half of the detainees
appeared to be of some value and that sorting through them would be a
considerable problem.

In late summer 2002, a senior C.I.A. analyst with extensive experience in the
Middle East spent about a week at the prison camp observing and interviewing
dozens of detainees, said officials who read his detailed memorandum.

While the survey was anecdotal, those officials said the document, which
contained about 15 pages, concluded that a substantial number of the detainees
appeared to be low-level militants, aspiring holy warriors who had rushed to
Afghanistan to defend the Taliban, or simply innocents in the wrong place at the
wrong time.

Senior military officials now readily acknowledge that many members of the
intelligence team initially sent to Guantanamo were poorly prepared to sort
through the captives. During the first half of 2002, they said, almost none of
the Army interrogators had any substantial background in terrorism, Al Qaeda or
other relevant subjects.

One Army intelligence reservist had previously been managing a Dunkin' Donuts.
Many younger Army interrogators had never questioned a real prisoner before. As
in Afghanistan, interrogators at Guantanamo asked the same basic questions again
and again, many former detainees recalled.

''They asked me, 'Do you know the Taliban? Do you know Mullah Muhammad Omar? Do
you know bin Laden?' '' said Jan Muhammad, 37, a farmer from Helmand Province
who said he had been forcibly conscripted into the Taliban. ''I said, 'I have
never seen bin Laden; I have not even seen bin Laden's car driving past.' ''

Interpreters were in such short supply that the Army turned to private
contractors, most of whom knew nothing about intelligence. The Southern Command,
responsible for military operations in Latin America, had no particular
experience with Al Qaeda or Afghanistan, either. Nonetheless, its intelligence
analysts often rewrote reports on the detainees as they saw fit, former
interrogators complained.

One of the few American intelligence sectors to show any early interest in the
detainees was an obscure defense intelligence unit that traced weapons around
the world, one interrogator said. As a result, interrogators were required to
question detainees about the serial numbers on rifles they had used and the
markings on their bullets. ''Of course, they had no idea,'' the interrogator
said.

Military intelligence units at Guantanamo managed to solve some of the
shortcomings, gathering available experts -- a Lebanese-born F.B.I.
counterterrorism specialist and an Afghan interpreter, for example -- and having
them conduct a daylong seminar on Al Qaeda, the Taliban and other relevant
subjects.

But senior defense officials grew frustrated with the shortage of compelling
information. ''At the beginning, the process was broken everywhere,'' said Lt.
Col. Anthony Christino III, a recently retired Army intelligence officer who
specialized in counterterrorism and was familiar the Guantanamo intelligence.
''The quality of the screening, the quality of the interrogations and the
quality of the analysis were all very poor. Efforts were made to improve things,
but after decades of neglect of human intelligence skills, it can't be fixed in
a few years.''

Defense officials ultimately ordered a broad review of the
intelligence-gathering effort. That assessment, in September 2002, led to a
series of changes including a major overhaul of intelligence databases and the
addition of 30 days of basic training for interrogators and analysts at Fort
Huachuca, Ariz., a course quickly nicknamed ''Terrorism 101.''

Around the same time, faced with continuing resistance from many detainees, some
military intelligence officers urged that they be allowed to take advantage of
the suspension of Geneva Conventions to try more coercive methods -- a step that
led to bitter conflicts between military intelligence members and military
criminal investigators assigned to prepare cases for the tribunals.

''As time went on, people wanted to do more,'' a senior officer who served there
said. ''The detainees were resistant. They knew we weren't going to torture
them. So we needed to come up with a Plan B for the small group of people who
wouldn't talk and who we thought did have intelligence.''

The 20th Hijacker
It Took Months To Identify Kahtani

 For interrogators at Guantanamo looking to score a high-profile intelligence
victory, Mr. Kahtani, the Saudi who was the so-called 20th hijacker, appeared to
be their man. In the end, though, his case instead came to illustrate some of
the problems they faced in determining who they were holding and what they knew.

According to several officials familiar with the case, military intelligence
officers had no idea who the young detainee was when he arrived in Cuba from
Afghanistan, where he had been captured on the battlefield in December 2001. For
some weeks, the officials said, Mr. Kahtani -- like most of the detainees --
refused to cooperate with interrogators, withholding his name and denying their
suspicions that he was Saudi.

Then, in July 2002, a routine check by F.B.I. agents matched his fingerprints to
a thumbprint from a man who had been turned back by an immigration official
after flying into Orlando International Airport in Florida from London on Aug.
3, 2001, without a return ticket or hotel reservation.

Members of the F.B.I. unit investigating the Sept. 11 attacks were immediately
intrigued, officials said. On that same day in August 2001, they noted, toll
records showed calls from a pay phone at the Orlando airport to Mustafa
al-Hawsawi, a Qaeda member in the United Arab Emirates who served as a
logistical coordinator for the attacks, the officials said.

Checking surveillance camera recordings for that day, the agents found that a
rental car used by the hijackers' leader, Mohamed Atta, entered an airport
parking lot shortly before Mr. Kahtani's Virgin Atlantic flight arrived from
London, officials said.

In July 2002, about a week after Mr. Kahtani's identity was discovered, military
officials invited the F.B.I. to question him, officials said.

The bureau sent a longtime counterterrorism specialist who is fluent in Arabic
and worked extensively on investigations of Al Qaeda. Michael Kortan, an F.B.I.
spokesman, declined to comment on the Kahtani case, other than to request that
the agent's identity be withheld from publication to ensure his safety.

Over a series of interrogations that extended into the fall of 2002, the agent
slowly built a rapport with Mr. Kahtani, approaching him with respect and
restraint, officials said. ''He prays with them, he has tea with them, and it
works,'' a senior official said, speaking generally of the agent's approach to
terrorist suspects.

Mr. Kahtani began to open up, officials said. He disclosed that he attended an
important Qaeda planning meeting with two of the Sept. 11 hijackers in Malaysia,
in January 2000. Mr. Kahtani also said he had a relative he thought might be
living near Chicago.

The relative, Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri, is believed by officials to have been
planted in the United States as a Qaeda ''sleeper'' agent. He was taken into
custody as a material witness shortly after arriving in the country on Sept. 10,
2001, and was later confined to a Naval brig in Charleston, S.C., with two
American citizens charged as ''enemy combatants,'' Jose Padilla and Yaser Hamdi.

One official said that Mr. Kahtani had admitted that he had intended to join the
hijackers but that he had given up little or nothing about other Qaeda plans. To
some F.B.I. experts, officials said, his ignorance seemed credible: he had been
recruited to be what the plotters called a ''muscle'' hijacker, someone to
subdue passengers rather than pilot a plane. Officials said such lower-level
operatives were generally only minimally informed even as to the details of
attacks in which they would take part.

But military intelligence officials were skeptical, believing that new
approaches to Mr. Kahtani might well reveal plans for attacks that were to
follow the hijackings or that might have involved Mr. Marri. In late November
2002, Pentagon officials informed the F.B.I. that they would take over
interrogations of Mr. Kahtani, an official said.

A list of 17 new interrogation techniques -- the first such addition since the
Army field manual was issued in 1987 -- was approved by Mr. Rumsfeld in early
December. Ten of the techniques were used on Mr. Kahtani before complaints from
some military officials prompted Mr. Rumsfeld to retract his approval for the
more extreme methods, military officials said.

Military officials refused to say which techniques had been used on Mr. Kahtani,
but the list, contained in a memo dated Jan. 8, 2003, included hooding prisoners
during questioning, placing them in ''stress positions'' like standing or
squatting for up to four hours, aggravating phobias like fear of dogs, and
''mild noninjurious physical contact,'' officials familiar with the memo said.
Another detainee was also subjected to methods from the same list, they said.

General Hill, the Southern Command chief, said the tougher techniques used on a
detainee he would not identify -- but who was identified by others as Mr.
Kahtani -- ''were successful.'' Last month, a senior Bush administration
official told The Times that Mr. Kahtani had provided information to
interrogators ''about a planned attack and about financial networks to fund
terrorist operations.'' But several other officials disputed that
characterization, saying he had not given any new information about plots by Al
Qaeda.

Carrot and Stick
Hard Treatment And Favored Treatment

 As the Pentagon built a more permanent prison at Guantanamo, fashioning cell
blocks from double-wide trailers, the intelligence-gathering effort changed
under Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, who took over in November 2002.

Military police and intelligence units that had often been rivalrous were fused
into a single task force. Interrogators, linguists and analysts were divided
into ''tiger teams'' to interview detainees. Guards were encouraged to observe
the prisoners closely, trying to detect the leaders among them so they could be
isolated or marked for interrogation. Pentagon officials say the changes
produced more intelligence.

Foreign intelligence and law-enforcement agencies were brought in to interview
some detainees who refused to talk to American interrogators. Since early last
year, intelligence gathered at Guantanamo has been entered into a new database
shared by 42 government agencies worldwide.

Questions about the treatment of prisoners linger. Several detainees who have
been released said coercive interrogation methods used at Guantanamo had
constituted abuse, charges American officials have denied. Among the allegations
are complaints of druggings, invasive body searches, sleep deprivation and other
mistreatment.

Parkhudin, a 26-year-old Afghan farmer who was held at Guantanamo from February
2003 to March 2004, said in an interview in Khost that he had been questioned
for up to 20 hours at a time under uncomfortable conditions at Guantanamo. He
said he had been shackled with a small chain during questioning. ''They made me
stand in front of an air-conditioner,'' he said. ''The wind was very cold.''

In a visit to Guantanamo this week, several military officers disputed accounts
of harsh treatment and said the most useful interrogation tool was a reward
system put into effect in 2003, in which more cooperative detainees were
accorded privileges like more comfortable quarters or occasional ocean swims.

The most cooperative detainees are moved to ''Camp 4,'' a medium-security
facility where they are permitted to wear white uniforms, rather than the
standard prison orange. In Camp 4, cells hold 10 prisoners each, and the
detainees can spend up to nine hours a day outside their cells. They can also
play soccer, eat meals outside and watch ''family oriented'' films in their
native language. Last week, a half dozen Camp 4 detainees went on a field trip
-- to the beach.

''We try to keep people hopeful,'' said Col. Nelson J. Cannon, the commander of
the joint detention operation at the base. ''Camp 4 is the place they aspire to
get to.''

In interviews, Mr. Rodriguez, the head of Guantanamo's intelligence-gathering
effort, and two interrogators said valuable information continued to be
produced. ''We've had new openings just in recent weeks,'' Mr. Rodriguez said.
''After two years, my team still has fresh fields to plow.''

One morning last week, a reporter was allowed to observe -- but not listen to --
two interrogations at Guantanamo from behind one-way glass. In one room, an
elderly detainee with a long white beard played chess with his interrogator. The
chess game was a ''reward'' for 90 minutes of ''fruitful'' discussion, an
interrogator said. In another room, a detainee in his late 30's wearing an
orange jump suit looked despondent as his interrogator spoke calmly to him
through an interpreter. In a period lasting nearly 10 minutes, the detainee
appeared to say nothing.

Intelligence and law-enforcement officials outside the Defense Department
generally agree that the compendium of narrow, personal accounts from detainees
has deepened the intelligence sector's historical understanding of Al Qaeda's
recruitment and training activities. But there are limits to the historical
information.

''It's like going to a prison in upstate to find out what's happening on the
streets of New York,'' a counterterrorism official with knowledge of Guantanamo
intelligence said. ''The guys in there might know some stuff. But they haven't
been part of what's going on for a few years.''

Other investigators describe the value of the detainees more narrowly: for
hundreds of intelligence and law enforcement officers now working on terrorism,
stints at the camp have offered a rare chance to study committed Islamic
militants. ''We haven't had this broad of access to true believers ever,'' a
senior counterterrorism official said. ''It has taught people how to go
face-to-face with them. If we see can them as they see themselves, it makes us
stronger.''

As public criticism of Guantanamo has increased, the Pentagon has intensified
its public-relations campaign on the importance of intelligence from the base.
General Miller, who left Guantanamo in May to take over prison operations in
Iraq, has claimed repeatedly -- although without specifics -- that the quality
of the intelligence gathered from detainees had improved the longer they had
been imprisoned.

Paul Butler, who was the senior Pentagon official for detainee policy until
recently becoming Mr. Rumsfeld's chief of staff, was even more expansive. At a
briefing on Feb. 13, Mr. Butler described the Guantanamo detainees as ''very
dangerous people'' who included ''senior Al Qaeda operatives and leaders and
Taliban leaders.'' In the most detailed public accounting yet of important
detainees at Guantanamo, he also briefly profiled 10 unidentified Qaeda members
or ''affiliated'' militants. But several senior officials with detailed
knowledge of the Guantanamo detainees described Mr. Butler's portrait of the
camp as a work of verbal embroidery, saying none of the detainees at the camp
could possibly be called a leader or senior operative of Al Qaeda.

Value of Detainees
Some Challenge Claims of Success

 Mr. Rumsfeld has repeatedly cited the importance of Guantanamo to the fight
against terror, saying the detentions there had helped prevent attacks.

''We are keeping them off the street and out of the airlines and out of nuclear
power plants and out of ports across this country and across other countries,''
he said in a speech in February.

In interviews with reporters, officials have repeatedly pointed to two
operations against foreign militants whose success they attributed to
interrogations at Guantanamo. One, they said, involved a plot in which Saudi
militants in Morocco were to attack British and American ships in the Strait of
Gibraltar with small, explosives-laden boats. The other involved breaking up a
terrorist cell in Milan that same year.

A closer look at both, however, indicates that the role the Guantanamo
information played was overstated, as was the nature of the threat the two cases
posed.

According to interviews with European, North African and American officials,
small teams of law-enforcement and intelligence officials from both Italy and
Morocco visited Guantanamo several times in 2002 and 2003 to interview detainees
from those countries.

In the Moroccan case, an important tip came from one of nine Moroccans who were
initially held there. In March 2002, the detainee told a Moroccan interrogator
about a Saudi man who had recruited young men in Morocco on behalf of Al Qaeda
in the late 1990's. The detainee knew the man only by the name ''Zuher,'' an
Arab counterterrorism official said. He also provided the full names of the
man's Moroccan wife and sister-in-law.

Moroccan investigators were able to track down the sister-in-law. She then
pointed the investigators to her brother-in-law, who was living in Morocco.

The authorities quickly began surveillance of the man, whom they identified as
Zuher al-Tbaiti, 35. With the help of Saudi intelligence officials, the
Moroccans learned that Mr. Tbaiti had attended a Qaeda training camp in
Afghanistan in the late 1990's and had been in the Tora Bora area of Afghanistan
in December 2001, during the United States bombing campaign to kill Mr. bin
Laden.

The Moroccan authorities arrested Mr. Tbaiti along with two Saudi associates in
June 2002. A Casablanca prosecutor later disclosed that Mr. Tbaiti and his two
associates had intended to load a small boat with explosives to attack an
American or British warship in a plot modeled after the attack that killed 17
American sailors aboard the American destroyer Cole in October 2000.

Both American and Moroccan officials have at times suggested that the plot was
thwarted in its final stages. In recent interviews, however, counterterrorism
officials from both countries acknowledged that the Saudis and their Moroccan
associates were in the earliest planning stages when they were arrested.

''I don't believe the attacks were anything more than an idea,'' a senior
American official said. ''They were far from pulling it off.''

What Moroccan investigators did not learn from Guantanamo -- or were not
particularly interested in -- is also revealing.

By the time Moroccan investigators made a second trip to Guantanamo in September
2002, the number of Moroccan prisoners had grown to 18 from 9. Nearly all of
them had trained with Al Qaeda in Afghanistan, but investigators said only five
had any useful information -- and that was about recruitment and links between
other Moroccan extremists and Al Qaeda. One official also said a lead developed
during the trip had been given to British officials, which helped bring about
the arrests of several men in possession of the toxic agent ricin in a north
London apartment in January 2003.

That same month, the Moroccans traveled again to Guantanamo for a new round of
interrogations. This time, however, the detainees not only refused to cooperate
but also began lying about their activities.

''By then they were discouraged and cynical and realized they were not getting
out any time soon,'' an official with knowledge of the interviews said.

As with the Moroccan case, the episode in Milan involved the authorities who
were already well into their investigations. American officials have pointed to
it as a trophy of the intelligence effort at Guantanamo, but other senior
officials say the information developed there had a limited impact on
counterterrorism investigations in Italy.

Italian investigators first traveled to the camp in July 2002 to try to learn
more about a militant cell in Milan. The cell's suspected leader, Yassine
Chekkouri, had been under arrest in Italy for more than six months on charges of
possession of explosives and chemical weapons. After they arrived in Guantanamo,
the investigators discovered that Mr. Chekkouri's brothers, Redouan and Younes,
were being held there. Ultimately, however, the two detainees were not helpful
with the case, the officials said.

The Italian investigators did have some other useful conversations at
Guantanamo, officials said, speaking to about 10 other detainees -- Tunisians,
Moroccans, an Egyptian -- who had passed through Italy at various times and
offered some background information about some of the dozen Islamic militants
who had been arrested in the Milan investigation over the course of 2001. They
also provided some information on the reputed head of Al Qaeda's operations in
Italy, Essid Sami Ben Kehmais, a Tunisian convicted last year.

None of the information led to new suspects, however, or prevented any attacks,
officials said.

One European official familiar said the Guantanamo interrogations ''confirmed a
lot of things'' that had already been under investigation. But an American
investigator familiar with the case was even less generous.

''It was part of the overall picture, but there was other evidence, I think,
that helped,'' the official said. ''This was also a logistical cell, not an
operational cell.''

Releases
Hopes for Spies Vs. Returned Foes

 Government officials initially hoped to do more at Guantanamo than extract
information from detainees they had captured; they hoped they might be able to
turn some of them into intelligence ''assets'' in their fight against terrorism.

According to several officials, the C.I.A. has carried out an active effort to
recruit some of the detainees as spies for the agency, offering to help them get
out of Guantanamo and resettle in their home countries in return for information
about militant activities.

The success of those efforts is unknown; Bill Harlow, the C.I.A. spokesman,
declined to comment on the matter. What is more certain, though, is that
American officials have freed at least a handful of captives who turned out to
be dangerous -- another indication of how difficult it has been for officials to
get a firm assessment of just who they have imprisoned at Guantanamo.

''Let me put it this way,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said at a Pentagon briefing on March 9.
''I've been told by senior people in this department that of the people that
have been released, we know of at least one who has gone back to being a
terrorist.''

Pressed for details, Mr. Rumsfeld said, ''I can't give you any more information
because I don't -- I've forgotten.''

Military and police officials in southern Afghanistan were more forthcoming.

In interviews, the officials said at least five prisoners released from
Guantanamo since early 2003 had rejoined the Taliban and resumed attacks on
American and Afghan government forces. Although two American officials said only
one of the former detainees had turned out to be an important figure, Afghan
officials said all five men were in fact commanders with close contacts to the
Taliban leadership.

''They are fighting again and killing people,'' said Khan Muhammad, the senior
military commander in southern Afghanistan.

The most notorious of the former Guantanamo detainees, Mullah Shahzada, had been
a lieutenant to a senior commander when he was first captured in the war, an
American military intelligence official said. After his return to Afghanistan in
March 2003, he emerged as a frontline Taliban commander, Afghan officials said,
leading a series of attacks in which at least 13 people were killed, including 2
aid workers.

Senior Pentagon officials refused to explain how Mr. Shahzada had talked his way
out of Guantanamo. But two other military officials with knowledge of the case
said he had given a false name and portrayed himself as having been captured by
mistake.

''He stuck to his story and was fairly calm about the whole thing,'' a military
intelligence official said. ''He maintained over a period time that he was
nothing but an innocent rug merchant who just got snatched up.''

Other detainees who are known to have been released and then taken up arms are
Mullah Shakur and two men known only as Sabitullah and Rahmatullah. A senior
security official, Abdullah Laghmani, described all five men as commanders with
close ties to the outlawed Taliban leadership.

Afghan officials blamed the United States for the return of the five men to the
Taliban's ranks, saying neither American military officials nor the Kabul
police, who briefly process the detainees when they are sent home, consult them
about the detainees they free.

''There are lots of people who were innocent, and they are capturing them, just
on anyone's information,'' said Dr. Laghmani, the chief of the National Security
Directorate in Kandahar. ''And then they are releasing guilty people.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Military police guards with a Guantanamo Bay inmate in 2002.
(Photo by Reuters)(pg. A1)
Prisoners captured in Afghanistan aboard an American plane bound for Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, early in the detention program. (Photo by Getty Images)
For detainees: a chair, and a ring for their shackles. (Photo by Angel
Franco/The New York Times)(pg. A10)
 Detainees from Afghanistan at Camp X-Ray, the first makeshift prison at the
Guantanamo Bay Naval Station, in January 2002. The base now has other detention
facilities. (Photo by Department of Defense)(pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (90%); PRISONS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TALIBAN (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); NAVIES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
INTERVIEWS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); SUPREME
COURTS (70%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%)
Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human
Rights; Terrorism; Intelligence Services; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (92%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group); Taliban (Afghan Group); Central
Intelligence Agency

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%) Tim Golden; Don Jr Van Natta; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Europe; Middle East

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             466 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 23, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WHITE HOUSE SAYS PRISONER POLICY SET HUMANE TONE

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON; Eric Lichtblau and David Johnston contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; REACH OF WAR: INMATES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1371 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


In a February 2002 directive that set new rules for handling prisoners captured
in Afghanistan, President Bush broadly cited the need for ''new thinking in the
law of war.'' He ordered that all people detained as part of the fight against
terrorism should be treated humanely even if the United States considered them
not to be protected by the Geneva Conventions, the White House said Tuesday.

That statement of principle, which has been described publicly but never before
released in its entirety, came at a time of intense debate within the Bush
administration over how far the military and the intelligence agencies could and
should go in using coercive interrogations and torture to extract information
from detainees, administration officials said as they released hundreds of pages
of previously classified documents related to the development of a policy on the
detainees.

By late 2002, the documents showed, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld was
fleshing out the policy under intense pressure to squeeze more information from
people seized in Afghanistan. He briefly approved techniques including the use
of dogs, and by April 2003 he approved the use, under some conditions, of
interrogation techniques including changes in diet, reversing sleep cycles, and
isolation.

But the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, told reporters on Tuesday that
Mr. Bush never considered more aggressive options set out by administration
lawyers, including those in an August 2002 Justice Department memo that appeared
to offer a permissive definition of torture. The Justice Department on Tuesday
essentially disavowed that memo, saying it was now considered irrelevant. It is
being rewritten, a senior department official said.

The documents released Tuesday did little to settle some of the central
questions surrounding what happened at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, including
whether the administration tacitly or explicitly encouraged military personnel
and intelligence officers -- in Afghanistan, at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba and
finally in Iraq -- to be more aggressive than the written policies for dealing
with detainees would permit.

The White House rejected any link and said Mr. Bush had made clear what the
policy of the United States was.

''The president has given no order or directive that would immunize from
prosecution anyone engaged in conduct that constitutes torture,'' Mr. Gonzales
said. ''All interrogation techniques actually authorized have been carefully
vetted, are lawful and do not constitute torture.''

Directly addressing any suggestion that the administration's consideration of
more aggressive interrogation might have sent a signal to military personnel
that abusing prisoners was justified and therefore contributed to what happened
at Abu Ghraib, Mr. Gonzales said, ''We categorically reject any connection.''

Democrats said the documents released Tuesday appeared to represent only a
portion of important legal documents related to detainees.

The administration released the documents after months in which its policies
toward interrogation and torture have been called into question by the abuse of
detainees at Abu Ghraib. The documents showed that the effort to draw up new
rules for interrogation after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks drastically widened
the scope of techniques considered at the highest levels of the administration,
but also in the end a reluctance to endorse many of them.

The release of the documents seemed to be driven by a sense at the White House
that the gravity of the prison abuses required a fuller disclosure of the legal
papers and internal debate that formed the basis for Washington's handling of
detainees in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Administration officials said that the documents did not circulate widely in the
government at the time they were prepared and that there was no connection
between their exploration of the legalities of various interrogation techniques
and what happened at Abu Ghraib.

Senate Democrats prepared a subpoena last week requesting more than a dozen
documents beyond those released Tuesday. That subpoena was blocked last Thursday
in a 10-to-9 party-line vote of the Senate Judiciary Committee. On Tuesday,
Democrats dismissed the administration's document release as highly selective
and said it failed to address important questions about its handling of detainee
issues.

''The stonewalling in the prison abuse scandal has been building to a crisis
point,'' Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, said in a statement.
''Now, responding to public pressure, the White House has released a small
subset of the documents that offers glimpses into the genesis of this scandal.
All should have been provided earlier to Congress, and much more remains held
back and hidden away from public view.''

None of the documents released Tuesday sheds any light on the legal thinking
behind the detention of a small number of high-level Qaeda operatives who have
been detained by the Central Intelligence Agency at secret locations around the
world and who have been subjected to coercive interrogations without access to
lawyers or human rights groups.

Asked Tuesday about the prison abuse and torture, Mr. Bush told reporters in the
Oval Office that torture ran counter to the values of the United States and that
he would never sanction its use.

''Let me make very clear the position of my government, and our country,'' Mr.
Bush said. ''We do not condone torture. I have never ordered torture. I will
never order torture.''

Briefing reporters after releasing the documents, Mr. Gonzales said they
highlighted ''the thorough and deliberative process the administration used to
make policy decision on how to wage the global war on terrorist organizations.''

Although he acknowledged that some of the legal issues raised during internal
administration debates were controversial, he said the principles settled on by
Mr. Bush were ''more narrowly tailored'' than the legal theories offered by his
lawyers and made clear that torture was not an option for interrogation.

The ''abstract'' discussions about stretching the bounds of the law on torture
and interrogation were never made available to ''soldiers in the field, nor to
the president,'' Mr. Gonzales said.

With the administration clearly eager to distance Mr. Bush from the debate over
what kinds of interrogation techniques were allowable or legal, the Justice
Department on Tuesday described as irrelevant and unnecessary a detailed,
50-page memo sent by the department to the White House in August 2002 on the
legal restrictions on torture, saying the document was now considered
irrelevant.

The memo, which leaked out in the news media earlier this month, appeared to
offer a legal rationale for harsh treatment of Qaeda prisoners, setting a high
bar for what constituted torture. It was sent from the Justice Department's
Office of Legal Counsel to Mr. Gonzales.

The memo concluded that under international law banning torture, a tactic ''must
inflict pain that is difficult to endure'' and that ''physical pain amounting to
torture must be equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious
physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even
death,'' according to a copy released by the administration.

But a senior Justice Department official said the document was ''overbroad and
irrelevant'' and was unnecessary because no one in the administration had ever
asked for the legal authority to torture captives. The department is now
rewriting the entire memo in a less abstract, more case-specific context, the
official said.

The official said prisoners in Iraq were clearly covered by the Geneva
Conventions and that Iraqi prisoners were ''legally distinct'' from Qaeda or
Taliban prisoners. ''Our simple advice to everybody in connection with the Iraq
detention is comply with the Geneva Conventions,'' the official said.

Some of the documents showed that the administration originally had no intention
of making its internal debate public anytime soon. Mr. Rumsfeld's April 16,
2003, memo authorizing the limited use of more aggressive interrogation
techniques at Guantanamo Bay was stamped ''Declassify On: 2 April 2013.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); PRISONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); TERRORISM (77%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); APPROVALS (75%); ARMED FORCES (75%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%);
DOGS (72%); GENOCIDE (71%); IMMUNITY (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); SLEEP
(66%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Geneva Conventions; Torture; Terrorism; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Dogs; Sleep

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice
Department

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); ALBERTO GONZALES (89%) George W (Pres) Bush; Donald
H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Alberto Gonzales; Richard W Stevenson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (68%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             470 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. DROPS PLAN TO EXEMPT G.I.'S FROM U.N. COURT

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: WAR CRIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 23


The United States bowed Wednesday to broad opposition on the Security Council
and announced it was dropping its effort to gain immunity for its troops from
prosecution by the International Criminal Court.

''The United States has decided not to proceed further with consideration and
action on the draft at this time in order to avoid a prolonged and divisive
debate,'' James B. Cunningham, the deputy American ambassador, said on emerging
from the Council chamber.

The envoys from the 15-member Council had spent the morning in closed session,
discussing a rewritten version of the American resolution that circulated on
Tuesday night to try to meet the objections.

Resolutions granting a year's exemption had passed the Council in each of the
past two years, but this year the renewal ran into difficulties because of the
prison scandal in Iraq and strong opposition from Secretary General Kofi Annan.

The outcome, while a political defeat for Washington, will have no effect on the
vulnerability to prosecution of American soldiers in Iraq. Neither the United
States nor Iraq is a member of the tribunal, and its jurisdiction is limited to
countries that do not themselves prosecute crimes by their military.

The setback for American diplomacy at the United Nations came just two weeks
after the Bush administration was praised there for demonstrating flexibility
and a willingness to compromise in securing a unanimous vote on a resolution
affirming the arrangements for the transfer of power in Iraq.

This time American diplomats, who had been confident of obtaining a routine
''technical rollover'' of the measure, appeared to have miscalculated the impact
of the publicity given the American mistreatment of Iraqi detainees.

They were also caught off guard by the intervention of Mr. Annan, who told the
ambassadors on Friday that a vote in favor of the United States would undermine
the new solidarity of the Council.

Shortly after Mr. Cunningham's announcement, Mr. Annan issued a statement
saying, ''The decision by the United States not to pursue a resolution on this
matter will help maintain the unity of the Security Council at a time when it
faces difficult challenges.''

Ambassador Wang Guangya of China, which had supported the measure the past two
years, said, ''Clearly from the very beginning, this year China has been under
pressure because of the scandals and the news coverage of the prisoner abuse,
and it made it very difficult for my government to support it.''

Spain's ambassador, Juan Antonio Yanez-Bernuevo, explained his country's
opposition, saying, ''For us the essential thing is to remain faithful to the
International Criminal Court, which we strongly support, and also to the United
Nations Charter, and to respect the statement made by the secretary general last
week, which had a powerful effect.''

In calling for the Council to turn back the American request, Mr. Annan said it
was ''of dubious judicial value,'' and especially objectionable in the aftermath
of the prisoner abuse. Passing the measure, he said, would discredit the
Council, the United Nations and the ''primacy of the rule of law,'' and he
appealed to the members to maintain the common purpose they had shown on June 8
in their unanimous vote on Iraq.

Mr. Yanez-Bernuevo said he regretted that the Americans had not mounted the same
kind of diplomatic effort that secured that unanimous vote. ''We would have
liked to see a process as we saw in the Iraq resolution, a more collective
effort,'' he said. Instead, he said, ''according to what we heard from the U.S.,
that was the last word, they could not go any further, there was no point in
pursuing the matter.''

Ambassador Heraldo Munoz of Chile said Mr. Annan's statement had had ''a very
important impact on many delegations.''

The Bush administration has said it needs the troop-protection measure to
prevent people from using the court to bring politically motivated war-crime
prosecutions against Americans abroad.

Elaborating on that Wednesday, Ambassador Cunningham noted that the United
States was the ''largest contributor to global security.''

''When the United States voluntarily commits its armed forces to participate in
peacekeeping missions around the world, we believe it is wholly inappropriate to
subject them to a tribunal which cannot provide adequate guarantees of due
process,'' he said.

Asked if the United States would limit its peacekeeping actitivies in the future
-- a threat it has made in past years -- Mr. Cunningham said, ''I'm not going to
comment on that.''

An accompanying statement said that in the absence of a resolution, the United
States would ''take into account the risk of International Criminal Court review
when determining contributions to U.N. authorized or established operations.''

Addressing concerns about American military conduct abroad, Mr. Cunningham said,
''The United States has a well-functioning system of military justice that will
assure accountablity.''

Since the international court was established, the Bush administration has made
bilateral agreements with 90 countries barring any prosecution of American
officials by the court.

The current exemption expires on June 30, the day Iraq regains its sovereignty
and American troops become part of the kind of United Nations-approved force
that the renewal was meant to cover.

But the court has no jurisdiction in Iraq, which did not sign the 1998 treaty
establishing it, or in the United States, which is also not a signer. In
addition, backers of the court argue that since it accepts cases only when a
nation is unwilling to prosecute, there is little likelihood it would ever be
called upon to deal with the United States.

The court, formed in July 2002, is to hear cases of war crimes, genocide and
systematic human rights abuses.

The resolution that was withdrawn on Wednesday included a revision intended to
meet a major objection: language in the original proposal that expressed the
intention to renew the one-year exemption each July 1 ''for as long as may be
necessary.''

That paragraph was eliminated and new language inserted that pledged that this
request for a one-year exemption would be the final one. But the attempt to
bridge the differences did not work, and Ambassador Munoz, of Chile, said that
while he thought the United States' decision had been ''too rushed,'' it was
probably the best one under the circumstances.

''Better not to be divided after the consensus and the unity that we showed on
Iraq,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(78%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%);
IMMUNITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CORRECTIONS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); POLITICS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Immunity From Prosecution

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) United Nations;
International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); SPAIN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             472 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gore Says White House Is Eroding Democracy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: DEMOCRATS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


Former Vice President Al Gore accused President Bush and Vice President Dick
Cheney on Thursday of undermining American democracy by using the Iraq war to
empower the executive branch at the expense of civil liberties, Congress and the
court system.

Without mincing words, Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney of lying on a
crucial justification for war, that Iraq had a role in planning the Sept. 11,
2001, attacks.

''In the end, for this administration, it is all about power,'' Mr. Gore said in
a nearly hourlong speech to the American Constitution Society, a left-leaning
organization of lawyers and law students. ''This lie about the invented
connection between Al Qaeda and Iraq was and is the key to justifying the
current ongoing constitutional power grab by the president. So long as their big
flamboyant lie remains an established fact in the public's mind, President Bush
will be seen as justified in taking for himself the power to make war on his
whim.''

As it has after other recent speeches by Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush's re-election
campaign dismissed his remarks as rhetoric intended to aid Senator John Kerry,
Mr. Bush's likely opponent.

''This is just one of the faces of John Kerry's Democratic Party,'' a spokesman
for Mr. Bush's campaign, Terry Holt, said. ''The anger and vitriol of this
attack is so out of step with what voters need in this election. The former vice
president's series of rants fits with the whole tenor of their effort to attack
President Bush.''

The speech was Mr. Gore's fifth in recent months in his effort to have role in
the elections. While echoing themes often expressed by Mr. Kerry, he has framed
his arguments with a sharper edge than the candidate himself. Mr. Gore referred
several times to the report last week by the staff of the Sept. 11 commission
that cited contacts between Iraq and Al Qaeda but said there was no
collaborative relationship between them. Yet he said Mr. Bush and other
administration officials continued to assert ''aggressively and brazenly'' that
a stronger link existed.

''They have such an overwhelming political interest in sustaining the belief in
the minds of the American people that Hussein was in partnership with bin
Laden,'' Mr. Gore said, ''that they dare not admit the truth lest they look like
complete fools for launching our country into a reckless, discretionary war
against a nation that posed no immediate threat to us whatsoever.''

Mr. Gore said the White House was ignoring the commission's findings in ''a
deliberate campaign to mislead America.'' That, he argued, posed a danger for
the country.

Invoking Washington, Jefferson and Madison's names, he suggested that the
founders would be appalled to see such executive branch powers as the right to
imprison a citizen without charges or legal counsel so long as the president has
declared him an ''enemy combatant.''

Mr. Gore also said the abuse of Iraqi prisoners represented ''a troubling
manifestation of how seriously off track this president's policies have taken
America.'' He said a legal argument developed by an administration lawyer that
justified harsh interrogations was ''strange and perverted,'' a rationale for
''sadistic activities conducted in the name of the America people.''

''If our honor as a nation is to be restored,'' he added, ''it is not by
allowing the mighty to shield themselves by bringing the law to bear against
their pawns. It is by bringing the law to bear against the mighty themselves.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Al Gore speaking yesterday at the Georgetown University Law
Center. He criticized President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney. (Photo by
Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (89%); AL-QAEDA (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);
HIJACKING (76%); LIBERALISM (75%); LAWYERS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%) Election Issues; Presidential
Election of 2004; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Airlines and Airplanes;
Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (94%); AL GORE (94%); DICK CHENEY (91%); JOHN KERRY (89%);
OSAMA BIN LADEN (56%) Michael Janofsky; Al Gore; George W (Pres) Bush; Dick
(Vice Pres) Cheney; John (Sen) Kerry

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             473 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture: Condemned or Condoned?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 99 words



To the Editor:

The White House documents supporting a humane attitude toward prisoners of war
fail to diminish the general sense of horror this country continues to
experience over the abuse and torture of those prisoners.

Certainly, the documents do not exonerate the Bush administration and, if
anything, reinforce the suspicion of at least gross indifference toward the
human rights of the captives.

A few scraps of paper are neither going to succeed in burying this horrific
injustice nor easing the international revulsion arising from Abu Ghraib.

WADDELL ROBEY
Harrisburg, Pa., June 23, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); POWS &
MIAS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); NAVIES (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
TERRORISM (59%) Torture; Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (91%)

PERSON: Waddell Robey; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: HARRISBURG, PA, USA (50%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             476 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudis in Terror's Shadow

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 701 words


Ever since President Bush set his sights on war, many Americans have looked
around the world and wondered if Iraq was really the worst problem out there.
North Korea, and probably Iran, are the countries busily creating nuclear
weapons in defiance of international law. Sudanese leaders worked closely with
Osama bin Laden and slaughter their people as callously as Saddam Hussein did.
Pakistan has provided nuclear weapons technology and fuel to rogue nations.

And then there is Saudi Arabia, which produced the young men who flew planes
into the World Trade Center and whose wealthy citizens were probably the main
funders of the attacks. The independent commission on 9/11 recently concluded
that Al Qaeda got no financial support from Saudi Arabia's government or senior
officials in the period leading up to 9/11. Any direct cooperation between Saudi
intelligence agencies and Osama bin Laden probably ended well over a decade ago,
with the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. Since then, the Saudi government
has had no reason to want to help Al Qaeda directly. In the early 1990's, Mr.
bin Laden denounced Saudi rulers for allowing American troops to be stationed in
the kingdom. In 1994, Riyadh revoked his Saudi citizenship.

However, unofficial tolerance continued. Lax government monitoring of charitable
foundations and the money they sent overseas allowed large sums to flow into
terrorist training and operations. Without this money, Al Qaeda would have had
trouble financing some of its most ambitious attacks. Saudi rulers winked at the
terrorist operations as long as they were directed outside their borders. They
provided crucial support for the Taliban, while it provided sanctuary and
training bases to Osama bin Laden. They began cracking down on terrorist cells
within the kingdom only when Al Qaeda expanded its targets to include sites and
people within Saudi Arabia itself.

Still, it's good news that the Saudis are getting serious, even if it is simply
a matter of self-preservation. Lately Crown Prince Abdullah, the country's de
facto ruler, has moved to hunt down terrorists and cut off their finances, and
remove inflammatory clerics from their pulpits. The vicious kidnappings and
assaults on foreign workers in recent weeks, including the beheading of an
American, were certainly a shock to Saudis who need non-Arabs to help run the
vast oil industry.

But the terrorists may have had help from low-level officials in the police or
other government agencies, where attitudes toward Al Qaeda are more favorable.
The Saudi people have been exposed to years of preaching in favor of violent
global jihad by senior Wahhabi clerics, whose backing is a main source of
legitimacy for the Saudi royal family. That helps explain why a poll taken late
last year showed half of all Saudis supporting Osama bin Laden's rhetoric.

Encouragingly, the overwhelming majority of Saudis rejected Mr. bin Laden's
political leadership and terrorist tactics. But some do not, and American
citizens living in Saudi Arabia are going to need extensive assurance that the
government is rooting out Qaeda sympathizers, particularly from the police and
security forces.

The United States, which depends on Saudi Arabia not only for support in the
fight against terror but also for its role in moderating world oil prices, will
certainly continue to work with the kingdom and its leaders. It actually has
little choice. But if Washington is interested in long-term stability in Saudi
Arabia, it must press harder for reform. Mr. bin Laden's rhetoric strikes a
resonant chord among Saudis who are increasingly anxious about the economy and
their own uncertain employment prospects. The kingdom uneasily combines a
21st-century oil industry, an absolutist and hugely corrupt family monarchy, and
a fiery, fundamentalist religious establishment.

In the narrow spectrum of Saudi royal politics, Crown Prince Abdullah is a
reformer. If he presses ahead with the bold changes Saudi Arabia needs he can
expect fierce resistance from other princes and influential clerics. But without
thoroughgoing reforms, the House of Saud faces a bleak and violent future.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (92%); TERRORISM (92%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MISCONDUCT (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); POLITICS
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (77%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (77%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (76%);
DENATURALIZATION (75%); CIVIL SERVICES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); CHARITIES
(71%); FOUNDATIONS (70%); CITIZENSHIP (69%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (68%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (65%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (65%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (64%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (53%); POLLS & SURVEYS (50%) Editorials; Terrorism; United
States International Relations; Politics and Government; Freedom and Human
Rights; Police Brutality and Misconduct; Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline; Prices
(Fares, Fees and Rates); International Trade and World Market; Government
Employees

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Osama
Bin Laden

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (77%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); SUDAN (92%); IRAQ (92%);
KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             477 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Uncertainty About Interrogation Rules Seen as Slowing the Hunt for Information
on Terrorists

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE INVESTIGATORS;
Pg. 8

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


Confusion about the legal limits of interrogation has begun to slow government
efforts to obtain information from suspected terrorists, American intelligence
officials said Sunday.

Doubts about whether interrogators can employ coercive methods, the officials
said, could create problems at the start of a critical summer period when
counterterrorism officials fear that Al Qaeda might attack the United States.

Interrogators are uncertain what rules are in effect and are worried that the
legal safeguards that they had believed were in place to protect them from
internal sanctions or criminal liability may no longer exist, the officials
said.

Some intelligence officials involved in the C.I.A.'s interrogation program have
told colleagues that they are bitter because their superiors, in the months
after the September 2001 attacks, had assured them that aggressive interrogation
techniques were necessary and legal.

Other intelligence officials have expressed a sense of resignation, saying they
had a feeling that, from the early days in the war on terror, aggressive steps
taken in an effort to protect the country from another attack would lead to
criticism and internal investigations.

The uncertainty follows the Bush administration's decision to review and revise
the legal basis on which interrogations of high-level Qaeda detainees have been
conducted.

A Justice Department legal memo in August 2002 said the government had broad
legal authority over detainees, approving tactics that stopped just short of a
prisoner's death.

The memo said interrogators would use extreme interrogation methods without
violating international treaties or federal law, which bars inhumane treatment.

Senior administration legal advisers announced last week that the legal memo,
signed by Jay S. Bybee, head of the Office of Legal Counsel, had been disavowed.
In repudiating the memo, they said it was too broad and created the false
impression that the Bush administration condoned torture.

The C.I.A.'s interrogation program has been troubled.

A C.I.A. contractor has been indicted in North Carolina in the death of a
detainee in Afghanistan. The Justice Department has been reviewing two other
cases in Iraq in which C.I.A. personnel had contact with detainees who died.

C.I.A. personnel had become increasingly wary of the interrogation methods used
in 2002 and 2003 against some detainees, including sleep and food deprivation
and procedures in which detainees were led to believe that they might be shot,
drowned or hanged.

The Washington Post reported on Sunday that the use of extreme measures had been
halted while the government re-examined the law regarding how far interrogators
could go in questioning terror subjects. A spokesman for the C.I.A. would not
discuss the report, but other officials said that the status of a suspension was
somewhat unclear and that the rules for interrogation were being reviewed but
not necessarily rescinded.

Intelligence officials say the C.I.A.'s detention system was designed to handle
only the most important Qaeda operatives captured in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Less important captives from the war in Afghanistan, as well as Iraqi prisoners,
have been held by the American military.

With the approval of President Bush, the C.I.A. decided early in the war on
terrorism to isolate top-level Qaeda detainees in remote and undisclosed
locations outside the United States, keeping them far removed from the rules
governing the American judicial system.

The agency also decided to segregate them from the larger numbers of low-level
Afghan and foreign fighters sent to a detention facility at the Guantanamo Bay
naval base in Cuba. The C.I.A. wanted complete control over the so-called
high-valuedetainees; at Guantanamo, officials from several United States
agencies had access to the low-level captives.

Abu Zubaydah, who managed Al Qaeda's recruiting system for its training camps in
Afghanistan, was among the first Qaeda leaders to be captured, and his treatment
in detention raised early concerns about the C.I.A.'s harsh tactics.

After his April 2002 capture in Pakistan, he was believed to have been taken to
Thailand, where the local government had agreed to allow the C.I.A. to establish
a secret interrogation facility for important prisoners. The tactics used on Mr.
Zubaydah prompted concern among some F.B.I. agents who were aware of how the
C.I.A. was treating him.

The Bybee memo was prepared after an internal government debate about the
tactics used in Mr. Zubaydah's interrogation, and provided a legal basis for the
use of coercive tactics used against other high-value detainees, including
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, believed to have been a planner of the Sept. 11 attacks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAWYERS (75%); INDICTMENTS (75%); TORTURE (71%);
INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (52%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terrorism; Freedom
and Human Rights

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (51%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (51%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (51%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (51%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (51%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (51%)

PERSON: David Johnston

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             480 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Classic Check and Balance, Court Shows Bush It Also Has Wartime Powers

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE SUPREME COURT: THE PRESIDENT;
Pg. 17

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


In the fall of 2001, President Bush justified his decision to treat some
captured terrorist suspects as ''enemy combatants'' without access to lawyers,
courts or other long-established legal rights on the grounds that he could not
let the United States' ''enemies use the forums of liberty to destroy liberty
itself.''

On Monday morning, the Supreme Court upended a good-sized chunk of that logic,
and offered a powerful reminder that in the United States, even in wartime, no
prisoner is ever beneath the law's regard, and no president above its limits.

It was Justice Robert H. Jackson who first noted 52 years ago this month, in
another wartime election summer, that a president is not commander in chief of
the country, only of the military. Justice Jackson wrote that in his concurring
opinion overturning Harry S. Truman's seizure of the American steel industry
during the Korean war, and Justice David H. Souter cited those words approvingly
in his concurrence on Monday.

The effect of the current court's rulings in two related cases was to place a
classic institutional and political check on Mr. Bush's effort to keep some
citizens and aliens held as the most dangerous ''enemy combatants'' from ever
having their day in any court. It is precisely the right to some such hearing,
the court held, that defines the constitutional separation of powers and by
extension the American governing creed.

While Mr. Bush will now have to seek explicit Congressional authorization in
dealing with these terrorist suspects, that should not be an insurmountable task
for this president. But it falls to him at a time when he is already facing
challenges on many fronts, including the handover of sovereignty in a
still-dangerous Iraq, questions about his administration's policies on
interrogation of prisoners of war and polls that show slipping public support
for his handling the war on terrorism and uncertain prospects for his
re-election.

''It is a clear demonstration of how much our system of checks and balances, of
separation of powers, continues to be an effective brake on any one branch,''
said the historian Robert Dallek. ''After all, this is not a left-leaning court,
or one dominated by justices who are left of center. But ultimately the court
has a unique degree of independence from the executive and legislative branches,
that even in times of great difficulty it does not lightly give up.''

Justice Clarence Thomas dissented from the majority in the case of Yaser Esam
Hamdi, an American citizen picked up in Afghanistan and held mostly without
access to the outside world ever since. ''The founders intended that the
president have primary responsibility -- along with the necessary power -- to
protect the national security and to conduct the nation's foreign relations,''
Justice Thomas wrote. ''They did so principally because the structural
advantages of a unitary executive are essential in these domains.''

The White House chose to emphasize the parts of the majority opinions in the
Hamdi case, and another involving foreign detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
that supported the president's ability to detain ''enemy combatants'' without
trial.

''The president's most solemn obligation is to defend the American people, and
we're pleased that the Supreme Court has upheld the president's authority to
detain enemy combatants, including citizens, for the duration of the conflict,''
said a White House spokeswoman, Claire Buchan. ''The administration is committed
to fashioning a process that addresses the court's concerns and permits the
president to continue to exercise his constitutional responsibility as commander
in chief to protect this nation during times of war.''

In a statement, Mark Corallo, a Justice Department spokesman, said the
department was pleased that the court ''upheld the authority of the president as
commander in chief of the armed forces to detain enemy combatants, including
U.S. citizens.'' The statement added that the court ''also held that individuals
detained by the United States as enemy combatants have certain procedural rights
to contest their detention. But the court recognized that those procedures must
reflect the unique context of the detention of enemy combatants and the need of
the executive to prosecute the war.''

Much other reaction broke down along predictably partisan lines. Senator John
Kerry of Massachusetts, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, praised
the decision, saying: ''I have argued all along with respect to detainees that
it is vital to uphold the Constitution of the United States, to respect civil
liberties and civil rights, even as we protect our country. I've suggested many
ways you can do that, including judicial review, different kinds of review
structures.''

By contrast, Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, the chairman of the
Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on the Constitution, civil rights and
property rights, called the decisions ''a bit of a disappointment,'' and added:
''I am a little concerned about the new constraints that the Supreme Court has
placed on the president as commander in chief. I hope that they don't represent
handcuffs.''

Some historians were not surprised by the court's decisions. Alonzo Hamby, a
scholar of the presidency at Ohio University, noted wryly that ''once upon a
time, it was not assumed that presidents necessarily had to pay attention to
Supreme Court decisions.''

In the 1830's, when the Supreme Court declared the government's forced removal
of Indian tribes from their lands illegal, President Andrew Jackson famously
dismissed the ruling by the chief justice by saying: ''John Marshall has made
his decision. Now let him enforce it.''

Mr. Hamby said, ''But in the world we live in now, it's literally impossible for
a president to ignore a Supreme Court decision, no matter how wrong or dangerous
he may think it is.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Joint Chiefs of Staff listened on Sept. 20, 2001, as
President Bush addressed Congress, announcing a cabinet position on domestic
security. (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); LIBERALISM (77%); VERDICTS (77%); KOREAN WAR (75%); PUBLIC
POLICY (75%); HISTORY (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(73%); NAVIES (69%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (60%) Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts;
Freedom and Human Rights; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Separation-of-Powers
Doctrine; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court
(US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); CLARENCE THOMAS (58%); DAVID SOUTER (58%) Todd S
Purdum; George W (Pres) Bush; Yaser Esam Hamdi; Jose (Abdullah Al-Muhajir)
Padilla

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (89%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             481 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fresh Starts: One for Iraq, One for Bush

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; TRANSITION IN IRAQ: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1465 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


Seconds after President Bush received a handwritten note from Condoleezza Rice
during a NATO meeting early Monday in Istanbul, telling him that their secret
plan to turn over formal sovereignty to the Iraqis two days early had been
consummated at 10:26 a.m., he smiled and scrawled a quick response.

''Let freedom reign!'' he wrote on it.

Yet for all the quiet celebration of the moment, Mr. Bush's mission is far from
accomplished. The transfer represents yet another new start for Mr. Bush in
Iraq. It is the president's last, best hope of turning the page, of refocusing
America and the world on the possibilities of remaking a broken nation, and of
moving beyond the gruesome images of a star-crossed occupation. Several of his
own advisers, in their more candid moments, admit they do not know whether that
is still possible.

If Mr. Bush's accomplishments in Iraq are judged on the events of the past 14
months, he has clearly succeeded in only one of his tasks: dismantling a
tyrannical government. The so-far fruitless search for unconventional weapons --
the primary justification for invading Iraq -- undermined his credibility,
making what Mr. Bush described as a war of necessity appear to have been one of
choice. His argument that a change of rule in Iraq would quell terrorism is
similarly questioned, undercut by a rewritten State Department assessment that
now concedes an increase in terrorist incidents. The attacks on American troops
in Iraq were not part of the count.

And it will be years, or even decades, Mr. Bush himself says, before anyone
knows if the war in Iraq plants any seeds of democratic reform in the Middle
East.

Yet Mr. Bush is gambling that the transition of formal sovereignty to the Iraqis
will change the dynamic of the American intervention in Iraq, and with it the
terms by which the Bush presidency is judged, not only on Election Day in
November but also by history. His aim is to push doubts about the wisdom of the
war and the bitter occupation into the past, and turn attention to the issue of
where Iraq goes from here. That task was further complicated Monday by the
Supreme Court's repudiation of the administration's insistence that the
president alone could determine the fate of enemy combatants captured in the
fight against terrorism.

But Iraq's fortunes and Mr. Bush's own are inextricably linked, the polls
strongly suggest. And so Iraq strategy and campaign strategy have become linked
as well.

One senior White House official said the other day that as soon as Mr. Bush's
team came to understand that the occupation was ''detested'' by Iraqis, Mr. Bush
and his aides decided to turn over formal sovereignty as quickly as possible.
The idea is to remove the American forces as a target and force the insurgents
to face off against other Iraqis, in the hope that the Iraqi people themselves
-- to defend a nation they now control -- will then rise to crush the enemy
within.

''The struggle is, first and foremost, an Iraqi struggle,'' Mr. Bush said
Monday. Referring to Iyad Allawi, the man who once took part in C.I.A. covert
actions against Saddam Hussein and who now will lead the fragile government, Mr.
Bush added: ''The prime minister said of his people, 'We're prepared to fight,
and if necessary, die for these objectives.' America, Great Britain, our
coalition respect that spirit, and the Iraqi people will not stand alone.''

The question is whether they can stand long enough to suppress an insurgency
whose size, power, funds and appeal are still shrouded in mystery. The answer,
notes James M. Lindsay, the co-author of ''America Unbound,'' an account
published last year of the revolution in Mr. Bush's foreign policy after the
Sept. 11 attacks, ''may have different effects on the ground in Iraq and back
here'' during an election year.

Mr. Bush, he said Monday, is ''hoping that if we get out of the way of the Iraqi
people, they will have an incentive to make it work.''

''The problem is that no one knows if the Allawi government has the capacity to
handle the problem,'' he said. ''And that is a threat that has to keep a lot of
people in the White House up at night.''

One senior official, asked Friday what could go wrong after the transfer,
immediately answered: ''Allawi could get killed. That would be disastrous.'' A
less dramatic risk, he said, is that ''his appeal may not stick'' as his
government has to answer for every delay in turning on the lights, pumping the
oil and distributing aid in Iraq.

But for Mr. Bush, the bigger risk at home may be one that his own defense
secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld, has hinted at in recent days. Using an analogy
that other members of the president's national security team have avoided, Mr.
Rumsfeld compared the insurgency to the Tet offensive, a battle in which the
North Vietnamese and Vietcong, he said, ended up ''winning psychologically.'' He
suggested that the insurgents in Iraq had studied history and were hoping to use
the 24-hour news cycle, in which every rocket-propelled grenade that hits an
American armored personnel carrier and every American death obliterates the news
of an Iraq that is struggling to its feet.

''Will it work?'' Mr. Rumsfeld said Sunday. ''I think not.''

Whether it works or not, it poses a huge risk for Mr. Bush. For while the United
States has stepped back from running Iraqi politics, it has not stepped back
from the responsibility for keeping the streets calm enough for Iraqi politics
to flourish.

''The loss of control makes the job even tougher,'' said Robert Orr, a Harvard
scholar and a member of a team of outside experts on post-conflict
reconstruction that Mr. Rumsfeld sent to Iraq last summer. ''We have the same
number of targets on the ground today as we did yesterday, but less control over
the politics. The reality is that we are as engaged in Iraq as we have ever
been.''

Mr. Bush is already arguing the opposite position, that the transfer is the
first step toward a gradual American pullback.

''Iraq's prime minister and president have told me that their goal is to
eventually take full responsibility for the security of their country,'' he said
Monday in Istanbul. ''And America wants Iraqi forces to take that role. Our
military will stay as long as the stability of Iraq requires, and only as long
as their presence is needed and requested by the Iraqi government.''

That argument will undoubtedly be repeated on the campaign trail. But Mr. Bush
begins a summer of hopscotching the country facing a nation of doubters: sixty
percent of the respondents to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll say the
war has not been worth the loss of life, up from 45 percent last August, as the
insurgency began. Suddenly, Mr. Bush is confronted with the need to prove to
Americans that there is an eventual way out, even at a moment when the Pentagon
is considering contingency plans for bolstering the force.

That is certainly not the political situation Mr. Bush envisioned, his aides
concede, when last July 2 he expressed confidence that the Americans could crush
the then nascent insurgency. ''There are some who feel like the conditions are
such that they can attack us there,'' he said at the time, adding: ''My answer
is, bring them on.''

In retrospect, Mr. Bush's challenge was uttered just as events were beginning to
spin out of control. Historians will be arguing for years about whether more
forces on the ground after the initial toppling of Saddam Hussein, or different
choices by the just-departed head of the American occupation, L. Paul Bremer
III, could have crushed the insurgency before it gained speed. But to Mr. Bush's
aides, the consequences are clear.

''There was no occupation until the insurgency created one,'' one of Mr. Bush's
senior advisers argued recently. ''Before then, if we went into a town it was
probably to rebuild a school. It was only in response to the insurgents that we
had to act like an army of occupation.''

The prison abuse scandal that began a few months later, many senior Republicans
close to the White House believe, was born of the initial efforts to get the
intelligence necessary to understand where the insurgents were coming from and
how to choke them off. The publication of the now infamous photographs of
prisoners being attacked by dogs and forced into sexually humiliating positions
only spread public antipathy for the occupiers.

With the early transfer timed, the White House said, to give Mr. Allawi the
chance to take office without the sound of car bombs going off, that formal
occupation has ended. Now Mr. Bush is staking his presidency, and history's
judgment, on the American experiment in Iraq, on the bet that Iraqis will feel
as if the occupation has really ended, and that together he and the new
government can avoid their own Tet.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: (White House photo, via Associated Press)(pg. A1)
 President Bush, with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, top, received the note
about Iraq from Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. He checked the time, then
spoke with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain. (Photographs by Larry
Downing/Reuters)(pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICS
(89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (71%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (71%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (66%); PRIME MINISTERS (66%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (65%); SUPREME COURTS (60%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Biological and Chemical Warfare  ; Atomic Weapons;
Public Opinion; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government;
United States Politics and Government; Presidents and Presidency (US)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (73%); TONY BLAIR (51%) David E
Sanger; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); TURKEY (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Middle East  ; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             482 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 75 words


An article in The Arts on Thursday about the Freedom Center, a planned cultural
attraction chosen for ground zero in Manhattan, included a name supplied by the
organizers erroneously on a list of historic figures whose political
imprisonment may be depicted in an exhibit. Susan B. Anthony was not held in a
prison cell; after her arrest for illegal voting in the 1872 presidential
election she was placed under the custody of a United States marshal.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HIJACKING (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%); ELECTIONS (86%); TERRORISM
(86%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (86%); CORRECTIONS (86%); MARSHALS (85%); PRISONS
(84%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (83%) Terrorism;
Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC); Freedom and Human
Rights

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             483 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reaffirming the Rule of Law

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 833 words


Part of the ''new normal'' that the Bush administration ushered in after Sept.
11 was a radically broader view of the government's power to detain people. The
administration claimed the right to hold foreign terrorism suspects in an
indefinite legal limbo in Guantanamo, and to designate American citizens as
''enemy combatants'' and hold them for years without access to lawyers.
Yesterday, the Supreme Court delivered a stinging rebuke to these policies. In a
pair of landmark decisions, the court made it clear that even during the war on
terror, the government must adhere to the rule of law.

The Guantanamo case was brought by 14 of the more than 600 detainees being held
at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The detainees insist that
they did not engage in combat or terrorism against the United States, but were
wrongly picked up in the fog of war in Afghanistan. The Bush administration
responded that, guilty or innocent, they have no right to be heard. In its view,
non-citizens held outside the United States cannot turn to American courts to
challenge their confinement. A federal district court and an appeals court both
agreed, and dismissed the lawsuit.

The Supreme Court reversed that decision on a 6-to-3 vote. The court rightly
looked beyond the legal fiction that the government relied on, that the base in
Guantanamo is not part of the United States. For more than 100 years, the court
observed, Guantanamo has been under America's ''complete jurisdiction and
control,'' and it will remain so for the foreseeable future. As a legal matter,
there is no difference between being held in Guantanamo and being held in the
United States. The court also noted that habeas corpus, a venerable doctrine
that allows prisoners to challenge their confinement, applies not to the
prisoner, but to the one doing the imprisoning -- in this case, the Defense
Department. By this logic, the location where the prisoner is being held should
not matter.

The court did not rule on the detainees' actual claims of being wrongly
confined. But it held that they have a right to have the claims heard in federal
court, and it sent the case back down to the district court with instructions to
start considering them. The ruling reaffirms a core principle of American law:
anyone behind bars has a right to challenge that imprisonment in court.

In a second case, the court ruled for Yaser Esam Hamdi, an American citizen who
has been designated an enemy combatant. The government says Mr. Hamdi was
captured by the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan in 2001, and he has been held
for more than two years in naval brigs in Virginia and South Carolina. The
government contended that Mr. Hamdi could be held indefinitely without access to
a lawyer, although it eventually relented and allowed him to consult with
counsel.

The Supreme Court's decision is fractured, but Justice Sandra Day O'Connor spoke
for a majority when she wrote that the conditions of Mr. Hamdi's confinement
were unacceptable. At the least, the court held, a citizen designated as an
enemy combatant must be given access to a lawyer, told the basis on which he
received the designation and accorded a fair opportunity to challenge it before
a neutral decision maker.

Yesterday's cases leave important questions unanswered. In the Guantanamo case,
the court is unclear about whether its ruling applies only to detainees held in
Guantanamo because it is effectively American territory, or whether it extends
to any non-citizen held outside the United States. Given the court's analysis of
the purpose and history of habeas corpus law, however, the decision should apply
to detainees both in Guantanamo and elsewhere.

In the enemy combatant case, the court is not specific about what kind of
hearing Mr. Hamdi should get. Justice O'Connor's opinion could be read as
allowing him to be brought before a military tribunal. But even the Bush
administration, when it announced that it would be using military tribunals,
made it clear that American citizens would not be tried before them. Putting
American citizens before military tribunals would be bad politics, as the
administration realized. It would also substantially diminish the level of due
process Americans can expect when they are accused of wrongdoing. It is
important that when Mr. Hamdi presents his case, he be allowed to do so in a
federal district court.

During World War II, the Supreme Court handed down one of its most infamous
decisions, affirming the government's power to put Japanese-Americans in
internment camps. Fortunately, this court appears to be mindful of the mistakes
of the past. ''It is during our most challenging and uncertain moments that our
nation's commitment to due process is most severely tested,'' Justice O'Connor
observed yesterday, ''and it is in those times that we must preserve our
commitment at home to the principles for which we fight abroad.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); RULE OF LAW (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); NAVIES (89%); MILITARY BASES (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); HABEAS CORPUS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (77%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(76%); JURISDICTION (76%); VERDICTS (76%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); APPEALS COURTS
(71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (66%) Terrorism; Editorials;
Decisions and Verdicts; Freedom and Human Rights; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); United States International Relations; Terrorism; United States Armament
and Defense; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush; Yaser Esam Hamdi; Jose (Abdullah Al-Muhajir)
Padilla

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             485 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

IRAQ WILL CHARGE HUSSEIN IN COURT ALONG WITH AIDES

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from Baghdad for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; TRANSITION IN IRAQ: SADDAM HUSSEIN;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 29


Iraq's interim government announced Tuesday that it would take legal, but not
physical, custody of Saddam Hussein and 11 of his top associates from the United
States on Wednesday.

The government will file charges against all 12 on Thursday in a special Iraqi
court set up to try members of the ousted government on charges of crimes
against humanity.

Under terms approved by President Bush, the men, including several of the most
notorious figures in Mr. Hussein's inner circle, will remain indefinitely under
American military guard at an undisclosed location in or near Baghdad.

But they will cease to be prisoners of war from the moment they are arraigned,
becoming criminal detainees with legal protections under Iraqi criminal
procedures, including access to legal counsel, that were previously denied.

Also on Tuesday, three marines were killed by a roadside bomb in southeastern
Baghdad, but there was no evidence of an overall surge in attacks since Iraq
formally resumed sovereignty on Monday. [Page A10.]

In claiming jurisdiction over Mr. Hussein and the others as the interim Iraqi
government's first major act, Prime Minister Iyad Allawi acknowledged that
American forces ''will continue to maintain physical custody'' until Iraq has a
prison system capable of ensuring that they remain unharmed and do not escape.

Sensitive to suggestions that his government's authority is constrained by its
reliance on American military power, however, he underlined that the arrangement
was ''at our request,'' not under American duress.

''We believe that to truly be in control of our affairs and our own future, we
must be in control of the people we believe most responsible for so much of the
suffering the Iraqi people endured over the past 35 years,'' Dr. Allawi said at
a news conference in the American-run international press center.

''More than a million Iraqis are missing as a result of events that occurred
during the former regime,'' he said in fluent English. ''Hundreds of thousands
of Iraqis of all religions and ethnic groups are believed to be buried in mass
graves. I know I speak for my fellow countrymen when I say I look forward to the
day when former regime leaders face justice, God willing.''

How soon the trials of the 12 will begin remained uncertain; Dr. Allawi said Mr.
Hussein's would not begin ''for a number of months.''

American and Iraqi lawyers involved in the process have said the prosecution of
Mr. Hussein would be better timed after other former leaders are tried, so that
emerging information can be used to build a case against the man ultimately
responsible for much of the killing.

Among Iraqis who lived through the repression under Mr. Hussein and who were
interviewed in Baghdad on Tuesday, there appeared to be broad support for the
dictator to be brought to trial, even in areas like Adhamiya that were Sunni
Muslim strongholds favored by the dictator.

But there were those who felt that trying him while the country was at war was
not wise. ''I hope the new government will postpone the trial until things
settle down,'' said Wamidh Hathiq, 25, a mobile phone salesman. ''They shouldn't
rush it.''

Some international legal rights groups have expressed doubts that a legal
process created by the Americans and controlled by Iraqis and Americans can
yield justice in a political climate as charged as Iraq's.

''Questions are being raised about the whole process,'' Hanny Megally, director
of the Middle East program at the International Center for Transitional Justice,
a New York-based group that assists war crimes prosecutions. ''The United States
is funding the court, conducting the investigations, sifting through the
evidence and developing prosecution strategy. While all this could be done with
good intentions, it all seems to be controlled by one entity.''

The list of the men to be placed under what Dr. Allawi called ''Iraqi legal
custody'' was issued by the Iraqi Special Tribunal, which was established in
December by the American occupation authority to try cases rising out of the
worst excesses of Mr. Hussein's rule.

In addition to the 66-year-old Mr. Hussein, they included a man synonymous among
Iraqis with some of his government's worst atrocities: Ali Hassan al-Majid,
known as ''Chemical Ali'' for his role in directing a poison gas attack on the
Kurdish town of Halabja in March 1988.

Others were Taha Yassin Ramadan, one of Mr. Hussein's two vice presidents, long
cited by international human rights groups for his role in the torture and
killing of tens of thousands of Iraqis; Tariq Aziz, a deputy prime minister who
conducted many of Iraq's international negotiations, especially in the prelude
to the Persian Gulf war in 1991; and Abid Hamid Mahmud al-Tikriti, a relative of
Mr. Hussein who oversaw his personal security.

Most of the 12 appear in the ''deck of cards'' the United States issued after
the invasion that pictured the 55 most-wanted Iraqi officials. Iraqi and
American officials declined to say why the 12 were chosen for transfer to Iraqi
jurisdiction.

One theory was that the most compelling evidence has been accumulated against
them. They may also be those viewed by most Iraqis as responsible for the most
heinous offenses, especially Mr. Hussein, Mr. Majid and Mr. Ramadan.

Another theory was that some of the men not being transferred have cooperated
with investigators and are thus viewed by the Americans as best kept beyond the
reach of legal counsel while the trials of the 12 are prepared. American
military commanders have said Mr. Hussein resorted early in his captivity to a
posture of defiance, and was offering little under interrogation but resolute
denials of any wrongdoing.

American officials hinted that on Thursday, at least some reporters and
cameramen might be allowed to attend his arraignment in a media pool, in what
may be his first semipublic appearance since his capture in December.

Dr. Allawi, keenly aware of the risks of being viewed as a pawn, had hinted in
recent days that he would act to distance himself from the Americans. Their
power will henceforth be exercised through the new American Embassy, which will
operate, for now, out of the same Republican Palace that was the headquarters
for the occupation.

Dr. Allawi, 58, a British-trained neurosurgeon who led an Iraqi exile group in
London after fleeing in 1971, has also signaled that he intends tough action on
the insurgency and other matters. At the news conference, he said: ''We would
like to show the world that the new Iraqi government means business, and wants
to stabilize Iraq. We want to put this bad history behind us.''

Iraqi polls have shown that most Iraqis favor reinstating the death penalty --
suspended last year by L. Paul Bremer III, then the American administrator here
-- especially for Mr. Hussein and the most brutal of his aides. Dr. Allawi said
his government was reviewing the issue.

But he also dwelled on the importance of fair trials. ''The accused who will
appear in front of an Iraqi court will be accorded rights that were denied by
the former regime,'' he said, referring to the right to appoint their own legal
counsel, free of charge if the defendants cannot afford them; the right ''not to
testify against themselves,'' and the right to remain silent.

One cause of unease among international legal experts has been the pervasive
role played by a team of several dozen American lawyers and investigators. They
were recently reformed into a new unit known as the Regime Crimes Liaison Office
and operate from the American Embassy.

But American legal experts in Baghdad said Tuesday that the work of those
investigators had been essential. ''The investigative infrastructure in Iraq has
been virtually nonexistent for decades,'' one said.

The new power alignment between the Iraqis and the Americans took formal shape
on Tuesday with a ceremony in the palace complex, at which John D. Negroponte,
formerly the American ambassador to the United Nations, presented his
credentials to the new Iraqi president, Ghazi al-Yawar.

Mr. Negroponte, who will lead a staff of some 1,700, arrived in Baghdad just as
Mr. Bremer prepared to depart Monday. Mr. Negroponte issued a statement saying:
''The way ahead presents many challenges, but the government and people of Iraq
have the courage and ability to succeed. The future is in their hands.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ambassador John D. Negroponte presented his credentials
yesterday to Iraq's president, Ghazi al-Yawar, left, and Foreign Minister
Hoshyar Zebari. (Pool photo by David Guttenfelder)(pg. A1)
The Iraqi flag, second from right, flew yesterday for the first time over the
First Cavalry's Second Battalion. (Photo by Nikola Solic/Reuters)
Saddam Hussein (Photo by Reuters)
Abid Hamid Mahmud al-Tikriti (Photo by Reuters)
Ali Hassan al-Majid (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)
Barzan al-Hassan al-Tikriti (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)
Tariq Aziz (Photo by Associated Press)
Taha Yassin Ramadan (Photo by Associated Press)
Sultan Hashim Ahmed (Photo by Associated Press)
Watban al-Hassan al-Tikriti (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)(pg.
A10)Chart/Photos: ''12 Iraqis to Be Tried''Prime Minister Iyad Allawi said
Saddam Hussein and the following 11 top Baathist officials would be taken into
Iraqi legal custody and charged and tried in Iraqi courts.Saddam Hussein --
President of Iraq from 1979 to 2003 and leader of the Baath Party.Abid Hamid
Mahmud al-Tikriti -- Secretary to Saddam Hussein and head of his personal
security force.Ali Hassan al-Majid -- Known as Chemical Ali for his role in
chemical weapons attacks against Kurds.Barzan al-Hassan al-Tikriti -- Saddam
Hussein's half brother, adivser and money manager.Tariq Aziz -- Deputy prime
minister and foreign minister. Led international negotiations on behalf of the
Hussein government.Taha Yassin Ramadan -- Vice president. Believed responsible
for the torture and killing of thousands of Iraqis.Sultan Hashim Ahmed --
Minister of defense.Watban al-Hassan al-Tikriti -- Saddam Hussein's half brother
and adviser.Muhammad Hamza al-Zubaydi -- Helped lead suppression of the 1991
Shiite rebellion. Member of Revolutionary Command Coucil.Aziz Salih al-Numan --
Commander of the Baath Party in Baghdad.Kamal Mustafa al-Tikriti -- Saddam
Hussein's half brother and a top adviser.Sabir Abdul Aziz al-Douri -- Governor
of Baghdad. Head of military intelligence during the 1991 Persian Gulf
war.(Sources by Associated Press
 United States Central Command)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); CHILD CUSTODY & SUPPORT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); LAWYERS (78%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (78%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (77%); JURISDICTION (77%); CORRECTIONS
(77%); POWS & MIAS (75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
BOMBINGS (74%); APPROVALS (71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (71%); PRISONS (70%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); TERRORISM
(68%); RELIGION (61%); ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS (50%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (83%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (71%); GEORGE W BUSH (69%) John F
Burns; George W (Pres) Bush; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Iyad (Prime Min) Allawi; Ali
Hassan Al- Majid; Taha Yassin Ramadan; Tariq Aziz; Abid Hamid Mahmud al- Tikriti

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (98%); GULF STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             492 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Roundup;
JUSTICES ALLOW POLICY OF SILENCE ON 9/11 DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1135 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


The Supreme Court on Monday turned down an appeal challenging the secrecy
surrounding the arrest and detention of hundreds of people, nearly all Muslim
men, in the weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

Without comment, the court let stand a ruling by a federal appeals court here
that had accepted the Bush administration's rationale for refusing to disclose
either the identities of those it arrested, most of whom have since been
deported for immigration violations unrelated to terrorism, or the circumstances
of the arrests.

A complete list of the names "would give terrorist organizations a composite
picture of the government investigation," a panel of the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said in a 2-to-1 ruling last June.
"The judiciary owes some measure of deference to the executive in cases
implicating national security," the majority said.

The dissenting judge, David S. Tatel, said the majority had "converted deference
into acquiescence" by accepting a categorical secrecy policy without requiring
the government to show why the names of those who had been cleared of terrorist
connections could not be made public. Of the nearly 1,000 people arrested, the
government eventually released the names of 129 against whom it brought criminal
charges.

The Supreme Court's action on Monday brought an end to one of the biggest court
cases related to the Sept. 11 attacks. Even though the justices gave no reason
for declining to take the appeal, the development was undoubtedly a welcome one
for the administration after several recent judicial setbacks.

Over the administration's opposition, the Supreme Court recently agreed to hear
appeals on behalf of 16 foreigners held at Guantanamo Bay and an American
citizen, Yaser Esam Hamdi, confined to a naval brig in South Carolina, all
designated "enemy combatants" by the government.

The case the court turned down on Monday had in fact been the occasion for one
of those judicial setbacks when a federal district judge, Gladys Kessler, ruled
in August 2002 in response to a Freedom of Information Act suit brought by a
coalition of civil liberties groups that the government had to disclose most of
the names. This was the ruling that the appeals court overturned nearly a year
later.

The lawsuit filed in October 2001 by the 22-member coalition, which included the
Center for National Security Studies, the American Civil Liberties Union,
Amnesty International USA and the Council of American Islamic Relations, cited
the Freedom of Information Act as well as the First Amendment. The group sought
the names of the people and those of the lawyers representing them, the dates
and circumstances of each arrest, any criminal charges filed and the basis for
keeping the records of each case under seal.

In response to the lawsuit, the government invoked an exemption provided by the
Freedom of Information Act for "law enforcement records," arguing that the
plaintiffs were seeking investigatory material that would not be made available
even in routine cases. The plaintiffs argued that to the contrary, much of the
information they wanted was routinely available on police blotters and was
necessary for an informed public evaluation of the administration's policies.

In their Supreme Court appeal, Center for National Security Studies v. United
States Department of Justice, No. 03-472, the plaintiffs said that "times of
crisis and fear demand vigilance from citizens and their courts to assure that
the countermeasures adopted by the executive are consistent with our fundamental
values and constitutional principles." The brief said the court should grant
review "to ensure that even after Sept. 11, the judiciary will continue to
fulfill its constitutional and statutory obligation to provide meaningful review
of the exercise of executive power."

Kate Martin, director of the Center for National Security Studies, said in an
interview Monday that the issues in the case remained important despite the
release of most of those who had been arrested. Ms. Martin said the appeals
court had given its blessing to "a secrecy regime in which arrests are off the
public docket, people are held in secret, deported in secret, and two and a half
years later, we still don't know the names."

The Supreme Court declined last year to hear a challenge to the closed-door
deportation hearings that the government used for many of the same people. The
administration at the time made a similar argument, that information about whom
the government had selected for deportation could provide a "mosaic" that would
reveal to watching terrorists what investigators knew and did not know.

Attorney General John Ashcroft said Monday that he was "pleased that the court
let stand a decision that clearly outlined the danger of giving terrorists a
virtual road map to our investigation that could have allowed them to chart a
potentially deadly detour around our efforts."

These were among the other developments at the court:

Pledge of Allegiance

The court set an argument date of March 24 for one of the term's most closely
watched cases, on the constitutionality of the recitation of the Pledge of
Allegiance in public school classrooms. The court also granted permission to
Sandra L. Banning, the mother of the 9-year-old child at the center of the case,
to file a brief as a "friend of the court" supporting the pledge.

The girl's father, Michael A. Newdow, an atheist, brought the lawsuit arguing
that the inclusion of the phrase "under God" in the pledge harmed his daughter
and, derivatively, himself. A lawyer, he will argue his own case, Elk Grove
Unified School District v. Newdow, No. 02-1624.

Mr. Newdow refused to allow Ms. Banning, whom he never married, to file her own
brief, necessitating a request by her lawyer, Kenneth W. Starr, to the court for
permission. In the brief, she argued that as a "committed Christian" and the
custodial parent, she wanted her daughter to recite the pledge and objected to
Mr. Newdow's pursuit through this case of "his own private agenda of imposing
certain beliefs on the nation's schoolchildren."

Junk Faxes

Without comment, the court rejected a First Amendment challenge to a 1991
federal law that prohibits the transmission of unsolicited commercial
advertisements over fax machines, or "junk faxes."

The case, Fax.Com Inc. v. Missouri, No. 03-507, grew out of a case brought by
the Missouri attorney general's office charging two companies with violating the
law, the Telephone Consumer Protection Act. After the Federal District Court in
St. Louis declared the law unconstitutional, the federal government joined
Missouri in defending it. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the
Eighth Circuit upheld the law as an acceptable regulation of commercial speech.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (89%); LITIGATION (89%); APPEALS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(78%); JUDGES (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); DEPORTATION
(78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); IMMIGRATION
(76%); LAWYERS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); RELIGION (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: DAVID S TATEL (79%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (53%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             495 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hague Journal;
Another Serb Defendant Stays on His Best Bad Behavior

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Slobodan Milosevic is being upstaged. For the past two years, the former
Yugoslav president has noisily challenged the international tribunal that is
trying him for war crimes, by pontificating, denigrating his judges and
dismissing his trial as a mere anti-Serb farce.

But a fellow Serb, the ultranationalist politician and warlord Vojislav Seselj,
is now outdoing the former strongman in insolence. Taken together, their
behavior illustrates some of the difficulties this court faces in doing its
work. Frustratingly slow at times, it deals with Croat, Muslim and Serbian
defendants accused of atrocities in the 1990's wars that broke up Yugoslavia.

Mr. Seselj (pronounced SHESH-el), who turned himself in a year ago, has sneered
that the United Nations court is just an "American tool against Serbs," which he
"will blast to pieces." Known in Serbia for his rabble-rousing speeches and foul
language, he has now brought those habits to The Hague.

He has equated one judge with the Nazis and requested that all three of his
judges be disqualified. He has accused the tribunal registrar of financial
crimes, fired off motions that amount to insulting diatribes, and managed to
outwit his prison guards -- and histrial has not even begun.

Some court officials wonder how a proper and fair trial can be held of such an
obstructionist defendant. "Other accused have their ways of being difficult,"
said Jim Landale, the tribunal spokesman, "but we have not seen such extreme
verbal assaults before."

Like Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Seselj, 49, is conducting his own defense, which allows
him to hold the floor in court, even now at preparatory hearings for the trial
that may begin later this year.

Mr. Seselj, a former Sarajevo University lecturer who founded an
ultranationalist political party and his own armed militia, faces charges of
crimes against humanity and war crimes in Bosnia and Croatia in the 1990's.

His indictment says that he ordered persecutions, plunder and killings, and that
he is accountable for the atrocities perpetrated by his gang, known as Seselj's
Men. Prosecutors and witnesses contend that he often directed the fighters as
they terrorized, robbed and killed non-Serbian civilians.

Mr. Seselj's latest move that aggravated court officials came in December, when
he managed to use the jail telephone to campaign for his Radical Party in the
parliamentary elections of Serbia. Mr. Milosevic did the same for his Socialist
Party. When the tribunal discovered they were broadcasting on Belgrade radio, it
imposed a temporary ban on all calls except to family and lawyers.

Mr. Milosevic reportedly respected the ban, a court official said, but Mr.
Seselj gave another interview on Dec. 25 from a public phone near his cell. He
told his listeners in Belgrade that he was able to trick his guards because "the
fools are all busy celebrating Christmas."

Mr. Seselj's party won almost 28 percent of the vote, making it the largest
political force in the country. He tried to deliver a victory speech by
telephone until his guards cut him off.

The telephone episode points up the challenge of trying to stop these two
seasoned politicians from exercising their influence from their cells. Court
officials are even more concerned about the plans of the two to use their trials
as political platforms. Mr. Milosevic, for example, is entitled to hold the
floor for many months once his defense begins in May.

Proceedings are regularly broadcast to the Balkans, and while Mr. Milosevic's
influence at home has waned, his past defiance and now Mr. Seselj's courtroom
histrionics draw applause or amusement in Serbia.

One such story involves a computer, which the court gave Mr. Seselj to try to
stop him from filing his lengthy motions scribbled by hand. He announced to his
judges that he would not touch this laptop because, he said with evident
sarcasm, he did not want to get electric shocks.

During one session, he requested that the judges change their red-and-black
courtroom robes because they caused him deep psychological problems. He said
they reminded him of the Roman Catholic Inquisition.

In court, the judges have shrugged off or played down most of his antics,
calling them "frivolous." But behind the scenes, Mr. Seselj has sometimes
provoked outrage, particularly with his motion demanding that his three judges
be disqualified. Wolfgang Schomburg, the presiding judge, he said, had to step
down because he was from Germany, a country hostile to Serbs.

"Whenever I see Wolfgang Schomburg, I remember Auschwitz, Mauthausen and
Jasenovac," Mr. Seselj wrote, referring to Nazi concentration camps. "The smell
of crematoriums and gas chambers comes into the Hague courtroom with him." As
for the two other judges, he wrote, they were "ardent and zealous Catholics,"
which meant they belonged to "one of the most dangerous international criminal
organizations," whose priests, he claimed, had taken part in mass killings of
Serbs.

The court dismissed his written outburst as ill-founded and frivolous, but
warned that it might decide to restrict his motions in the future.
"Unspeakable," said one judge who is not part of this case. But, he said, to
hold Mr. Seselj in contempt of court would probably be counterproductive.

Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch who follows the tribunal, said
the repugnant language served to illustrate the kind of racism and hatred with
which Serb politicians incited their public for years and which "are at the core
of much of the violence" in the former Yugoslavia.

In a highly unusual move, the court has now imposed a standby counsel on Mr.
Seselj to avoid being held hostage by his temper. It ruled that if his conduct
becomes too disruptive, he will be removed from the courtroom and the standby
counsel will take over.

Mr. Seselj retorted that he would have nothing to do with the "alleged standby
counsel." Further, he announced, he would sue the court for violating his
rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vojislav Seselj, shown last year in The Hague, is conducting
his own defense against charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
(Photo by Getty Images); Deputies of the Radical Party attended the Serbian
Assembly's inaugural session last week in Belgrade wearing T-shirts showing the
party's founder, Vojislav Seselj, and the inscription "Seselj: Serb Hero."
(Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (86%); ELECTIONS
(78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); POLITICS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); WITNESSES
(77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (73%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (73%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (71%);
PRISONS (71%); CHRISTMAS (67%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (67%); ROBBERY (62%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); CROATIA
(92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Brown U. to Examine Debt to Slave Trade

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1336 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I.,


When Ruth J. Simmons became the president of Brown University nearly three years
ago, one striking fact could not be overlooked.

A great-granddaughter of slaves, Dr. Simmons was the first African-American
president of an Ivy League university. But the 240-year-old university she was
chosen to lead had early links to slavery, with major benefactors and officers
of it having owned and traded slaves.

''It certainly didn't escape me, my own past in relationship to that,'' Dr.
Simmons said in a telephone interview in early March. ''I sit here in my office
beneath the portrait of people who lived at a different time and who saw the
ownership of people in a different way. You can't sit in an office and face that
every day unless you really want to know, unless you really want to understand
this dichotomy.''

Now, Dr. Simmons, whose office is in a building constructed by laborers who
included slaves, has directed Brown to start what its officials say is an
unprecedented undertaking for a university: an exploration of reparations for
slavery and specifically whether Brown should pay reparations or otherwise make
amends for its past.

Dr. Simmons has appointed a Committee on Slavery and Justice, which will spend
two years investigating Brown's historic ties to slavery; arrange seminars,
courses and research projects examining the moral, legal and economic
complexities of reparations and other means of redressing wrongs; and recommend
whether and how the university should take responsibility for its connection to
slavery.

Dr. Simmons, one of 12 children of an East Texas tenant farmer and a house
cleaner, said she was motivated by a sense that the multifaceted subject of
reparations had too often been reduced to simplistic and superficial squabbles.

''How does one repair a kind of social breach in human rights so that people are
not just coming back to it periodically and demanding apologies,'' she said,
''so that society learns from it, acknowledges what has taken place and then
moves on. What I'm trying to do, you see, in a country that wants to move on,
I'm trying to understand as a descendant of slaves how to feel good about moving
on.''

Dr. Simmons does not believe that her history will sway the inquiry. ''I don't
think there can be a person with a better background for dealing with this issue
than me,'' she said. ''If I have something to teach our students, if I have
something to offer Brown, it's the fact that I am a descendant of slaves.''

Both Dr. Simmons and the chairman of the committee, James T. Campbell, a history
professor at Brown, said the effort would be wide ranging and thorough,
encouraging all points of view.

''Everyone in a university is always being accused of being 18 miles to the left
of the country,'' said Dr. Campbell, who specializes in American,
African-American and African history, but ''there are people on this committee
who think reparations is the stupidest idea ever.''

Dr. Campbell, who said he had conflicting feelings about reparations, said the
committee was expecting criticism from both the right and the left.

''You're going to have those that will hear the very word reparations and start
blustering that this is just one more way that blacks are asking for a
government handout,'' he said. ''And then you are going have those that say the
university is just trying to whitewash things. Our hope is to carve out as large
a middle as possible.''

The issue of reparations has caused friction at Brown before, and at other
northern universities built with the investments of slave traders. In March
2001, the student newspaper, The Brown Daily Herald, printed a full-page
advertisement listing ''Ten Reasons Why Reparations for Slavery is a Bad Idea
And Racist Too.'' The advertisement, produced by David Horowitz, a conservative
writer, argued that slavery happened so long ago and was ended by white
Christians, and said black Americans should be grateful for their prosperity and
freedom in the United States.

The advertisement, also run by a handful of newspapers at other colleges, caused
a particular uproar at Brown. Student protesters dumped the newspapers in the
trash, formed human chains and demanded the paper pay ''reparations'' by
donating its advertising fee or giving free advertising space to proponents of
reparations. The paper defended itself on the grounds of free speech, and in Dr.
Simmons's first speech to students after taking office that summer, she stressed
her support for the free expression of unpopular opinions.

And in 2002, when nine lawsuits seeking reparations were filed in New York, New
Jersey and other states against FleetBoston, Aetna, J. P. Morgan Chase, and
other companies, lawyers involved in the cases said Brown, Yale and Harvard Law
School were likely defendants in future suits. So far, rulings have gone against
the plaintiffs.

Brown started as Rhode Island College. Its founder, the Rev. James Manning,
freed his only slave, but accepted donations from slave owners and traders,
including the Brown family of Providence.

Four Brown brothers, John, Joseph, Moses and Nicholas, were active benefactors.
John, a treasurer of the college, was a slave trader, while Moses freed his
slaves and became a Quaker and an abolitionist. Moses was supported by Nicholas
and Nicholas's son, Nicholas Jr., who became the university's namesake.

Moses pressed for John to be the first Rhode Islander prosecuted under the
federal Slave Trade Act of 1794, which barred American ports from outfitting
slave-trade ships. John was fined.

Dr. Campbell pointed out that even Moses's role was complicated because he ran a
textile factory that used cotton grown with slave labor. In addition, records
suggest that a Brown family company was involved in building University Hall,
which houses Dr. Simmons's office, and that the labor crew included at least two
slaves.

Dr. Campbell said that the committee included experts on South Africa, the
Holocaust and the internment of Japanese Americans by the United States in World
War II, and that the panel would look at these and other examples of how
societies dealt with historical injustice.

He said that if the committee did recommend that Brown make reparations, several
remedies might be considered, for example, providing scholarships or helping
African students attend Brown.

Two Brown professors not on the panel did not object to studying reparations but
expressed caution.

''I think it's very important that this does not degenerate into a bunch of
people congratulating themselves for thinking slavery is bad,'' said Felicia
Nimue Ackerman, a philosophy professor and self-described liberal.

John E. Savage, a computer science professor who says he is conservative on some
issues, said: ''I can't see the university as a private institution making
reparations to anyone. You'd have to identify who the victims were and have to
assess what Brown's culpability would be with respect to those victims.''

Professor Savage added that even now ''there are individuals who commit crimes
and before they are discovered they give money to universities,'' asking,
''Should there be reparations made by those universities who took those gifts?''

At least one committee member, James Patterson, an emeritus professor of
history, said political realities made him doubt that reparations on a national
scale ''has any chance at all.'' Professor Patterson said he had ''seen no
evidence'' that Brown should be held accountable, saying that ''Brown, like a
great many other people in the late 18th century, was indirectly a beneficiary
on a very very small scale of the fact that slavery was a source of wealth in
this country.''

Dr. Simmons said she would not reveal her opinion on reparations so as not to
influence the committee.

''Here's the one thing I'll say,'' she said. ''If the committee comes back and
says, 'Oh it's been lovely and we've learned a lot,' but there's nothing in
particular that they think Brown can do or should do, I will be very
disappointed.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ruth J. Simmons in her office at Brown University last week in a
building constructed by laborers who included slaves. (Photo by Robert Spencer
for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HISTORY (78%); GRANDCHILDREN (78%); COLLEGES &
UNIVERSITIES (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); TEACHING & TEACHERS
(72%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: BROWN UNIVERSITY (95%)

CITY: PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (79%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             528 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

May I See Your ID?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 753 words


Someday we'll look back with shame at the infringements of civil liberties in
the last few years.

There's been a broad pattern of injustice to individuals (mostly Muslims) in the
name of protecting security for the rest of us. Think of the detention of more
than 1,200 Muslim immigrants in the U.S., the jailing of children in an
extralegal zone in Guantanamo, and the unending imprisonment, without access to
lawyers, of ''enemy combatants,'' even when they are American citizens.

But that ground has been well poked over. For me, the tougher question is
whether there are some areas where we should be more aggressive about
sacrificing our liberties. In fact, I think there are two where we could
significantly increase our security with a negligible cost in freedom.

First, we should adopt a national ID card. Surprisingly, this is anathema to
many conservatives. If the right is willing to imprison people indefinitely and
send young people off to die in Iraq in the name of security, then why is it
unthinkable to standardize driver's licenses into a national ID?

More than 100 nations have some kind of national ID card. And the reality is
that we're already moving toward a government ID system -- using driver's
licenses and Social Security numbers to prove who we are -- but they neither
protect our privacy nor stop terrorists. Instead, they simply promote identity
theft.

At least seven of the Sept. 11 hijackers, some living in Maryland hotels,
managed to get Virginia ID cards or driver's licenses, which can be used as
identification when boarding planes. Americans routinely travel to and from
Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean with just a driver's license.

Some U.S. officials privately fret that security may depend on a harried
immigration officer in Maine who is handed a forged Guam or North Dakota
driver's license. One undercover federal study underscored the vulnerability
last year by using off-the-shelf materials to forge documents that were then
used to get driver's licenses in seven states and the District of Columbia. The
forgeries worked in each place attempted.

So why not plug this hole with a standardized, hard-to-forge national ID
card/driver's license that would have a photo, a fingerprint and a bar code that
could be swiped to check whether the person is, for example, a terror suspect
who should not be allowed onto a plane? We could simultaneously reduce identity
theft and make life tougher for terrorists.

The other area where I'd like to see a tougher approach has to do with
''cookbooks'' to make anthrax, sarin and other chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons. Over the last few years, I've collected a horrifying set of booklets,
typically sold at gun shows or on the Internet, detailing how to make mustard
gas, VX, anthrax or ''home-brew nerve gas.''

''One of the greatest feelings in the world is knowing you have the technology
to wipe out your whole neighborhood,'' one booklet declares.

Another book says: ''Nerve gases have been called 'the poor man's atom bomb,'
with good reason. They make the World War I gases look like kid's stuff. I'm
sure you'll be surprised how easy to make and use these little gems are.'' It
offers advice on how to distribute the nerve gas to devastate a city, ''using
one or more ultralight aircraft.''

In fact, biological and chemical weapons are not quite that easy to make or use.
But a cult or terrorist group, particularly if a member had a background in
chemistry, could make sarin, just as the Aum Shinrikyo cult in Japan did before
releasing it in the Tokyo subways in 1995.

Sure, I cherish the First Amendment. But remember what Alexander Bickel, the
eminent First Amendment scholar, told the Supreme Court when he argued on behalf
of this newspaper in the Pentagon Papers case. Pressed by the justices on
whether publication could be blocked if 100 Americans would certainly die as a
result, he reluctantly agreed: ''I am afraid that my inclinations to humanity
overcome the somewhat more abstract devotion to the First Amendment.''

W.M.D. cookbooks present such an exceptional situation. They have as little
free-speech value as child pornography, and they are more dangerous. We have
been largely spared chemical and biological attacks because the knowledge needed
to make effective weapons hasn't been easy to get. Now in these cookbooks we're
seeing ''information proliferation'' that empowers terrorists.

In these exceptional circumstances, we are -- I hate to admit it -- better off
banning books.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); LICENSES & PERMITS (89%); DRIVERS LICENSES
(89%); IDENTITY THEFT (87%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (86%); FRAUD &
FINANCIAL CRIME (86%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); RELIGION (77%); CONSERVATISM
(77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); IMMIGRATION (71%);
FINGERPRINTING (69%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%); ANTHRAX (69%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (69%); COUNTERFEITING (69%); HIJACKING (69%); NON FICTION
LITERATURE (69%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (67%); HOTELS & MOTELS (64%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(64%); MILITARY WEAPONS (60%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Biological
and Chemical Warfare; Security and Warning Systems; Identification Devices

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NORTH DAKOTA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA
(74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (79%); CANADA (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%);
NORTH AMERICA (79%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             530 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Official Killed as Strife Grows in Afghanistan

BYLINE: By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, March 21


Afghanistan's minister for civil aviation, the son of one of the country's most
powerful warlords, was killed Sunday as fighting broke out in Herat. The
violence was some of the worst in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban more
than two years ago.

While accounts were conflicting over what set off the fighting, officials in
Herat in western Afghanistan said it began after a failed assassination attempt
against the warlord Ismail Khan, who is also the provincial governor.

Mr. Khan's son, Mir Wais Sadeq, the minister of civil aviation for the central
government, was killed as he led an advance on the headquarters of a government
commander whom he blamed for the assault on his father, said Herat's deputy
intelligence chief, Abdul Wahid Tawakali.

The Pashto service of the British Broadcasting Corporation said the police,
security and counternarcotics chiefs of Herat had also been killed, and the
intelligence chief had been wounded, after seven rocket-propelled grenades were
fired at Mr. Sadeq's convoy. Officials reached by telephone in Herat, however,
said the police chief had not been killed.

Troops loyal to Mr. Khan surrounded the home and headquarters of the commander
they deemed responsible for the attack, Zaher Naibzadah, and his brigade on
Sunday night, and fighting was continuing. Reports that as many as 100 people
had been killed were unconfirmed.

''There was heavy fighting earlier -- it is now reported to be sporadic,'' said
Omar Samad, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry.

Occurring as Afghanistan is struggling to hold elections this summer, the
violence underscores how fragile the country's stability remains after two
decades of war. Mr. Sadeq is the second civil aviation and tourism minister, and
the third government minister, to be killed since the interim administration of
President Hamid Karzai interim administration took office in December 2001.

Abdul Rahman, an aviation and tourism minister, was killed in Kabul in February
2002. Hajji Qadeer, a vice president and minister of public works, was also
killed that year.

The American Embassy released a statement on Sunday night saying that ''Afghans
must not let the success of the last two years be put in jeopardy by this
incident.'' The embassy said it believed that the clash had begun with a
''traffic incident,'' and said that its Provincial Reconstruction Team, a mix of
civilian and military personnel based in Herat, had evacuated the German
diplomatic staff from its office to the team's site.

Herat, which is about 75 miles from the Iranian border, has been largely
peaceful, not least because Mr. Khan, with a large private army and extensive
intelligence network, has kept tight control over dissidents and potential
enemies.

His firm hold on power and unwillingness to permit free political activity have
been seen in Kabul as obstacles to free and fair elections, and his refusal to
submit fully to the rule of the central government has been viewed as a barrier
to rebuilding.

Attempts had been under way in recent days to dislodge him from his seat of
power, Afghan officials said in interviews. Mr. Khan was in Kabul this week and
met several times with Mr. Karzai to discuss Mr. Khan's future, and to resolve a
lingering dispute over whether Herat was fully sharing with the central
government the customs revenues from its lucrative border crossings with Iran.

Several senior Afghan officials have said recently that they were considering
moving Mr. Khan to another province. Zalmay Khalilzad, the American ambassador
here, said Saturday that he, too, had recently met with Mr. Khan and that
offering him a job with the central government was also being considered.

Until last year, Mr. Khan was governor and corps commander in Herat. To reduce
his power, the central government insisted that he give up one of the posts, and
he retained the governorship. Mr. Samad said Mr. Naibzadah had been appointed
corps commander by the central government six or seven months ago, although
other accounts said he was only a brigade commander.

Mr. Khan was a famous and feared commander whose resistance to the Soviet
invasion brought the Soviets' wrath to Herat, but made him a legend to its
people. He had been governor in Herat before the Taliban took the city in 1995,
was imprisoned by them, and then escaped from prison and took refuge in Iran.

He returned in triumph -- with the help of Mr. Naibzadah -- in November 2001,
and proclaimed himself emir, along with governor and corps commander, in Herat.
Both men are members of Jamaat-e-Islami, a hard-line religious party.

To the chagrin of many residents of Herat, a historically liberal city, he had
upon his return imposed a rigid form of religious conservatism, in which women
were discouraged from working and vice monitors controlled the streets.

His son was brought into a cabinet meant to be inclusive of all of Afghanistan's
factions and ethnic groups. They are ethnic Tajiks.

On Sunday, Mr. Khan was in a Herat park, the Bagh-e-Melat, when men opened fire
with Kalashnikov rifles about 5:30 p.m., said Mr. Tawakali, the deputy
intelligence chief.

Some men were detained and apparently implicated Mr. Naibzadah. ''He is
responsible,'' Mr. Tawakali said. As Mr. Sadeq, the minister, and others headed
to the commander's headquarters, they came under attack. Mr. Tawakali said that
Mr. Khan had not been injured -- and that Mr. Khan was leading his forces in
battle tonight.

Mr. Samad said the Afghan defense minister, Marshal Fahim, and Interior Minister
Ali Jalali, would lead a delegation to Herat to ensure that a cease-fire was in
place, and to attend Mr. Sadeq's funeral. He said Afghan National Army
reinforcements would be sent to keep the peace and arrest those responsible.

A spokesman for Mr. Karzai said the president was shocked, and expressed his
condolences to Mr. Khan.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ismail Khan, a provincial governor, survived an attack
yesterday. (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL AVIATION (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (89%); ARMED
FORCES (88%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (86%); CULTURE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); GOVERNMENT TOURIST OFFICES (78%); ARMIES (76%); POLICE FORCES
(76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); ASSASSINATION (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%);
POLITICS (69%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (68%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (65%) Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Elections

COMPANY: BRITISH BROADCASTING CORP (69%)

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (59%) Amy Waldman; Ismail Khan; Mir Wais Sadeq

CITY: HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Herat (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             548 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 7, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqis Meet With War Crimes Trial Experts

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
JUSTICE

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, April 2


Ten Iraqi judges and prosecutors preparing to try Saddam Hussein and members of
his government have quietly met here with veterans of international war crimes
tribunals to draw on their experience of judging atrocities in the Balkans,
Sierra Leone and Rwanda, according to the Iraqis and other participants.

Interviews with court officials based here and with Iraqi participants in the
meetings, held late last month, outline some of the Iraqis' deepest concerns and
their state of readiness.

The Iraqis said trials were not likely to start until early next year and
emphasized that Mr. Hussein would not be the first to be tried.

The Iraqis were led by Salem Chalabi, the coordinator of the tribunal for Iraqi
war crimes, who is a nephew of Ahmad Chalabi, the leader of the Iraqi National
Congress.

Salem Chalabi said the discussions included the need for security for staff and
witnesses, modern court equipment, careful handling of evidence, and an
effective defense for the accused, among many other issues.

The Iraqis also focused on the drawn-out trial of the grandstanding former
Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, the first deposed head of state to be
tried before an international court.

Because Mr. Milosevic defends himself, he is able to hold the floor for long
periods as he cross-examines witnesses. He often makes statements disguised as
questions and uses the court as a political podium from which to encourage
nationalist Serbs.

''There was a discussion what effect a Saddam trial could have on the Arab
street,'' one participant said.

The Iraqis are determined to keep Mr. Hussein on a far tighter leash,
participants in the meetings said.

Mr. Chalabi said that under Iraqi law, no one, not even Mr. Hussein, could
defend himself unless he is a lawyer.

In Amsterdam, the Iraqis met with members of the international courts dealing
with Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, East Timor and Sierra Leone. In The Hague,
they visited the new International Criminal Court, which Washington opposes, and
the Yugoslav tribunal.

''It was all extremely useful,'' said Mr. Chalabi, who has practiced law in a
London firm.

''Seeing the software and the monitors recording testimony in the courtrooms was
an extremely powerful message for our judges,'' he said of the Yugoslav
tribunal. ''It showed them how Iraq is lagging behind.''

The meetings, which lasted three days, also underlined the complexities and
contradictions of finding international help to organize the Iraqi tribunal,
when the process so far has been mainly controlled by the United States.

''Iraqis feel quite strongly that they want the international input to be
broad-based, not just American,'' said Neil Kritz, a director of the United
States Institute of Peace in Washington. ''We want to ensure that happens.'' But
it was his federally financed group that organized and paid for the trip, and he
accompanied the Iraqis.

In contrast to the United Nations, which has been cautious about being drawn
into a process in which it has no say, Washington has been deeply involved in
creating the tribunal, helping to draft statutes and providing staff, funds and
expertise.

But the United States has not held or encouraged the kind of open, international
meetings that accompanied the creation of other tribunals. ''It's all happening
behind closed doors,'' said Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch.
''It's almost clandestine.''

Meanwhile, some governments in Europe, including Britain, where there is no
death penalty, have said they will have problems cooperating in trials that
could lead to capital punishment.

Further, Mr. Chalabi said that unlike other international tribunals, judges will
not be from a variety of nations. ''We will have only Iraqi judges; that's a big
political issue in Iraq,'' he said, speaking by telephone after returning to
Baghdad. ''The judges will get special training to meet international
standards.''

The American involvement will intensify shortly. A small team from the Justice
Department has already gone to Iraq. Investigators and prosecutors will follow
this month to establish the tribunal, work out procedural rules, organize
evidence and charges against Mr. Hussein and his aides, administration officials
said.

Mr. Chalabi cited two main reasons Mr. Hussein will not be tried first: wrinkles
need to be ironed out before the tribunal ''gets put under the scrutiny of a
trial like Saddam's'' and as many as 12 charges may be brought against him, for
which evidence must be ready for trial.

United States officials have repeatedly cited the Sierra Leone court as a model
for future war crimes prosecutions, rather than the costly and large Rwandan and
Yugoslav tribunals created by the United Nations a decade ago. Its budget is
controlled by the United States and other donor countries; it has a three-year
mandate; and it aims to try only the 15 to 20 defendants deemed most responsible
for atrocities during the latter part of Sierra Leone civil war.

But the Iraqis may not be satisfied with a small number of trials. ''The U.S.
government was suggesting trying the 20 top cases, and Iraqis are talking of
hundreds, even thousands,'' Mr. Chalabi said. ''I rather think it will be closer
to 200 people, a good portion of which can be dealt with through
plea-bargaining.''

A primary concern will be security. At the time of their creation, the Yugoslav
and Rwandan conflicts were continuing, so the tribunals were set up outside the
country. But the Iraqi tribunal will remain in Iraq, and continuing violence may
hamper its operation.

In the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, for example, numerous witnesses were
threatened and refused to appear before the tribunals. At times, defense lawyers
have leaked the names of some witnesses who testified secretly or under assumed
names.

The unstable and polarized climate in Iraq may also cause deeper problems.
Antonio Cassese, the first president of the Yugoslav tribunal, said he feared
that the climate for a fair trial may not yet exist. But both Iraqi and American
officials have said early trials inside Iraq must be a part of the transition
and stabilization process.

Defense is another serious concern. The Yugoslav and Rwandan tribunals have seen
their work affected by poorly trained and sometimes corrupt defense lawyers
whose practices included slowing the proceedings in order to bill the United
Nations for more work or splitting their fees with defendants.

Like the courts of Rwanda and Yugoslavia, Iraq's will face vast amounts of
evidence, stretching over many years. Iraqis were told that the way evidence was
stored was crucial. The Yugoslav tribunal had to reorganize its databases and
catalogs three times as new evidence and new technology became available.

''Criminal trials and justice after armed conflict have now almost become a
given,'' said Sam Muller, a senior official at the newly created International
Criminal Court in The Hague who attended the talks. ''The practice of it is much
more difficult than is often believed.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The trial of Saddam Hussein, above, has raised concerns being
addressed by a group of Iraqis led by Salem Chalabi, below. (Photo by Reuters)
 (Photo by Ashley Gilbertson/Aurora)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
WITNESSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TESTIMONY (89%); JUDGES
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); DEPOSITIONS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); POLITICS (72%) Terrorism; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government  ; Security and
Warning Systems

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Marlise Simons; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Salem
Chalabi

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             555 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Local Officers Join Search For Illegal Immigrants

BYLINE: By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1217 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., April 9


Every workday morning, before the sun creeps above the trees, State Trooper
Anthony Birmingham goes on patrol with his new law enforcement bible, the
''Immigration Law Handbook,'' in his Ford Crown Victoria.

For seven and a half years, he has watched sleepy state roads and bustling
highways for speeding commuters and careless drivers. Now he also serves as a
foot soldier in the domestic war on terrorism, one of a small but growing number
of police officers empowered by the Department of Homeland Security to arrest
and detain illegal immigrants.

Over the past six months, Trooper Birmingham and 20 others on the state force
have arrested 106 illegal immigrants, including a Mexican man driving 90 miles
per hour and a Mexican mother of two who presented invalid documents while
applying for a driver's license. In the past, such immigrants were often given
traffic tickets or warnings and sent on their way. These days, they might be
arrested by the state police -- even if they have not broken a state law -- and
handed over to federal authorities for deportation.

''Before, the only thing we could do was issue a traffic citation and let them
go,'' Trooper Birmingham said as he cruised along State Road 9. ''It's different
now.''

Alabama is the epicenter of a widening effort by the Department of Homeland
Security to encourage states and localities to help enforce immigration laws in
the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.

Colorado, Idaho and Virginia are considering following the examples of Alabama,
which began its partnership with the Department of Homeland Security in
September, and Florida, which signed an agreement with federal officials in
2002. In Los Angeles County, the sheriff's office is close to an agreement to
allow booking officers to identify illegal immigrants in county jails for
deportation.

These and other efforts to involve law enforcement agencies in immigration
matters have stirred a furor among both advocates for immigrants and police
chiefs in Boston, Houston, several communities in California and around the
country. They warn that these arrangements may make immigrants wary of
cooperating with the police or reporting crime and could lead to racial
profiling, at the expense even of people in the country legally.

Many immigration violations, like overstaying a visa, are civil infractions, not
criminal offenses typically handled by the police. At least 30 jurisdictions bar
their officers from enforcing immigration laws, Congressional researchers say,
but others are joining in.

Homeland Security officials, understaffed and eager for assistance, are making
it easier for police officers to help by adding to an F.B.I. crime database the
names of immigrants who have evaded deportation orders, including 112,000 with
criminal records and 28,000 without them. The database is used by 80,000
agencies to track felons and fugitives. In December, immigrants' lawyers sued to
stop the expansion of the database, saying the police should not enforce civil
immigration laws outside of formal partnerships like those in Alabama and
Florida.

Officials are also improving the efficiency of the Department of Homeland
Security's Law Enforcement Support Center, which holds more detailed immigration
records than the F.B.I. database. In March, police officers who called the
center helped federal agents locate more than 2,000 illegal immigrants,
officials say.

Some Republicans in Congress say such efforts need to be stepped up. About 5,500
agents are assigned to immigration enforcement, but over eight million
immigrants are estimated to be in the country illegally. More than 100 members
of Congress are now backing legislation that would require the nation's 600,000
state and local police officers to help enforce the immigration laws.

Homeland Security officials say the cooperative efforts in place, while small in
scope, represent an unusual degree of collaboration between federal officials
and local police officials, who were overwhelmingly reluctant to assume any
federal immigration enforcement duties before the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

''I see the future of this being very positive,'' said Michael J. Garcia, the
homeland security under secretary for the Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, which promotes cooperation with the local police on a range of
issues, including identifying and deporting gang members who are illegal
immigrants.

Mr. Garcia emphasized that states were not required to participate in the formal
partnerships and noted that local police officers involved in such arrangements
receive several weeks of intensive training and strict warnings against racial
profiling.

State officials in Alabama, as well as immigrant advocates here, say so far
there have been no complaints from immigrants about the federal-local
partnership.

Senior police officials here said they were eager to join the national
experiment after grappling in recent years with concerns about terrorism and
complaints from residents and local police officers that the number of illegal
immigrants involved in traffic accidents had surged.

So last year, the officials issued a directive against racial profiling, to
allay concerns of advocacy groups, and assigned specially trained officers -- 14
to the highway patrol and 7 to driver's license bureaus.

Col. W. M. Coppage, director of the Alabama Department of Public Safety, said
his officers are reactive, not proactive. They do not conduct raids, and only
question immigrants and run background checks on those stopped for traffic
violations or applying for driver's licenses, he said.

''It's got to be a legitimate, probable-cause-type stop,'' Colonel Coppage said.
''You can't just say hey, 'There's somebody that may be Hispanic,'' and stop
them or say, 'There's somebody from the Middle East,' and stop them.''

Trooper Ronni Fetty, who works at a driver's license bureau, described several
arrests in which illegal immigrants were charged with presenting fraudulent
documents. Trooper Birmingham recounted the arrest of a speeder who turned out
to be carrying 50 pounds of marijuana.

Statistics indicate that most of the immigrants caught so far have been arrested
for violating federal immigration laws, not for state crimes.

Of the 106 illegal immigrants arrested Oct. 14 to April 1, 84 were charged with
overstaying visas, entering the country illegally or evading a deportation
order, officials here said. Sixteen of them also had criminal convictions. It is
unclear whether any have yet been deported.

Officials from the American Civil Liberties Union here and the Hispanic Interest
Coalition of Alabama, who oppose the initiative, say they fear that some
immigrants have already been deported and that others have been driven
underground.

In June, the groups hope to start posting fliers to urge immigrants to tell them
about their experiences with the police. In the meantime, advocates are telling
clients not to attract attention on state roads by speeding or driving cars with
broken taillights or missing license plates.

''Just because nothing has happened in these first six months doesn't make me
breathe any more easily,'' said Isabel Rubio, executive director of the Hispanic
Interest Coalition. ''We feel like this is definitely something we still have to
watch.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Trooper Anthony Birmingham, in Wetumka, Ala., questions drivers
stopped for speeding or other reasons about their immigration status. (Photo by
Gary Tramontina for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); VEHICULAR OFFENSES (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); DEPORTATION (89%);
REFUGEES (78%); RACIAL PROFILING (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); SHERIFFS (76%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); RACE & RACISM (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (75%); DRIVERS LICENSES (71%); FELONIES (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (65%)
Terrorism; Illegal Aliens; Freedom and Human Rights; Police; Terrorism;
Immigration and Refugees; Discrimination

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%) Homeland Security
Department

PERSON: Rachel L Swarns

CITY: BIRMINGHAM, AL, USA (91%); MONTGOMERY, AL, USA (79%); BOSTON, MA, USA
(79%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (94%); IDAHO, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Colorado; Idaho; Virginia; Alabama; Florida

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             561 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

From One Commission to Another: Shut Up

BYLINE: By Juliette Kayyem and Wayne Downing.

Juliette Kayyem teaches national security at the Kennedy School of Government at
Harvard. Wayne Downing was the national security adviser for counterterrorism in
the administration of George H. W. Bush.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 749 words


There is a growing chorus of criticism against members of the 9/11 commission
that they are behaving like partisan players in what was supposed to be an
objective review of the terrorist attacks. After all, you can't turn on the
television or flip through a newspaper (including to this page) without
encountering panel members pontificating on the hearings. While we are confident
that the commission will ultimately be able to produce a constructive and
unbiased report, as members of another panel on terrorism we also know the value
of silence.

In August 1999, we were appointed to the independent National Commission on
Terrorism, which Congress established after the embassy bombings in Africa to
assess the growing threat against America. One of us is a conservative Army
general who led special operations during Desert Storm. The other is a
Democratic lawyer who worked at the Justice Department under Attorney General
Janet Reno.

From that moment until the commission released its report in June 2000, we did
not speak to the news media. Following a voluntary gag order, we and the eight
other commissioners revealed not a single inkling of our assessments of
witnesses, documents or the Clinton administration's policies. It seemed to us
that we were only relevant, and would only be effective, if we spoke in a
unified voice once our work was complete.

The time has come for the 9/11 commission to impose the same voluntary gag order
on itself. The heightened profile and interest in the hearings has inevitably
made this panel a focal point for those engaged in election debates. There is
little the commissioners can or should do to stop those interpretations. Their
job is to ask hard questions -- they were chosen for their unique and
substantive backgrounds and because they are no longer aligned with any
government agency.

While open testimony is important for the American public, open pontificating by
the commissioners is not. That only encourages outsiders to perceive the
commissioners as stand-ins for factions in current political battles. It also
tempts commissioners into making assessments and conclusions prematurely.

A panel like this acts as a kind of jury, taking information and determining
what ultimately should result. There is a sound reason why jury deliberations
are not public and why individual jurors are prohibited from discussing their
deliberations while they are occurring. The weight of the commission's
recommendations is made more credible and dignified if the commissioners do not
have known opinions outside the ultimate verdict.

We learned first-hand that initial opinions can change over time after hearing
additional testimony and undergoing internal deliberations. One of us, for
example, went ''left'' in ultimately deciding that more rigorous standards were
needed for detaining individuals based on undisclosed information. The other
went ''right'' in supporting more aggressive recruitment by the C.I.A. of
human-rights violators to act as informants. This is a healthy process. It is
hard to see how it is facilitated by taking a premature position on national
television. That only makes it more difficult for a commissioner to back away
from that position later on, and unnecessarily so.

This is not to say that the 9/11 commissioners do not have an interest in making
their opinions known. But that interest should be limited to issues involving
process and the effective workings of the panel. Such procedural concerns
included the commission's request for Condoleezza Rice, the national security
adviser, to testify, and its unanimous recommendation that the Aug. 6
Presidential Daily Brief be released to the public.

In the end, public analysis, as a matter of sound political strategy (political
in the effectiveness sense, not the partisan sense), is better left to others in
the White House, the Kerry campaign, Congress, the 9/11 families and the news
media. Once the report is released, there will be plenty of time for the
commissioners to chat.

There should, of course, be no sanction for violating a gag-order agreement. But
the reality is that an individual commissioner's interpretation of the hearings,
evidence and report itself is irrelevant. If, as we hope, the 9/11 report is
going to say something constructive and beneficial about America's security,
then a voluntary gag order will help ensure that it will have the greatest
possible historical importance and influence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TESTIMONY (89%); JURY
TRIALS (89%); VERDICTS (89%); HIJACKING (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%);
WITNESSES (76%); ETHICS (75%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); LAWYERS (73%);
APPOINTMENTS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); ARMIES (70%); DESERT STORM (69%); POLITICAL
DEBATES (69%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (54%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade
Center (NYC); Election Issues; Ethics; Terrorism

PERSON: Juliette Kayyem; Wayne A Downing

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (76%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             562 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

9/11 Panel Calls Policies On Immigration Ineffective

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


The commission investigating the 9/11 attacks has concluded that immigration
policies promoted as essential to keeping the country safe from future attacks
have been largely ineffective, producing little, if any, information leading to
the identification or apprehension of terrorists.

The commission said one program had proved so fruitless that it was discontinued
after less than a year.

The critical assessment was released this week as part of a preliminary finding
to a final report due in July. It returned a spotlight to programs that have
been controversial from the start, aimed mostly at people, like the 9/11
hijackers, from Muslim or Arab countries. Critics have said the government
engaged in a wholesale roundup of these people, kept them in jail for months, in
some cases without access to lawyers, and conducted closed-door legal hearings
on their status.

Many of the libertarian and pro-immigration groups that have criticized the Bush
administration for what they deem the unfair and unnecessary focus on these
groups hailed the findings. They said that as the first independent assessment
of government actions after 9/11, it affirmed their misgivings.

''Clearly, the government was overreaching,'' said Timothy H. Edgar, legislative
counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, about the immigration programs.
''We raised concerns from the beginning that they not only interfere with
time-honored civil liberties, but they were likely to prove to be ineffective.''

But a former Justice Department official involved in the development of the
programs defended them as critical to counterterrorism efforts.

Kris Kobach, a Republican candidate for Congress in Kansas who served as counsel
to Attorney General John Ashcroft from 2001 to 2003, said the programs had
yielded great benefits by leading to the identification and deportation of
hundreds of people with criminal backgrounds or indirect ties to terrorism.

Mr. Kobach said the commission viewed the impact of the programs too narrowly,
drawing conclusions based solely on the application of antiterrorism laws,
rather than others, like immigration law. ''The commission is looking for a
terrorism label affixed to an individual,'' Mr. Kobach said in an interview.
''But it's failing to realize that just because the F.B.I. hasn't gotten to the
point of applying the terrorism label, it doesn't mean the individual is not a
terrorist.''

Perhaps the most controversial of the programs was one that sought to identify
''special interest'' immigrants, which resulted in the arrests of more than 700
people, most from Middle Eastern countries, who were charged with violating
immigration laws and held for months, in many cases, until federal agents
cleared them of any involvement in terror-related activities.

The commission report echoed concerns raised when these programs were initiated.
The concerns led to an investigation by the inspector general at the Justice
Department that found that officials ''made little attempt to distinguish''
between immigrants who had ties to terrorism and those who did not.

Kate Martin, director of the Center for National Security Studies, a civil
libertarian organization, called the detention program misguided, saying:
''Hundreds of people's rights were violated, and, very importantly, the United
States is now seen around the world as a country where Arabs and Muslims can be
arrested in secret and held without charges. That's a very dangerous development
in terms of a country promoting democracy and human rights as an antidote to
terrorism.''

But Mr. Kobach said the detention program had proved more valuable than the
commission knew, leading to the deportation of at least three men with ''strong,
substantial connections to terrorism,'' including a roommate of one of the 9/11
hijackers, an immigrant who confessed to attending a terrorist training camp in
Afghanistan and another who was found with 75 pictures of the World Trade
Center.

In response to the inspector general's report, the Department of Homeland
Security issued new guidelines last month to streamline the process for handling
cases involving immigrants held in connection with national security concerns.

The commission report also disparaged a program that requires additional
screening for visa applications from 26 predominantly Muslim countries. It
charged that investigators had not been processing them in a timely fashion and
that ''no terrorists have been uncovered'' by the effort. The report also cited
a program, begun in November 2001, that delayed visa applications from the same
countries and a few others. The commission concluded that the program, which was
shut down 11 months later, ''yielded no useful antiterrorist information and led
to no visa denials.''

Other critics said the two programs had discouraged students, artists,
entrepreneurs and other travelers from visiting the United States and alienated
a community ''that was as shocked as anyone by the 9/11 attacks,'' in the words
of Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, an
advocacy group.

But Mr. Kobach defended both efforts, saying that the first was necessary for
the security of the country and that the second was a temporary and necessary
action while efforts were under way to make sure federal investigators could
scrutinize the names of visa applicants.

The commission criticized a fourth program, the Absconder Apprehension
Initiative. Its intent was to round up 5,000 immigrants from countries with a
Qaeda presence who were facing deportation and to expedite their expulsion. The
commission found that by early 2003, 1,139 had been apprehended, a group that
included 803 who had been deported, 224 who were awaiting deportation and 45 who
were being prosecuted on other criminal charges.

But so far, the commission report said, ''we have not learned that any of the
absconders were deported under a terrorism statute, prosecuted for
terrorist-related crimes or linked in any way to terrorism.''

Mr. Kobach asserted that the so-called absconders were already in violation of
immigration laws and some were wanted for other criminal violations, including
more than 100 who were found to be sex offenders.

''In many cases,'' he said, ''we have kicked terrorists out of the country over
garden-variety immigration laws.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); LAWYERS (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); ARRESTS (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%);
HIJACKING (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); JAIL SENTENCING (69%); INTERVIEWS
(69%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             565 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Court and Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 528 words


The Supreme Court will hear a pair of cases tomorrow that will help set the
ground rules for the war on terror. Detainees at Guantanamo, some of whom have
been held for more than two years, are seeking an opportunity to challenge their
confinement. The Bush administration insists, however, that they can be
imprisoned indefinitely. That position is legally and morally wrong, and rather
than help America's defense, it makes the nation more vulnerable. The Supreme
Court should rule for the detainees.

More than 600 detainees are being held in the American military base at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Most were captured in Afghanistan while American troops
were fighting the Taliban forces there. Their advocates say many were simply in
the wrong place at the wrong time, or innocent men whom bounty hunters handed
over as terrorists in order to claim rewards. The cases the court is hearing
involve Kuwaiti, British and Australian nationals whose families say they were
not involved with Al Qaeda or engaged in military action against the United
States.

The detainees are seeking only the most basic elements of due process: to be
informed of the charges against them, to meet with their families and lawyers,
and to have a forum for contesting their imprisonment. They do not claim a right
to have the American court systems review their cases. A military tribunal would
be sufficient.

The administration argues that as noncitizens being held outside the United
States, the detainees have no right to be heard in federal court. But the law
gives the courts jurisdiction over ''all civil actions arising under the
Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States,'' which certainly
describes these cases. The federal habeas corpus statute also gives anyone held
by the government, which the detainees certainly are, the right to challenge
their confinement. Even if the government's narrow view of jurisdiction were
right, it is irrelevant. Guantanamo, as the Navy concedes on its own Web site,
''for all practical purposes, is American territory.''

International law also strongly supports the detainees. The International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, following American and British legal
traditions, states that ''anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or
detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court.''

Legal arguments aside, the Guantanamo policies are a tragic mistake. They are
being followed closely abroad, where they are greatly harming America's
reputation for fairness. And -- as a group of retired American military officers
argue in a friend-of-the-court brief -- they will come back to haunt us when
Americans are taken captive.

Most important of all, the treatment of the Guantanamo detainees is not true to
America's guiding principles. ''The practice of arbitrary imprisonments,''
Alexander Hamilton observed in Federalist No. 84, has been ''in all ages'' one
of ''the favorite and most formidable instruments of tyranny.'' Much has changed
since Sept. 11, 2001, but one thing that has not is this nation's commitment to
freedom, and to the rule of law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR ON TERROR
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); JURISDICTION (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HABEAS CORPUS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); NAVIES (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); ARMED
FORCES (75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%)
Editorials; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights; Suits
and Litigation; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             568 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Indonesia: Indicted General A Presidential Pick

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 65 words


Golkar, the party of the former dictator Suharto, has nominated a former general
indicted by the United Nations for alleged human rights abuses in East Timor as
its presidential candidate in July. The general, Wiranto, who uses only one
name, beat the party's chairman for the nomination. Golkar is expected to emerge
as the biggest party in Parliament in legislative elections this month.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (88%);
ELECTIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (92%); TIMOR-LESTE (92%); ASIA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             573 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Enemy Combatants' in Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 515 words


The Supreme Court hears arguments this week in two cases involving Americans who
are being held indefinitely, without the right to see a lawyer, simply because
they have been designated ''enemy combatants.'' The Bush administration,
ignoring basic constitutional principles, argues that because the detentions are
military decisions made in wartime the courts have no authority to second-guess
them. These are historic cases that could shape the post-9/11 legal landscape
for years to come. The Supreme Court should send a strong message that even
during a war on terrorism, the government cannot strip citizens of their most
basic rights.

Jose Padilla and Yaser Esam Hamdi have been held in a military brig for about
two years without being charged with a crime. Mr. Padilla was arrested at O'Hare
International Airport in Chicago, suspected of involvement in a ''dirty bomb''
plot. Mr. Hamdi was captured by the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan. The
government has labeled both men enemy combatants, but in each case the evidence
was scant. For Mr. Hamdi, the government relied on a Pentagon official's
nine-paragraph description of his capture. For Mr. Padilla, it used confidential
sources of uncertain reliability. The government sets a frighteningly low
standard for itself, saying it needs only ''some evidence'' that a citizen has
''associated'' with a terrorist organization ''bent on hostile acts'' to hold
him indefinitely.

Citizens can be deprived of their liberty only on the basis of a properly
enacted law, after a judicial trial that meets minimum standards of due process.
Once a citizen's liberty has been taken away, he is entitled to challenge his
imprisonment in a habeas corpus proceeding. These rights all apply to Mr.
Padilla and Mr. Hamdi, and they have all been violated.

President Bush asserts that he can circumvent these constitutional protections
simply by invoking his military powers, but that is inconsistent with the law,
and with fundamental American values. In the Declaration of Independence, the
Founders criticized the king of England for ''render[ing] the Military
independent of and superior to the Civil Power.'' In establishing the American
system, they made clear that civil authority had supremacy over military
authority. The Supreme Court recognized this principle in a landmark Civil
War-era case, Ex parte Milligan, in which it held that if civilian courts are
open and functioning, they, not the military, must try American citizens.

The significance of the cases goes well beyond the two prisoners, and the
consequences of a ruling for the government are frightening. Mr. Padilla's
lawyers do not exaggerate when they tell the court that if their client loses,
''it would mean that for the foreseeable future, any citizen, anywhere, at any
time, would be subject to indefinite military detention on the unilateral order
of the President.'' That formula for totalitarianism has never been the law in
America. It is up to the Supreme Court to ensure that it does not become the law
now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); HABEAS CORPUS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); PRISONS (72%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); DIRTY BOMBS (70%);
ARRESTS (69%); AIRPORTS (68%); BRITISH MONARCHS (50%) Terrorism; Editorials;
Freedom and Human Rights; Law and Legislation  ; Prisoners of War; Terrorism;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) George W (Pres) Bush; Jose (Abdullah Al-Muhajir)
Padilla; Yaser Esam Hamdi

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ENGLAND (79%)

REGION: United States; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             574 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Computer Student on Trial Over Muslim Web Site Work

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1254 words

DATELINE: BOISE, Idaho, April 23


Not long after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, a group of Muslim
students led by a Saudi Arabian doctoral candidate held a candlelight vigil in
the small college town of Moscow, Idaho, and condemned the attacks as an affront
to Islam.

Today, that graduate student, Sami Omar al-Hussayen, is on trial in a heavily
guarded courtroom here, accused of plotting to aid and to maintain Islamic Web
sites that promote jihad.

As a Web master to several Islamic organizations, Mr. Hussayen helped to
maintain Internet sites with links to groups that praised suicide bombings in
Chechnya and in Israel. But he himself does not hold those views, his lawyers
said. His role was like that of a technical editor, they said, arguing that he
cannot be held criminally liable for what others wrote.

Civil libertarians say the case poses a landmark test of what people can do or
whom they can associate with in the age of terror alerts. It is one of the few
times anyone has been prosecuted under language in the antiterrorism law known
as the USA Patriot Act, which makes it a crime to provide ''expert guidance or
assistance'' to groups deemed terrorist.

''Somebody who fixes a fax machine that is owned by a group that may advocate
terrorism could be liable,'' said David Cole, a Georgetown University law
professor who argued against the expert guidance part of the antiterrorism law
this year, in a case where it was struck down by a federal judge.

Mr. Hussayen, 34, a father of three who was pursuing a doctorate in computer
sciences at the University of Idaho, is charged with three counts of conspiracy
to support terrorism and 11 counts of visa and immigration fraud. His trial
opened on April 14 and is expected to last until June.

The trial offers conflicting views of Mr. Hussayen, a son of the Saudi middle
class. Defense lawyers have portrayed him as a loving family man who embraces
Western values while holding to his Islamic faith; the prosecution team has
presented him as a secret conspirator, aiding the cause of terrorism through his
computer skills.

[In a ruling that bolstered Mr. Hussayen's case on Monday, Judge Edward J. Lodge
of Federal District Court in Idaho would not let prosecutors show the jury a Web
page that encourages suicide bombings. The judge said the government must prove
that Mr. Hussayen created the page or endorsed its contents.]

Earlier this year, Judge Audrey B. Collins of the Federal District Court in Los
Angeles, struck down a part of the antiterrorism law being used in this trial,
ruling that it was overly broad and vague. But Judge Collins did not extend her
ruling beyond the one case in California.

President Bush made several recent campaign-style stops on behalf of the
antiterrorism law, saying it is an essential tool for law enforcement.

''The Patriot Act defends our liberty, is what it does, under the Constitution
of the United States,'' Mr. Bush said in Buffalo on Tuesday.

Idaho, one of the most Republican states, has become an unlikely home of
opposition to the act.

The state's senior senator, the Republican Larry E. Craig, and Representative C.
L. Otter, also a Republican, have sponsored bills to amend the act, which they
have called a threat to civil liberties.

Mr. Hussayen's lead lawyer, David Nevin, is best known for his defense in 1993
of Kevin Harris, who was involved in a standoff with government agents at a
cabin in Ruby Ridge, Idaho, along with Randall C. Weaver. That case, in which
Mr. Weaver's wife and teenage son were shot and killed by government agents, is
a cause celebre among mainly right-leaning civil libertarians.

Some of Mr. Hussayen's supporters say they see a similar kind of government
abuse in his trial.

''It's an illustration of how much power the government can bring against
somebody,'' said John Dickinson, a retired professor of computer sciences who
was Mr. Hussayen's doctoral adviser at the University of Idaho. ''It should
scare anybody.''

Mr. Dickinson said he was interviewed by the F.B.I. for several hours after Mr.
Hussayen's arrest in February 2003. ''They kept saying his Ph.D. program was a
front and that the person I knew was only the tip of this monstrous iceberg,''
he said. ''But I've yet to hear one thing the government has said since then
that has made me question his innocence.''

Justice Department officials and prosecutors refused to comment on the broader
implications of the case, citing the trial. But in court documents, the
government makes a case that Mr. Hussayen funneled money to Islamic charities
with terrorist ties and that he posted calls for jihad by different Saudi
sheiks.

In the indictment, the government charged that Mr. Hussayen provided ''computer
advice and assistance, communications facilities, and financial instruments and
services that assisted in the creation and maintenance of Internet Web sites and
other Internet medium intended to recruit and raise funds for violent jihad,
particularly in Palestine and Chechnya.''

And they have argued that Mr. Hussayen's technical assistance, even if he did
not share the beliefs of the groups he helped, were like providing a gun to an
armed robber.

Most of the facts are not in dispute. Mr. Hussayen's lawyers said that he gave
money to legitimate Islamic charities and that his Web site work was protected
by the First Amendment. The Web sites he maintained also posted views opposing
jihad, they said.

The government has argued that Mr. Hussayen, a Saudi citizen who is the son of a
retired Saudi minister of education, does not have all the protections of an
American citizen. They said he abused his privilege as a student by working for
computer sites that advocate terror. His friends in the Idaho college town may
have known one side of him, the prosecutor, Kim Lindquist, said in his opening
remarks to the jury, but they seldom saw ''the private face of extreme jihad.''

The Saudi government is paying for the defense of Mr. Hussayen, his family said.

One of the charities that Mr. Hussayen supported, Islamic Assembly of North
America, still operates out of Ann Arbor, Mich. On its Web site, the group says
its mission is to promote the spread of Islam, and the group solicits money from
the public. Mr. Nevin said the charity has never been classified as terrorist by
the government.

But the government said the Michigan charity was one of the Web sites that
''accommodated materials that advocated violence against the United States.''

Both sides in this case are looking to appeals that will probably turn on the
part of the antiterrorism law thrown out by Judge Collins in January.

In that case, the judge ruled on behalf of several humanitarian groups that
wanted to provide support to the nonviolent arms of two organizations designated
as terrorist in Turkey and Sri Lanka. Judge Collins wrote that ''a woman who
buys cookies at a bake sale outside her grocery store to support displaced
Kurdish refugees to find new homes could be held liable'' if the sale was
sponsored by a group designated terrorist.

The American Civil Liberties Union, which is trying to overturn the
antiterrorism law in court, tried to join the Idaho case, but was rebuffed by
Judge Lodge.

''We very much wanted to be involved in this case because it is by far the most
radical prosecution we've seen under the Patriot Act,'' said Ann Beeson,
associate legal director of the national A.C.L.U. ''You shouldn't be held liable
for what somebody else said. Under this theory, you could charge the electrician
who services the wrong client.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sami Omar al-Hussayen is on trial in Boise, Idaho. (Photo by
KREM-TV)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%);
CONSPIRACY (89%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (86%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); LAWYERS (76%); JUDGES (76%);
JURY TRIALS (76%); INTERNET & WWW (76%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (76%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); IMMIGRATION LAW (67%); IMMIGRATION (63%)
Terrorism; Computers and the Internet; Freedom and Human Rights; Bombs and
Explosives; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (54%)

PERSON: Timothy Egan; Sami Omar Al- Hussayen

CITY: BOISE, ID, USA (91%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: IDAHO, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (87%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Moscow (Idaho)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             579 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syria Says Little About Damascus Attacks, Pointing to 'Terrorists'

BYLINE: By SUSAN SACHS and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Susan Sachs reported from Istanbul
for this article and Neil MacFarquhar from Jidda, Saudi Arabia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, April 28


Retreating into characteristic silence on security threats, Syrian officials
disclosed no new information on Wednesday about the identities or possible
motives of the gunmen who set off a bomb near the center of the capital,
Damascus, on Tuesday.

While the dearth of details was not unusual for Syria, it deepened the
uncertainty surrounding the incident, a rare burst of violence in a country that
keeps tight control over its citizens and deploys several security agencies to
quell all forms of dissent.

Authorities continued to say it was ''terrorists'' who detonated an explosive
device under a car in Mazza, a well-to-do residential neighborhood, and lobbed
grenades at the police officers who chased them.

Officials also said that Syria's government was not the target.

Ahmad al-Haj Ali, an adviser to the Syrian information minister, told the Arab
television channel, Al Jazeera, that the attackers did not have sophisticated
weapons but chose Syria as their target to demonstrate that they could strike
anywhere.

''They wanted to give the impression that there is no area or place safe from
these acts, particularly since Syria has been enjoying a state of stability that
is well known on the regional and international level,'' he said. ''They wanted
also to give the impression that the U.S. or other targets can be found
anywhere.''

The United States has long accused Syria of aiding terror groups and, more
recently, of failing to stop Arab militants from crossing into Iraq. Syria has
denied the charges.

After the explosion, the police battled the bombers for more than an hour. A
police officer and a woman caught in the crossfire were killed, along with two
of the ''terrorists,'' officials said.

A number of diplomatic buildings, including the Canadian and Iranian Embassies
and the British ambassador's residence, are near the site of the explosion,
although only a building once used by the United Nations suffered extensive
damage.

Within a few hours of the incident, Syrian authorities announced that they had
uncovered a cache of weapons in a hideout used by the gunmen in a village south
of Damascus.

Western and Arab analysts said they were puzzled over what could have been a
motive for a terrorist attack on Syria, which fiercely opposed the American-led
war in Iraq and has praised the violent insurgency there as legitimate
resistance to an occupying force.

The Syrian Muslim Brotherhood clashed violently with the government in the past,
but it has been quiescent since the early 1980's. The shooting appeared ill
prepared, the analysts said, compared to recent attacks in Saudi Arabia and
Iraq.

Syria's response was relatively muted. During antigovernment demonstrations just
last month by Kurds demanding greater cultural and political rights, when riot
police sealed off the university and Kurdish neighborhoods, blocking all
movement in or out for days.

The Mazza neighborhood, by contrast, was closed for just about four hours after
the explosion and the gun battle. Afterward, curious onlookers were permitted to
wander about, looking at the broken glass and damaged building.

Syrian newspapers and radio, which normally offer only state-sanctioned
commentary, provided no further clues in their morning-after coverage,
restricting themselves to praising the police response to the explosion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); RIOTS (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (75%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (74%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); IRAQ WAR (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (68%) Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Security and Warning Systems

PERSON: Susan Sachs; Neil Macfarquhar

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (94%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (96%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Syria; Damascus (Syria); Iraq; Syria

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             583 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hold the Toasts for Colonel Qaddafi

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 485 words


Some European leaders seem unduly eager to welcome Libya's bloodstained
dictator, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, into respectable international company. They
ought to restrain themselves. Colonel Qaddafi's police state is a prime example
of the kind of autocratic, erratic and incompetent government that has led most
of the Arab world into a dead end of economic and political stagnation,
blighting millions of lives and stoking rage across the region.

Colonel Qaddafi's agreement last December to dismantle Libya's unconventional
weapons programs made the world safer, and justified the easing of American
economic sanctions explicitly linked to those programs. A strong case can now be
made for easing Libya's economic isolation and improving the lot of its people
-- so long as Colonel Qaddafi refrains from channeling the proceeds into
financing weapons programs or terrorism.

While doing so, however, democratic leaders need to maintain a healthy distance
from the man responsible for the deaths of so many innocent people as he
prepares to celebrate the 35th anniversary of his absolute rule.

For most of that period, Colonel Qaddafi has used Libya's oil wealth to finance
his fantasies of international revolutionary leadership by sponsoring coups,
invasions, assassination attempts and terrorist atrocities across the world.
Americans got a taste of his methods in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103
over Lockerbie, Scotland, an attack that killed 270 people. A year later,
another Libyan terrorist bomb killed 170 people on a French airliner over
Africa. Libyans have endured decades of assassinations, abductions and torture.

In recent years, Colonel Qaddafi has withdrawn from direct involvement in
international terrorism, and he has now ended his unconventional weapons
programs. Still, lengthy arbitrary detentions and other human rights abuses
continue at home.

Yet earlier this spring, the British prime minister, Tony Blair, who insists
that the civilized world was right to confront the murderous Saddam Hussein,
allowed himself to be entertained by Colonel Qaddafi in a tent in Tripoli. Mr.
Blair's principles should have kept him away.

Last week, Colonel Qaddafi met with the European Commission in Brussels, his
first visit outside Africa or the Arab world in nearly 15 years. After sharing
an elegant lunch with the commission's president, Romano Prodi, he made it clear
that his views on violence and politics have not fundamentally changed.
Characterizing past Libyan terrorism as ''armed struggle'' in support of freedom
fighters, he darkly warned that ''hopefully, nothing will force us to go back to
the old days when we used our cars and explosive belts.''

Colonel Qaddafi remains true to the bloody creed he has professed throughout his
career. European leaders should be as steadfast in scorning this enemy of
democracy and human dignity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); POLITICS
(89%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (89%); BOMBINGS (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); COUPS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); ANNIVERSARIES (72%); TORTURE (71%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (71%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (66%);
AIRLINES (65%) Editorials; Atomic Weapons; United States International
Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions; Terrorism; Politics and Government

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); TONY BLAIR (57%); ROMANO PRODI (50%) Muammar El-
(Col) Qaddafi

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%); TRIPOLI, LIBYA (78%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (98%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
AFRICA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: Libya; Europe

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             589 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Lawyer Arrested in Madrid Bombing Inquiry

BYLINE: By SARAH KERSHAW and ERIC LICHTBLAU; Sarah Kershaw reported from
Portland, Ore., and Eric Lichtblau from Washington. Sabrina Tavernise
contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., May 6


An Oregon lawyer was taken into custody by the F.B.I. on Thursday on a material
witness warrant in connection with the deadly railway bombings in Madrid on
March 11, a government official said.

The lawyer, Brandon Mayfield, was the first person in the United States to be
drawn into the investigation of the Madrid bombings, which killed 191 people and
which Spanish officials have linked to possible associates of Al Qaeda.

The F.B.I. executed a search warrant on Mr. Mayfield's home in the Portland area
and a second one at his law office, said the government official, who spoke on
condition of anonymity. Officials would not say what agents were searching for
or what led them to Mr. Mayfield.

''All I can say is we served two search warrants,'' said Beth Anne Steele, a
spokeswoman for the F.B.I. in Portland. She declined further comment.

Mr. Mayfield's mother and her former step-mother, who both live in Kansas where
Mr. Mayfield was raised, were questioned Thursday by F.B.I. agents, the former
step-mother, Ruth Alexander, said. Ms. Alexander said she had helped raise him
from the age of 12.

Both of the women were stunned, said Ms. Alexander, who said she had learned
about Mr. Mayfield's arrest when F.B.I. agents arrived at the auto repair shop
where she works as an officer manager in Halstead, Kan.

''This somehow has to be some kind of a mistake,'' Ms. Alexander said in a
telephone interview. ''I think they're grasping at straws to try and nail people
for some of these crimes. And no one, no one, can imagine that he would have
anything intentionally to do with anything.''

Outside the Mayfields' home in the Portland suburb of Aloha, his wife, Mona
Mayfield, gave a brief statement to reporters. ''I know he is innocent,'' she
told KGW, a Northwest cable news station. ''Everyone knows he's innocent.''

Few details emerged Thursday night about Mr. Mayfield's case.

A government official said: ''We don't know how strong the case is, and the
information is very limited. It's a very active investigation at this point.''

Officials confirmed Thursday night, however, that Mr. Mayfield's fingerprints
matched prints found on a bag in the wreckage of the Madrid bombing.

Mr. Mayfield, an American citizen who converted to Islam, has a link to one of
the six defendants in a highly publicized case in Portland who were convicted of
conspiring to aid the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

He represented one of the most prominent defendants, Jeffrey Leon Battle, in a
custody case involving Mr. Battle's son, a lawyer for another defendant said.
Mr. Mayfield did not represent him in the criminal case.

But government officials said it had not yet been determined whether his
connection to Mr. Battle had anything to do with his arrest in the Madrid
investigation.

The news of the arrest was first reported by Newsweek.

The use of a material witness warrant suggested that authorities were still
building their case against Mr. Mayfield, 37. The Justice Department has used
the warrants with increasing frequency since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks to
indefinitely incarcerate dozens of people who the authorities say may have had
information relevant to an investigation. Some civil rights advocates have
attacked the practice, saying it has been abused.

Mr. Mayfield, who joined the Army after high school, partly to pay for his
college tuition and, later, law school, Ms. Alexander said, served at Fort
Lewism, Wash., where he met his wife, an Egyptian. He passed the bar in Portland
in 2000. He ran his own business, with his wife working as the secretary, Ms.
Alexander said, and was ''struggling'' to support three children, between the
ages of 10 and 15, on the income from a start-up law firm.

Ms. Alexander said that Mr. Mayfield had converted to Islam in the 1980's,
around the time that he met his wife, but that he was far from a ''radical
Muslim.''

''It was just a go-to-church-on-Sunday type religion for him,'' she said. ''The
only difference I ever saw was that he couldn't eat pork and they didn't
celebrate Christmas.''

The couple married in Las Vegas she said, while Ms. Alexander watched their new
baby in Kansas.

Now, Ms. Alexander said Mr. Mayfield's family ''doesn't even know where he is.''

Eighteen people have been charged so far in Spain -- six with mass murder and
the others with collaboration or belonging to a terrorist organization. The
F.B.I. and other federal agencies have warned that Al Qaeda or its sympathizers
might try to attack mass transit systems in major cities in the United States
this summer.

A seventh person in the Portland terrorism case, Maher Hawash, was taken into
custody a year ago as a material witness and was later charged and convicted of
conspiring to aid the Taliban. He was sentenced to seven years in prison in
February.

Mr. Mayfield is listed in the University of Oregon's directory of immigration
lawyers. Court records show he has argued custody cases before the Oregon
appellate court.

Last night in Beaverton, a suburb of Portland, a small office on Canyon Lane
with Mr. Mayfield's name on the door was dark. Two lawyers from the law firm
next door said they did not know Mr. Mayfield.

''You'd think a new attorney would want to come over and chat, but we never
heard from him,'' one of the lawyers, Michael Baxter, said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brandon Mayfield was taken into custody by the F.B.I. on
Thursday. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. A22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SEARCH WARRANTS (90%);
WITNESSES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); ARRESTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); FINGERPRINTING (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARREST
WARRANTS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); FAMILY LAW (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (78%); LEGAL SERVICES (78%); CHILD
CUSTODY & SUPPORT (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); STEPPARENTS (67%); RELIGION (60%) Bombs and
Explosives; Terrorism; Railroads; Fingerprinting; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AL-QAEDA (83%) Al Qaeda
(Terrorist Group); Taliban (Afghan Group); Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: Sarah Kershaw; Eric Lichtblau; Brandon Mayfield

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (94%); PORTLAND, OR, USA (93%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (93%); KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Spain; Portland (Ore); Madrid (Spain); Spain

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             592 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abu Ghraib And Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 134 words



To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis rightly questions whether there may have been torture of
''unlawful combatants'' at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. It is not reassuring to learn
that since the abhorrent torture and killing of Iraqi prisoners was reported,
Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, who ran the prisons of Guantanamo, has been
transferred to operate Abu Ghraib.

It is imperative that we find out whether the published photos of hooded
prisoners in Cuba are symptomatic of similar abuse there. Putting a few Camp
X-Ray interrogators under oath should obtain some answers.

With every revelation of extra-legal abuse tolerated by the Bush administration,
America's once sterling human rights reputation gets dragged down closer to the
level of some third-rate tinpot dictatorship.

CARL MEZOFF
Stamford, Conn., May 7, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); PRISONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (71%)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             593 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Official Says Soldiers May Soon Face Abuse Charges

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
LONDON

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 10


Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon told Parliament on Monday that the British military
had acted swiftly to investigate allegations of mistreatment by its forces in
Iraq and that it was close to bringing charges of brutality against British
soldiers in two cases.

Mr. Hoon also revealed that in response to complaints raised last summer by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the British Army in September stopped
its practice of putting hoods on Iraqi prisoners.

When one lawmaker pointed out that the British Army had forsworn the use of
hoods for years and then asked, ''When did the policy change?'' Mr. Hoon
replied, ''The policy did not change and it was stopped.''

Mr. Hoon spoke the day after Prime Minister Tony Blair issued the first British
apology to any Iraqis who suffered mistreatment or degradation during the
yearlong military campaign in Iraq. For the first time, Mr. Hoon officially
challenged the authenticity of a series of sensational photographs that appeared
to show a hooded Iraqi prisoner in the back of a truck being beaten with rifle
butts and urinated on. The photos appeared in a tabloid newspaper, The Daily
Mirror, on May 1.

The special investigations branch of the Royal Military Police has concluded
that ''there are strong indications that the vehicle in which the photographs
were taken was not in Iraq during the relevant period,'' Mr. Hoon told the House
of Commons.

The editors of The Daily Mirror immediately issued a lengthy statement defending
their decision to publish the photos, and pointed out that Mr. Hoon had not
denied that such an incident had occurred.

Amnesty International also issued a report on Monday that said that British
soldiers had fired on and killed civilians in Iraq, even in cases where there
was no serious threat.

Speaking of the 33 criminal cases of civilian deaths in Iraq that have been
opened, 12 of which are still continuing, Mr. Hoon said, ''I can confirm today
that 2 cases have reached an advanced stage with decisions on prosecutions
pending.'' One such case, according to British officials, is said to involve the
beating death in September of Bahar Musa, a clerk at the Basra Hotel, who was
reported to have been brutalized during an all-night interrogation session by
soldiers in the Queen's Lancashire Regiment.

As Mr. Blair and senior members of his government were engaged in another day of
damage control in the unfolding political crisis over prisoner abuse in Iraq,
senior figures in Parliament questioned why reports that laid out the full scope
of brutality that was occurring in the American zone were kept secret by British
officials.

With the publication on Monday by The Wall Street Journal of a Red Cross report
from February on abuses that were occurring in American- and British-run
prisons, British lawmakers demanded to know why the report was withheld for so
long and why senior ministers, including Mr. Blair, were not informed of its
contents.

Mr. Hoon said that by the time the Red Cross report arrived in London in
February, British military commanders were aware of its central concerns about
British military conduct and had already moved to remedy those concerns with
policy changes or through criminal investigations, which were under way.

''It is fair to say,'' Mr. Hoon said, that the Red Cross was ''generally
satisfied with our approach,'' he added.

Still, Nicholas Soames, the Conservative spokesman on defense matters, said the
Red Cross report demonstrated that ''this government has lost its grip on its
policy in Iraq.''

At least four members of Parliament demanded to know why British military
officials had not expressed their opposition to American military commanders
after learning from the Red Cross of the rampant abuse of prisoners that had
been discovered in the Abu Ghraib prison, just west of Baghdad.

Robin Cook, the former foreign secretary, wanted to know ''what concerns were
expressed to the United States'' about whether British commanders could accept
acts of brutality by another member of the coalition.

Mr. Hoon steadfastly refused to answer any question that could be construed as
criticism of the conduct of American forces.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%);
PRISONS (71%); TERRORISM (63%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Prisoners of War; Terrorism; Photography

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (50%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(58%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (58%) Red Cross

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (79%) Patrick E Tyler; Geoff (Sec) Hoon; Tony (Prime Min)
Blair

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             596 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Proof of Abuse: Images That Shocked the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 130 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Mr. Rumsfeld's Defense'' (editorial, May 8):

In the same way that capitalism depends on business ethics, so it is now clear
that the successful execution of a war depends on observing the Geneva
Convention.

Enron showed us all that corrupt business and poor auditing practices undermined
trust in the stock market and were significant factors in the recent recession.
Likewise, the outrageous human rights abuses in an occupied country will make
the war harder to win and almost certainly lead to more deaths of coalition
forces.

If Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld really wants to be effective, then he
needs to learn these basic ethical lessons.

IAN MARKHAM
Hartford, May 8, 2004

The writer is dean and professor of theology and ethics at Hartford Seminary.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (90%); BUSINESS ETHICS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); BUSINESS
ETHICS & CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP (90%); LAW OF WAR (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); WRITERS (73%);
CORRUPTION (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%); RECESSION (54%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(54%); RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: ENRON CREDITORS RECOVERY CORP (58%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (58%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             599 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

THE SATURDAY PROFILE;
Weaving the Threads of Law, War and Shakespeare

BYLINE:   By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1260 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


IT seems fitting that on one side of Judge Theodor Meron's office walls there
are books about Shakespeare and the medieval laws of war, and on the opposite
side a set of outsize photographs of men trapped in a modern wartime
concentration camp.

The books on Shakespeare Judge Meron wrote himself. The large black-and-white
images, showing forbidding fences and hollow-eyed prisoners, are of Manjaca, a
Serbian-run camp of the early 1990's when war raged in Bosnia.

Drama, barbarity and accountability are very much the threads that have run
through Judge Meron's life, from the time he was a teenage prisoner in a Nazi
camp, to when he became a scholar of international law in New York, and now, as
the president of the United Nations war crimes tribunal that deals with the
atrocities of the former Yugoslavia.

In conversation, he does not like to dwell on his troubled Jewish youth in his
native Poland or on the four harsh years he spent in Czestochowa, at a Nazi
labor camp. He waved away the subject each time he was asked, as if anxious to
avoid any suggestion that his past would somehow affect his tasks as chief
judge.

But yes, he conceded, those years in the Nazi camp had unquestionably propelled
him to study law in order to "explore the means to avoid mistreatment, to focus
on ways to protect human dignity."

Less hesitant now, he continued: "From age 9 to 15, I did not go to school at
all. There were tremendous gaps in my education. It gave me a great hunger for
learning, and I dreamed that one day I could go to school.

"It is of course even more poignant that someone with my background can become a
judge here, and even the president of this body," he said. "I find it daunting."

At the tribunal, with its sober headquarters near the wooded outskirts of The
Hague, all the 16 permanent judges come from different corners of the world and
widely varied backgrounds. But none have made quite the zigzagging route from a
labor camp in Poland to Israel, then to the United States. Some of his
colleagues here have had to cope with political pressures at home, but probably
few have directly experienced the kind of persecution that they hear about at
the tribunal.

Judge Meron, now an American citizen and until two years ago a professor of
international law at New York University, has just been re-elected to a new term
as the tribunal president, a post that requires him to serve as an appeals
judge, steer the chambers, schedule cases and act as a diplomat. Inevitably,
crimes against humanity, like those he witnessed as a young man, appear in his
own and in the tribunal's daily workload.

BUT there are other unexpected ways in which now, at age 73, he sees parts of
his life coming together.

Judge Meron also brought to the court the uncommon perspective of having studied
the evolution of the laws of war, above all by using medieval chronicles and the
plays of Shakespeare. It is here at the tribunal, as he watches its trials
unfold, that he finds remarkable parallels, the dilemmas and moral doubts that
are as much a part of long-ago conflicts as the recent civil wars that tore up
Yugoslavia.

Similarities are manyfold, he says: there are the ancient kings and the modern
political leaders who avoided signed orders or provided lame pretexts so as not
to incriminate themselves; there are the nobles or military commanders
concocting alibis; there are the enemy combatants, then and now, who are abused
as they are held captive; prisoners and civilians are raped and killed,
disregarding centuries-old codes of doing battle.

Those codes fascinated him as a scholar of international law and became the
subjects of two books of which he is evidently proud: "Henry's Wars and
Shakespeare's Laws" (Oxford University Press, 1993) and "Bloody Constraint: War
and Chivalry in Shakespeare" (Oxford University Press, 1998).

Judge Meron's eyes light up as he turns to what is clearly his passion: the
principles of humanitarian law -- the quest to avoid the worst excesses of war
-- which appeared in early texts and became part of the modern Geneva
Conventions, other international protocols and even the statutes of the tribunal
itself.

He declines to discuss the current trial of the court's most famous defendant,
Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, or cases against others here
charged with massacres or widespread abuse, or both. He would also not comment
on the fate of other prisoners of more recent wars.

"As a judge, it would not be appropriate for me to refer to any current case,"
he said. "But the fact is that before this tribunal we see the same type of
age-old human tendency, of leaders and commanders washing their hands. It was
already of great concern in Shakespeare's time, and it remains at the very
center of war crimes today.

"Shakespeare's dialogues that touch on the moral and legal duties of leaders,
their accountability, their attempt to evade blame, will resonate in the ears of
anyone who listens to the major trials going on here."

CERTAINLY, it is hard not to think of the trials at the tribunal that deal with
the 1995 massacre of more than 7,500 people, almost all Muslim men and boys,
around Srebrenica in Bosnia when Judge Meron invokes a passage from "Henry V,"
the scene at Agincourt, France, in 1415. In the scene, the invading English
troops have won the battle and are holding uncounted French soldiers as
prisoners. Then, to the consternation of some of his officers, Henry orders all
the French prisoners of war to be killed.

" 'Tis expressly against the law of arms," says one of Henry's captains. The
king even summons yeomen not bound by chivalric codes to join the slaughter.
Such a call has an echo here at the tribunal. Some trials deal with the actions
of particularly violent paramilitary gangs, employed to hound and kill
non-Serbian civilians in Bosnia.

In another part of "Henry V," Judge Meron points to a revealing scene outside
the French town of Harfleur, long under siege by English troops. Before the town
walls, Henry warns the town elders to surrender because he may not be able to
stop his troops from committing murder, robbery and rape.

The judge turned to the passage:

What is't to me, when you yourselves are cause

If your pure maidens fall into the hand

Of hot and forcing violation?

Henry goes on to issue a warning:

Your fathers taken by the silver beards

And their most reverend heads dash'd to the wall;

Your naked infants spitted upon pikes.

"This is blackmail, of course," said Judge Meron, "because it did not happen,
but it also reads like a list of war crimes of the kind we are dealing with."
The haunting part, he said, is less that such horrors occurred centuries ago,
but that they persist on such a scale today.

Judge Meron, however, sees a shift, not in the facts of violence but in the
international perception that the world must deal with war crimes and other
large-scale abuse. Even in the former Yugoslavia, which has long been biased
against the tribunal, he sees a change of mood, a recognition that a reckoning
is needed.

As the tribunal will wind down its work in the coming years -- it intends to end
investigations this year and its trials in 2008 -- Judge Meron sees a future in
which remaining cases of war crimes and grave abuses will be tried in various
parts of the former Yugoslavia. He speaks of special tribunals that will be
formed in Sarajevo, Zagreb and Belgrade. Until now, he said, there has been no
choice but to hold the trials here in The Hague.

"We must remember," he said, "without this tribunal, what would have followed is
impunity."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: THEODOR MERON

CORRECTION-DATE: January 5, 2004



CORRECTION: The picture caption on Saturday with a profile of Theodor Meron,
president of the war crimes tribunal dealing with atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia, misstated a word in his quotation. It should have read, as it
appeared in the article itself, "We must remember, without this tribunal, what
would have followed is impunity"; he did not say "trial."

GRAPHIC: Photo: THEODOR MERON (Photo by Marlise Simons/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); JUDGES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LAW SCHOOLS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LEGAL EDUCATION (78%); GENOCIDE (74%); POLITICS (73%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%)
Politics and Government; Biographical Information; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

Marlise Simons; Theodor (Judge) Meron

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); POLAND (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE (55%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             600 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

After the Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

"A Top Khmer Rouge Leader, Going Public, Pleads Ignorance" (news article, Jan.
3):

It disheartens my Cambodian-American family to think that a top Khmer Rouge
official can still think that the world is ignorant enough to believe his claims
of nonparticipation in the genocidal war.

My parents came to the United States as refugees in 1980, where I learned about
the killing fields as a child growing up far from Cambodia. How can Khieu
Samphan claim to be unaware of the atrocities, especially since he lived inside
of Cambodia, as an official Khmer Rouge leader? His mind is more boggled about
realizing his historical mistakes, rather than accepting the modern consequences
of them.

It is this mask of "contrition" that throws a final blow to the Khmer victims
and their ancestors around the world.

DANNEL DAN
New York, Jan. 3, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); BUDGETS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); REFUGEES
(70%) Space; Mars (Planet); Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; United States
Armament and Defense; Politics and Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: John E Dilorenzo; George W (Pres) Bush; Dannel Dan; Khieu Samphan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CAMBODIA (94%)

REGION: United States; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             602 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Nation: Prisons to Mosques;
Hate Speech and the American Way

BYLINE:  By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1105 words


RACIAL and religious hate speech is criminal in much of the world, but it
flourishes in the United States. Even Saudi Arabia, for instance, has been
signaling that it will cut back on the diplomatic visas it issues to militant
Wahhabi clerics, who sometimes praise suicide attacks. But militant Wahhabism
and other religious doctrines advocating violence are freely preached in the
United States. It happens in mosques and churches, in schools and, especially,
in prisons.

American tolerance for even the sort of dissent that calls for the violent
overthrow of the government and for racial hate is unique. It is not absolute;
direct advocacy of immediate violence can be a crime. Still, the international
war crimes tribunal in Tanzania that convicted three men last month for using a
radio station and newspaper to incite genocide in Rwanda called American law
"the most speech protective" in the world and declined to use its near-absolute
standards as a model.

American solicitude for almost all speech is relatively recent and rooted in a
metaphor. "The best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself
accepted in the competition of the market," Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote
in a 1919 dissent that eventually became the basis for modern First Amendment
jurisprudence. "I think that we should be eternally vigilant," he added,
"against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe
to be fraught with death."

In 1969, in overturning the conviction of a leader of a Ku Klux Klan group under
an Ohio statute that banned the advocacy of terrorism, the Supreme Court
unanimously endorsed Holmes's idea and turned it into the language of law. The
Klan leader, Clarence Brandenburg, had urged his followers at a rally to "send
the Jews back to Israel," to "bury" blacks, though he did not call them that,
and to consider "revengeance" against politicians and judges who were
unsympathetic to whites.

The government, the justices ruled, may not "forbid or proscribe advocacy of the
use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to
inciting or producing imminent lawless action."

The line separating the two categories -- abstract advocacy and incitement to
imminent action -- can be a little fuzzy, but in practice it has protected just
about everything said from a pulpit, at a rally, on the radio and in a
newspaper, no matter how ugly. There have been only a few exceptions, and some
of those have used analyses that avoided the distinction entirely.

In recent years, federal appeals courts have allowed a civil suit against a
publisher of a manual for mercenaries and upheld a civil jury verdict against a
group that distributed Old West-style wanted posters identifying doctors who
provided abortions. Last year, the Supreme Court upheld the central part of a
Virginia law that made it a crime to burn crosses with a purpose to intimidate.

But the standard remains, said Floyd Abrams, the First Amendment lawyer. "The
general advocacy of the violent overthrow of the government is protected," he
said. "And it ought to be."

But he and others stressed that context matters, that speech that once did not
seem to signal a direct exhortation to immediate violent action might, given
recent history, mean something different. "In a post-9/11 context," Mr. Abrams
said, "a call in a mosque for a killing might not be protected by the First
Amendment."

Rodney A. Smolla, law school dean at the University of Richmond, said the
distinction proposed by the Supreme Court in 1969 must be reinterpreted. "Our
experience should tell us that what we thought was abstract 10 years ago may not
be so abstract any more," he said.

The problem is particularly pressing and particularly tangled in prisons.

In an article in 2002 for the journal First Things, Charles W. Colson, who spent
seven months in prison for his role in Watergate and is the founder of Prison
Fellowship Ministries, wrote that some varieties of religious instruction in
prison can transform "petty criminals into professional terrorists."

"It is a telling -- and alarming -- sign that following Sept. 11, 2001, the two
failed terror attacks involved people who were drawn to Islam while serving time
in prison," Mr. Colson wrote. He referred to Jose Padilla, accused of planning a
"dirty bomb" attack and now held as an enemy combatant, and to Richard Reid,
convicted of trying to blow up an airplane with a shoe bomb. Both apparently had
converted to Islam in prison.

The Wall Street Journal reported a year ago that the Muslim cleric who
coordinated New York's Islamic prison program for two decades recruited
prisoners to a radical form of Islam and expressed admiration for the Sept. 11
hijackers. After the article was published, the cleric, Warith Deen Umar, who
retired in 2000 but had continued to work as a volunteer chaplain, was banned
from the prison system. He has denied making some comments attributed to him.

Driving radical doctrine from prisons is an urgent matter, says Senator Charles
E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and where to draw the line is a relatively
straightforward question. "You err on the side of liberty, but you still have to
protect yourself," he said in an interview. "Free speech is not absolute. Free
speech is different in different contexts. Incitement has a lower threshold in
prison than on, say, a dairy farm."

At first blush, limiting the spread of any religious doctrine that incites
violence would seem to be easier in prison, because courts have traditionally
given prison administrators great leeway in security matters.

But a law enacted in 2000 with the support of politicians ranging from Senator
Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, presents prison officials with additional and almost certainly
unintended challenges. The law requires courts to review restrictions on
religious practices in prison with heightened skepticism.

Federal appeals courts have differed about whether the law is constitutional.
Prison officials argued to the only appeals court that has struck down the law
that it allows "inmate gangs to claim religious status in order to insulate
their illicit activities from scrutiny."

Marci A. Hamilton, a professor at Cardozo Law School and an expert in the law of
religious liberty, said Justice Holmes's marketplace of ideas may not be in
business behind bars.

"Prisons are rife with fringe and very violent religions," she said. "When you
get that kind of fanaticism in the prison population without the leavening of
rational thought, it's a breeding ground for terrorism."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Advocacy of violence is a special problem in prisons, where some
fear that radical Islam is being preached. (Photo by Chris Ramirez)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FREEDOM
OF PRESS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (87%); APPEALS (86%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (79%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); LITIGATION (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
JURY TRIALS (74%); VERDICTS (74%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); LEGISLATION (73%);
WAR CRIMES (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); JUDGES (69%);
ABORTION (68%); APPEALS COURTS (64%); POLITICS (61%); GENOCIDE (54%) Terrorism;
Freedom of Speech and Expression; United States Politics and Government; Law and
Legislation; Terrorism

PERSON: Adam Liptak

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); RWANDA (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             606 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkey and the West: Lessons of History

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 62 words


To the Editor:

I appreciated Thomas L. Friedman's Jan. 11 column describing Turkey as "the only
Muslim, free-market democracy in Europe."

But can killing Kurds and oppressing them in the south be considered a
democratic action?

Is refusing to acknowledge the Turkish genocide against Armenians also part of
being democratic?

SAMAR JARRAH
Port Charlotte, Fla., Jan. 11, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); WAR CRIMES (85%) Armenians; Kurds; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (59%) European Union

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (73%) Samar Jarrah

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); ARMENIA (91%); EUROPE (90%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: Turkey; Europe

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             608 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Troops, Acting on a Tip, Press Hunt for Serbian Fugitive

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 551 words


NATO troops conducted raids this week close to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in an attempt to track down a leading war-crimes suspect,
Radovan Karadzic.

In the latest operation, early Tuesday morning, American, British and Italian
soldiers, some equipped with sniffer dogs, surrounded and searched a house in
Pale, the former wartime capital of the Bosnian Serbs.

The building was used by Dr. Karadzic, the former leader of Bosnian Serbs,
during the 1992-95 war, which tore the country apart and left as many as 200,000
people dead.

Along with the former Bosnian Serb military commander, Gen. Ratko Mladic, Dr.
Karadzic is on the top of the list of suspects sought by the United Nations war
crimes tribunal in The Hague. He is wanted for 16 counts of genocide and crimes
against humanity during the war.

A NATO spokesman said the raids began on Saturday with a tip that Dr. Karadzic,
58, was seeking medical attention in Pale.

Hundreds of troops combed the area and searched the home of Dr. Karadzic's wife,
as well as a local hospital and church.

One man, whom peacekeeping troops said was part of the network used by the
fugitive to hide from NATO peacekeepers, was detained for questioning. Documents
were also seized, and military officials said those papers prompted Tuesday's
search.

NATO is under growing pressure to arrest Dr. Karadzic before its withdrawal from
Bosnia, which is planned for the end of this year.

The arrest of war crimes suspects is also a condition for joining NATO's
partnership program, for which Bosnia has applied. The program is regarded as a
first step toward full membership.

"We are getting closer than ever," said Capt. David Sullivan, spokesman for the
peacekeepers, speaking by telephone from Sarajevo.

He stressed that co-operation with the Bosnian Serb authorities, which have been
accused in the past of helping to hide Dr. Karadzic, had been "outstanding."

Bosnia has been split into two entities, the Serb-controlled Republika Srpska
and a Muslim-Croat Federation, since the end of the war.

Bosnian Serb officials have barely hidden their reluctance to help track down
their former leader, but admit to being under increased pressure to co-operate.

Dragan Kalinic, the speaker of Parliament in Republika Srpska, was quoted Monday
by Agence France-Presse as telling journalists that the Serb-run part of Bosnia
had been threatened with unspecified sanctions if cooperation was not
forthcoming.

In early December, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld announced at NATO
headquarters in Brussels that American forces would assist in peacekeepers'
efforts to arrest Dr. Karadzic and other indicted suspects in the coming year.

"I believe that there is a concern that it would be shameful to leave without
capturing him," said Senad Slatina, an analyst with the International Crisis
Group in Sarajevo.

Most previous attempts to detain Dr. Karadzic have centered in southern Bosnia,
around Foca.

Mr. Slatina said many Bosnians still doubted any outsiders' commitment to
finding Dr. Karadzic.

"With just 10 men, 8 years and the resources of the strongest military alliance
in the world, I would guarantee that by now I would have $5 million in my
pocket," he said referring to the reward offered in exchange for information
leading to Dr. Karadzic's arrest.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); GENOCIDE (88%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (79%); INDICTMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (73%); DOGS (57%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (51%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (51%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (76%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); UNITED STATES
(93%); SERBIA (93%); CROATIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (76%); BELGIUM (59%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Pale (Bosnia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             611 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Constitution

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 210 words


To the Editor:

Re "Hurray! A Constitution! (Tell It to the Warlords)" (Letter From Asia, news
article, Jan. 14):

Regarding Afghanistan's warlords, you write that reportedly when Abdul Rasul
Sayyaf and Burhanuddin Rabbani (who is my father and the former Afghan
president) "pushed too hard for their desires in the Constitution," they were
reminded by the United States ambassador and the United Nations special envoy
"that they could face trial for war crimes."

In fact, the broad participation of delegates and their desire to reach a
consensus resulted in the successful ratification of the Constitution.

To suggest that the grand council was successful as a result of outside
interference negates the impartiality of the United Nations and the United
States, the country that epitomizes the essence of democracy.

What we Afghans need at this time is the support of our international friends to
bring us close to each other. Declaring one section of the Afghan people as
warlords and the other as democrats or liberals doesn't help Afghanistan.
Afghans need reconciliation, coexistence and pluralism more than anything else
at this critical juncture.

SALAHUDDIN RABBANI
Counselor, Permanent Mission of Afghanistan to the United Nations
New York, Jan. 14, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); POLITICS (71%); LIBERALISM (71%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); GENOCIDE (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%) Politics
and Government; Constitutions; United States International Relations; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations; United Nations

PERSON: Salahuddin Rabbani; Burhanuddin Rabbani; Abdul Rasul Sayyaf

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             613 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Sweden: Israeli Envoy Mars Palestinian Art

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 98 words


Israel's ambassador damaged an artwork in a museum depicting a Palestinian
suicide bomber, Swedish radio reported.

The artwork consisted of a basin of red water on which floated a boat carrying a
portrait of Hanadi Jaradat, who killed herself and 19 others in an attack in
Haifa in October. The ambassador, Zvi Mazel, was among the guests at the opening
of the exhibition at the Historical Museum, linked to an anti-genocide
conference in Stockholm later this month. The radio report said Mr. Mazel ripped
out electrical wires attached to the work and threw a spotlight into the basin.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (88%); EXHIBITIONS (88%);
HISTORY (86%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (86%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (86%); WAR CRIMES
(85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%)
Foreign Service; Bombs and Explosives; Art; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Palestinians; Terrorism

PERSON: Hanadi Jaradat; Zvi Mazel

CITY: STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN (72%)

COUNTRY: SWEDEN (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%);
EUROPE (89%)

REGION: Israel; Sweden; Stockholm (Sweden); Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             621 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqis Again Seek Elections and a Local Trial for Hussein

BYLINE:  By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 474 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 20


Thousands of Iraqis demonstrated again on Tuesday in four major cities,
demanding that the United States turn over Saddam Hussein to stand trial here
and renewing calls for direct elections as the first step toward self-rule.

The protesters, mainly Shiite Muslims, gathered in central Baghdad, at a square
where a towering statue of Saddam Hussein was torn down by jubilant Iraqis in
April; in Basra, in the south; and in Najaf and Kerbala, two Shiite holy cities.

On Monday as many as 100,000 Shiites flowed through the main arteries of the
capital echoing the call of their most respected leader, Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani, for direct elections of the Iraqi government, which is to take over
from the American-led civil administration by July 1.

The spate of demonstrations and a suicide-bomb attack in central Baghdad on
Sunday that killed 25 people have heightened the sense of combustibility. On
Tuesday night, a mortar shell landed inside the civil administration's compound,
exploding in the parking lot of a building that houses many offices and some
soldiers.

As many as 5,000 people in Baghdad called Tuesday for Mr. Hussein to be handed
over quickly to Iraq to stand trial as a war criminal. The United States is now
holding him as a prisoner of war, and L. Paul Bremer III, the head of the civil
administration here, reiterated in an interview on Tuesday with CNN in
Washington that Mr. Hussein would be transferred to Iraqi authorities in the
future.

That standing pledge failed to convince the marchers in Baghdad, many of them
followers of Moktada al-Sadr, a young cleric and harsh critic of American
policies in Iraq. Some protesters called for Mr. Hussein's execution.

The broader issue, however, remained the mechanism by which the Americans plan
to turn over authority. The civil administration now plans to relinquish power
to a government chosen by caucuses in Iraq's 18 provinces. The Americans argue
that the timetable is too short for valid elections.

Long denied power under successive imperial and native governments, Iraq's
Shiites, about 60 percent of the population, want direct elections, which they
believe would tilt authority to them.

Against the backdrop of such political tensions, Iraq's external debt was
reduced on Tuesday when the United Arab Emirates said it would forgive most of
the $3.8 billion debt owed by Iraq, The Associated Press reported. The
announcement, made by Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed, crown prince of Abu Dhabi, the
capital of the Emirates, followed a recent visit by former Secretary of State
James A. Baker III, who has been appointed by the Bush administration to
persuade countries to forgive Iraq's prodigious debts.

Iraq owes a total of about $120 billion. Arab countries hold about $80 billion
of the debt, and the so-called Paris Club of industrial nations the remaining
$40 billion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iraqi Shiite Muslims stood atop columns in Baghdad yesterday
during a demonstration in which they demanded a local trial for Saddam Hussein
and a direct parliamentary election instead of caucuses. (Photo by Lynsey
Addario/Corbis, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); EXTERNAL DEBT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (79%); PUBLIC DEBT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MIDDLE EAST
PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); POLITICS (77%); INTERVIEWS (75%); BOMBINGS (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); RELIGION (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (68%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (68%); POWS & MIAS (67%); RIOTS (64%); EXTERNAL DEBT REDUCTION (64%);
APPOINTMENTS (63%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (52%) Elections; Demonstrations
and Riots; United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (57%) Saddam Hussein; Neela
Banerjee

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (96%); ABU DHABI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (96%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             624 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sex Trade's Opponents

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 182 words


To the Editor:

Though Nicholas D. Kristof's recognition of prostitution and sex trafficking as
a modern form of slavery is welcome, his comment that American women's groups
have done little to address this tragedy is misdirected ("Girls for Sale,"
column, Jan. 17).

Women's groups around the world have been fighting the commercial sex industry,
a multibillion-dollar transnational enterprise, for decades.

Buying one or two girls out of sexual slavery is not a model of intervention.
The prosecution of those creating and commercializing this demand, as well as
the promotion of education and employment opportunities for girls otherwise left
without alternative means of survival, would address the scourge of trafficking
more effectively.

Governments turn a blind eye to the illegalities of commercial sexual
exploitation and often play a more active role through the corrupt participation
of government officials.

The inaction of governments, long decried by the women's movement, should be the
target of Mr. Kristof's outrage.

JESSICA NEUWIRTH
President, Equality Now
New York, Jan. 17, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (67%); EMPLOYMENT (67%)
Prostitution

ORGANIZATION: EQUALITY NOW (82%) Equality Now (Orgn)

PERSON: Jessica Neuwirth; Nicholas D Kristof

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             626 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Ex-Minister Gets Life In 1994 Genocide

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 64 words


An international court in Tanzania convicted a former minister for higher
education, Jean de Dieu Kamuhanda, of genocide and sentenced him to life in
prison. Mr. Kamuhanda, 51, handed out guns, grenades and machetes, and
personally led a Hutu militia attack on ethnic Tutsi who took refuge in a church
during a frenzy of violence in 1994, witnesses told the United Nations tribunal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); VERDICTS (88%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (86%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (86%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (85%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe; Decisions and Verdicts; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Jean de Dieu Kamuhanda

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             628 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cheney Calls for More Unity In Fight Against Terrorism

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT and MARK LANDLER; Alan Cowell contributed reporting for
this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: DAVOS, Switzerland, Jan. 24


Vice President Dick Cheney called Saturday for greater global unity to fight
terrorism, halt the spread of illicit weapons and promote democratic trends in
the Middle East, in the Bush administration's most significant appeal yet to
disaffected allies who opposed the Iraq war.

Mr. Cheney, one of President Bush's most influential senior advisers, defended
the administration's decision to topple Saddam Hussein. But in a rare trip
outside the United States, he also sought to mend rifts over the war, striking a
conciliatory tone in seeking help from Europeans and other traditional allies to
strengthen the global partnership against an array of security threats.

In a wide-ranging address to about 1,000 political, business and religious
leaders at an international conference here in the Alps, Mr. Cheney asked
European allies to join the United States to promote democratic movements in
Iran, to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian dispute and to combat the root cause of
terrorism by helping to overcome what he called the "freedom deficit" in many
Middle Eastern countries.

"We must meet the dangers together," Mr. Cheney said in his 30-minute speech to
the gathering, the annual World Economic Forum. "Cooperation among our
governments, and effective international institutions, are even more important
than they have been in the past."

Mr. Cheney continued, "Working cooperatively against the dangers of a new era
will place demands on us all, and there will be occasional differences, even
among allies who have great respect for one another."

The administration's choice of Mr. Cheney to lead its delegation here may seem
improbable, given his low profile and hard-line reputation. Mr. Cheney was
making only his second international trip in three years as vice president, and
remains an enigma to many Europeans and other foreigners. The White House also
generally avoids the kinds of issues this conference champions, like
globalization and multilateral diplomacy.

But aides to Mr. Cheney said he was eager to come, both out of an interest in
meeting with world political and business leaders, including King Abdullah of
Jordan and Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharaf, and to soften Mr. Bush's
international image and to reassure allies that the United States was not
pursuing a unilateral security strategy.

Responding to a question after his speech, Mr. Cheney sought to dispel
perceptions that the United States was empire-building. "If we were a true
empire, we would currently preside over a much greater piece of the earth's
surface than we do," he said. "That's not the way we operate."

Last year, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell spoke at the conference, drawing a
skeptical response when he laid out the case for military action in Iraq, even
without a United Nations mandate. Mr. Cheney received polite, but perfunctory,
applause on Saturday as he sought to patch up strains with European allies over
the Iraq war, stricter visa requirements and the treatment of detainees at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Klaus Zumwinkel, chairman of the German postal service, Deutsche Post, said that
Mr. Cheney "increased the market share of positive sentiment toward the United
States."

While other listeners took note of Mr. Cheney's conciliatory tone, some were
suspicious of his motives.

"This overture comes during an election year," said Carel N. Van Der Spek, a
Dutch banker. "The Bush administration wants to draw down its troops in Iraq,
and to do that, it needs helps from Europe."

Dominique Borde, a French law firm partner, praised Mr. Cheney's tone. But he
said the vice president offered little evidence that the United States planned
to pay more heed to France or other allies in formulating its foreign policy.

"This is a world where economic might prevails," Mr. Borde said. "We're not run
by an empire. We're run by a democracy."

Speaking at a dinner for journalists, the financier George Soros said
administration officials have "recognized the mistakes they have made, and now
realize that they need international cooperation," but "there is a big gap
between the words of the Bush administration and its actions."

In his remarks, Mr. Cheney offered no specific initiatives, instead proposing
democratic reforms like greater political participation and the rule of law as a
broad prescription for "confronting the ideologies of violence" and addressing
the root causes of terrorism. "Helping the peoples of the greater Middle East to
overcome the freedom deficit is, ultimately, the key to winning the broader war
on terror," he said.

Even as Mr. Cheney proposed a rhetorical truce in the trans-Atlantic feud over
Iraq and new courses of action ahead, he offered an unapologetic defense of the
administration's threat to use military force, if necessary, whenever diplomacy
fails.

Mr. Cheney, echoing themes in Mr. Bush's State of the Union address last
Tuesday, cited the ouster of the Taliban in Afghanistan and the end of Mr.
Hussein's rule in Iraq as examples of the strategy's success.

The recent decision by the Libyan president, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, to give up
his nation's illicit weapons programs, was the result of quiet diplomacy backed
up by the threat of force, Mr. Cheney said.

"Our diplomacy with Libya was successful only because our word was credible," he
said.

He did not address the issue of Iraq's elusive unconventional weapons, and was
not asked about them during a brief question-and-answer period after his
remarks. David Kay, who led the American effort to find banned weapons in Iraq,
said Friday after stepping down from his post that he had concluded that Iraq
had no stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons at the start of the war.

Mr. Cheney's remarks appeared to build on themes Mr. Bush voiced in a speech on
Nov. 21 in Britain, when he said France and Germany, which have been reluctant
to take part in stabilizing Iraq, should recall the lessons of World War II,
when an Allied effort defeated Nazi tyranny in Europe and paved the way there
for postwar security and prosperity.

Mr. Cheney again invoked World War II, and noted that American and European
intelligence and law enforcement agencies were working together to hunt down
terrorists.

"Through six decades and 12 American presidents, the United States and Europe
have faced monumental challenges and have overcome them together," he declared.

But he called on Europe to do more: "Europeans know that their great experiment
in building peace, unity and prosperity cannot survive as a privileged enclave,
surrounded on its outskirts by breeding grounds of hatred and fanatics."

Mr. Cheney listed several positive security developments, including Mr.
Hussein's capture, the new democratic Constitution in Afghanistan, and the
easing of tensions between India and Pakistan.

But he said terrorist groups still posed a long-term threat, given their
determination to develop or acquire chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear weapons.

"Were they to gain those weapons either by their own efforts or with the help
from an outlaw regime, no appeal to reason or morality would prevent them from
committing the worst of terrors," he said.

Mr. Cheney put a new emphasis on promoting democratic values as a way to defeat
terrorism. This appeared to answer criticism from foreign officials that the
administration's strategy for combating terrorism was too narrow.

"Democracies do not breed the anger and radicalism that drag down whole
societies or export violence," Mr. Cheney said. "Terrorists do not find fertile
recruiting grounds in societies where young people have the right to guide their
own destinies and to choose their own leaders."

The notion that democratic values could never take root in the Middle East was
"condescending" and "false," he said. He cited broader women's rights in
Morocco, as well as reduced state controls on news organizations in Jordan and
increased opportunities for women to run for public office in Bahrain.

Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, applauded Mr. Cheney
for pressing for democracy in the Arab world, though he said he was disappointed
by most of the speech, which he said was notable for its "complete lack of
reference to international law."

Some Arab members of the audience said the United States must step in more
forcefully to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, if it wanted to hasten
the development of democracy in the Middle East.

"Reform is like a seed you plant," said Nadim Y. Muasher, the chairman of the
Arab International Hotels Company in Jordan. "If you plant it between two rocks
-- Israel and Palestine -- it won't grow."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (76%); GLOBALIZATION (73%); ILLEGAL
WEAPONS (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (72%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (66%); RELIGION (54%) Terrorism; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

COMPANY: BUSH'S INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD (58%)

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (82%) World Economic Forum

INDUSTRY: NAICS311612 MEAT PROCESSED FROM CARCASSES (58%); NAICS311111 DOG & CAT
FOOD MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC2047 DOG & CAT FOOD (58%); SIC2013 SAUSAGES & OTHER
PREPARED MEAT PRODUCTS (58%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Eric
Schmitt; Mark Landler; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (79%); EARTH (79%); ALPS (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); EUROPE (94%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); JORDAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); ISRAEL (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Europe; Middle East; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             632 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Congo: Punishment Vowed For Rapists

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 58 words


Azarias Ruberwa, a vice president and former rebel leader, said the country had
to punish former fighters guilty of raping thousands of women during the
five-year civil war. The World Food Program said in November that its workers
were uncovering rape on a horrific scale as the peace process allowed them to
move deeper into rebel-held regions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%);
GENOCIDE (86%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); PEACE PROCESS (80%) Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (91%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
United Nations World Food Program

PERSON: Azarias (Vice Pres) Ruberwa

COUNTRY: AFRICA (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             633 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Tribunal's Defense Lawyers Strike

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 55 words


Lawyers defending suspects facing charges in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda began a
three-day strike. The lawyers said they backed a list of defendant demands,
including rights to bail, to subpoena defense witnesses, and to know the
identity of prosecution witnesses sometimes protected by the international
court, based in Tanzania.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (93%); SUBPOENAS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); STRIKES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WITNESSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (84%) Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe  ; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Bail; Labor; Strikes; Legal Profession

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (91%); AFRICA (72%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             634 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Croatian-Serb Ex-Leader Convicted

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 72 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal convicted Milan Babic, a wartime
Croatian-Serb leader, of one count of persecution after he pleaded guilty in a
deal with prosecutors. The court accepted the prosecution's decision to drop
four charges of murder, cruelty and the destruction of villages during the war
in Croatia in the early 1990's. A sentencing hearing was set for April.
Prosecutors have recommended 11 years imprisonment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Plea Bargaining; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Milan Babic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO
(79%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Croatia; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             635 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stopping The Traffickers

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 724 words


When I was in Cambodia recently, writing about two teenage prostitutes whose
freedom I had purchased, Srey Neth and Srey Mom, readers started sending me
frantic e-mail along the lines of: I'll wire you some money if you'll free one
for me, too.

But buying sex slaves and freeing them is not a long-term solution. It helps
individuals but risks creating incentives for other girls to be kidnapped into
servitude. As my experience showed, the underworld these women inhabit is
complex and layered, and rescuing them involves more than just opening a door.

Yet even if perfect solutions are elusive, progress is possible. I felt that on
this trip.

I traveled to Cambodia because I had been shocked by what I had seen there in
the 1990's. I've covered wars, but nothing shook me more than interviews with
13-year-old girls who had been sold by their parents or kidnapped by neighbors.

These days the girls are 17 rather than 13, fewer are beaten or physically
imprisoned, and Cambodia's success in fighting AIDS with condoms means that
sexual slavery is not necessarily a death sentence.

The progress in Cambodia is mirrored by strides elsewhere, from South Korea to
Romania and the Dominican Republic. And most of the credit goes to the Bush
administration, particularly its State Department's trafficking office, which is
shaming and threatening countries into confronting traffickers.

President Bush's policies toward women have often been callous -- cutting off,
for example, funds for safe childbirth programs in Africa because of ideological
disputes with sponsoring groups. But on trafficking, this administration has led
the way.

Sex trafficking has become a hot issue among conservative evangelical
Christians, and they have successfully pushed Mr. Bush to embrace the issue. He
gave a landmark speech to the U.N. in September, and Colin Powell is moving the
issue forward in a commendably bipartisan way. The new director of the
trafficking office, John Miller, has bludgeoned foreign governments, telling
them to curb trafficking or face sanctions.

When I was in Cambodia, that pressure translated into a brothel owner's being
sent to prison for 20 years for peddling girls aged 10 and 12. Other brothel
owners decided that it wasn't worth the risk and cleared out their youngest
girls.

Conservative Christian leaders have called on Mr. Bush to do more, and to
appoint Mr. Miller as an ambassador. But the real mystery is why most Democrats,
liberals and feminist groups have been complacent on trafficking.

Senator Paul Wellstone helped direct the fight against trafficking, but since
his death, leadership on the issue has passed overwhelmingly into Republican
hands. Likewise, most mainstream women's groups, like the National Organization
for Women and the Feminist Majority Foundation, have been shamefully
lackadaisical about an issue that should be near the top of any feminist agenda.

"I'm critical of my sister feminists," says Donna Hughes, a professor of women's
studies at the University of Rhode Island and an expert on trafficking. "To me,
the two biggest threats to women today are Islamic fundamentalism and the
trafficking and normalization of prostitution. Mainstream feminists really have
not been responding tothese issues or active on them the way they should be."

With bipartisan support, child prostitution can be addressed through a
combination of tactics: (1) pressure on foreign governments to crack down on
brothels with underage girls or those held against their will, (2) promotion of
condoms to keep prostitutes alive and (3) above all, literacy and job programs
to raise the status of girls and women.

In addition, we could cripple the economics of sex trafficking in Asia by
focusing on the men who buy the virginity of girls. The $500 or $1,000 payments
these men make for young virgins are central to the profitability of the
brothels and are responsible for bringing in the youngest girls.

In Cambodia, there was one teenager, Jen, a shy, sweet farm girl, whose freedom
I had intended to purchase. But later, I couldn't find Jen, so she's presumably
still in Poipet, slowly dying. To Americans, Cambodian sex slaves must seem like
aliens on another planet, but talk to them and you realize that girls like Jen
are people just like us. They are not a hopeless cause, and it's worth trying
harder to save them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); PROSTITUTION
(90%); SLAVERY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); WOMEN
(89%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(86%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%); POLITICAL PARTIES (68%); RELIGION (68%);
AIDS & HIV (68%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (67%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (64%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (63%) Prostitution; Children and Youth; Women;
Feminist Movement; Prostitution

ORGANIZATION: State Department

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%) Nicholas D Kristof; Srey Neth; Srey Mom; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); ROMANIA (79%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%)

REGION: Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             638 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE PUBLIC EDITOR;
All the News That's Fit to Print? Or Just Our News?

BYLINE:  By DANIEL OKRENT

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1459 words


THIS week, it's time for some journalism heresy. I'd like to suggest that
newspapers with aspirations to greatness -- like the one you're holding in your
hands -- learn to be generous to their rivals, and in the process provide value
for their readers.

It has long been Times policy to credit other news organizations for their
scoops: "Such and so was first reported Monday in 'The Daily Bugle.' " It has
even longer been part of the paper's genetic code never to let someone else's
scoop lie unmassaged by Timesian hands. "What can we add?" goes the editors'
refrain. Sometimes -- often -- that works. Sometimes, though, the effort at
addition becomes, for the reader, an act of subtraction.

In the last several weeks, three stories launched elsewhere have been either
diminished or disregarded by The Times. (Of course, among major news
organizations, this not-invented-here attitude is no more exclusive to The Times
than are commas.) In each case, the effort to maintain a high level of what
people around here call "competitive metabolism" has not served the readers
well.

Last October, The Blade in Toledo, Ohio, published a series of articles
revealing that "members of a platoon of American soldiers known as Tiger Force
slaughtered an untold number of Vietnamese civilians over a seven-month period
in 1967." The series was the product of 10 months of research conducted on two
continents and in seven states.

When the Blade series broke, The Associated Press sent out a story summarizing
its findings. Many newspapers picked up the A.P. report; some, including the
Times-owned International Herald Tribune, put it on the front page. In the Times
newsroom, Roger Cohen, who was foreign editor at the time, thought it an
important story, but, he recalls, he was "focused on Iraq" and "did not give it
the attention it deserved." National editor Jim Roberts tried to get something
rolling that the paper could call its own, but reporters who knew their way
around the Pentagon were otherwise engaged. Editors felt that running 10 inches
of A.P. copy would not represent the story fairly.

In The New Yorker of Nov. 10, Seymour Hersh, who as a young reporter broke the
story about the massacre at My Lai, praised the Blade series, noting along the
way that the four major networks and most major newspapers had all but ignored
it. Hersh's article provoked The Times's executive editor, Bill Keller, to order
up a lengthy piece on The Blade's discoveries. John Kifner's "Report on Brutal
Vietnam Campaign Stirs Memories," which sought to place the Blade series in
historical perspective, finally ran on Dec. 28 -- a report on a two-month-old
story about events that took place 37 years ago. The Blade's publisher and
editor in chief, John Robinson Block, felt that The Times's late weigh-in, which
included a sizable helping of the skepticism that re-examination will almost
inevitably provoke, was an insult to his paper and its reporters.

Keller told me that if his own staff had developed the Blade series, he would
have put it on the front page. Yet at least partly because it was someone
else's, it ended up diminished, delayed and, in some eyes, devalued.

Scores of readers wrote me earlier this month about The Times's failure to put
former Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill's bombshells about the early days of the
Bush administration on the front page. Most suggested (and many insisted) that
the story was played down for political reasons.

There are several more practical explanations that could be invoked by Times
defenders. They might note that the carefully leaked morsels of news that fed
the story were intended to propel the book containing O'Neill's revelations onto
the best-seller list. They could point out that O'Neill himself wasn't available
to The Times; his first broadcast interview had been locked up exclusively by
"60 Minutes," and his first print interview had been promised to Time magazine.
Most persuasively, Times editors had very little to go on as they tried to
fashion their first story for Saturday, Jan. 10, and what they had was
frustratingly manipulative: promoting its exclusive Sunday evening interview
with O'Neill, CBS spooned out a few juicy nuggets to newspapers on Friday and
Saturday -- enough to entice readers to watch "60 Minutes," yet not enough to
make them feel they'd already seen it.

The 10-paragraph Associated Press story The Times ran on Jan. 10 may not have
been a prizewinner, but it did have a former cabinet member comparing the
president who appointed him to a "blind man in a roomful of deaf people," which
certainly sounds like Page 1 news to me. But if it didn't make the front page
because CBS had locked down the story, once The Times did have access both to
the book and to O'Neill himself, it didn't make the front page because -- well,
because by then the news was no longer new. For the historical record provided
by the newspaper of record, explosive revelations about a sitting president by
one of his appointees were consigned to Pages A11, A22 and A13.

THE most important not-invented-here in recent weeks, and the one that
crystallized the issue for me, was a story that ran in The Washington Post on
Jan. 7. "Iraq's Arsenal Was Only on Paper," by Barton Gellman, was so stunning a
piece of reporting that it led Bill Keller to tell The New York Observer that it
"caused everyone who competes with Gellman a serious case of indigestion
followed by admiration." In a conversation in his office last week, Keller
elaborated: Gellman's piece, he said, was "rich and subtle and deeply reported."
I asked him why, if it was so good, it didn't merit a story in The Times
recounting its main points, especially since The Times's own reporting on Iraqi
weapons programs last winter has continued to suffer a hurricane of criticism.
Keller said that trying to do a summary of Gellman's work for Times readers ran
the risk of oversimplification -- that the nuances that made the piece so strong
would not survive reduction to summary form. Gellman's piece, he said, was "easy
to admire, hard to represent."

Or, as former Times managing editor Gene Roberts once said by way of explaining
the difficulty of handling other papers' big stories, "You can't steal an
elephant." The necessary checking and re-reporting The Times had to go through
to run its own version of The Blade's Vietnam story required several weeks.
Tracking down Gellman's Iraqi sources might have taken years. Breaking through
the fortress of exclusivity erected around Paul O'Neill by CBS and Simon &
Schuster would have taken a safecracker.

But it's not as if The Times, and every other newspaper on the planet, doesn't
consistently publish material it hasn't gathered on its own. When a district
attorney announces an indictment, The Times doesn't assume it needs weeks to
interview witnesses, check allegations or otherwise vet the prosecutor's
charges. When a politician makes a speech, there's often so much taken at face
value a critic could argue (and in my e-mail, many, many do) that the paper is
shilling for the politician. Having read Barton Gellman's words for many years,
why can't Times editors have as much faith in them as in John Kerry's, or Dick
Cheney's, or the Santa Barbara County prosecutor's? They -- the editors -- may
read The Washington Post. But how many of their readers do?

There's no question that the competitive electricity powering a news
organization produces a great deal of benefit, just as it would in a soap
company fighting for market share or in a research team trying to beat the other
guys to a medical breakthrough. I understand why competition is necessary to
inspire the troops. I also understand that Macy's never carried anything with a
Gimbel's label sewn into it. But maybe The Times's insistence on stamping its
own brand on everything it touches ends up diminishing what it delivers. If the
goal of newspapering is to inform the readers and create a historical record,
shouldn't the editors be telling us about everything they think is important, no
mater where they find it?

I've been trying to stick to one theme in each of my biweekly columns, but as
that may be more a product of vanity than necessity, I'm going to break the
pattern here. Last Sunday's Times Magazine cover story on sex slavery, "The
Girls Next Door," by contributing writer Peter Landesman, has provoked a great
deal of controversy, and the article's detractors and its defenders have made
their cases forcefully. Go to www.slate.com/Landesman for a wide-ranging assault
on the piece by Slate editor at large Jack Shafer and for a comprehensive
defense by Times Magazine editor Gerald Marzo-rati. For those who missed it, a
link to the original story may be found at nytimes.com/weekinreview.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JOURNALISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (89%); NEWS
REPORTING (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); BIOCHEMISTRY (75%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (70%); VIETNAM WAR (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); GENES & CHROMOSOMES (70%);
NETWORK TELEVISION (65%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (63%) News and News Media;
Vietnam War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
Politics and Government; News and News Media; Armament, Defense and Military
Forces; Biological and Chemical Warfare

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: New York Times; Toledo Blade (Newspaper); Washington Post

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (54%)

PERSON: Daniel Okrent; Paul O'Neill; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: TOLEDO, OH, USA (69%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (91%); VIET NAM (86%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             640 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Top Bosnian Serb Goes On Trial

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 63 words


The long-delayed genocide trial of Momcilo Krajisnik, the second most powerful
Serbian politician in wartime Bosnia, opened. Mr. Krajisnik, who was speaker of
Parliament and right-hand man to the Bosnian Serb president, Radovan Karadzic,
was described by prosecutors as having helped craft the policy of ethnic
cleansing and was "fully aware of the horrific consequences."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Momcilo Krajisnik; Radovan Karadzic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA (93%);
NETHERLANDS (90%); EUROPE (87%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             642 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Prosecution Told To Close Its Case

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 37 words


Judges at the United Nations war crimes tribunal instructed prosecutors to wrap
up their case against Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, by Feb.
19 and authorized longer trial days to meet the schedule.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA
(79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             646 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE SATURDAY PROFILE;
What's in a Name? For a Saudi Insider, Everything

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: PARIS


She has a name that in the West follows her like a bad odor, stopping
immigration officials in their tracks, drawing frowns in banks and causing
consternation when she simply introduces herself as Carmen bin Ladin. "People
sometimes even look at me as if I'm joking," she said.

Mrs. bin Ladin, who was born Carmen Dufour, to an Iranian mother and a Swiss
father, acquired her name through love. It happened in 1974, when she married
Yeslam bin Ladin, son of one of Saudi Arabia's richest men. (She uses her
husband's spelling of the family name.) Soon after, she first met her new
brother-in-law, Osama bin Laden.

She does not claim to be an authority on her infamous brother-in-law, because,
she said, she met "the tall man with a commanding presence" only a few times.
But for 14 years, she said, she was a member of one of the country's most
secretive and powerful clans, observing its inner workings, its rigid social
code, the quarrels among its members and, ultimately, its common front.

She has now chronicled her Saudi life in "Inside the Kingdom," a book that has
just been published in Europe. In France (Lafon), it shot straight onto the
best-seller list. The English edition is to appear in London (Virago) in August.

Mrs. bin Ladin, who is separated from her husband, calls the book an expurgated
memoir because she has changed some royal names, withheld many details to spare
the feelings of people she remains in touch with and, not least, she says,
because she is still involved in a protracted divorce battle and a fight for her
children's inheritance.

But the book oozes frustration and anger and, it would seem, enough detail to
upset much of her extended family and the Saudi elite. Mrs. bin Ladin tells
tales about the envy among the clan's women and the squabbles and rivalry among
the bin Laden brothers, about their ties with senior princes who grant contracts
and expect kickbacks. Other "delicate subjects" as she calls them, in the book,
include abortion, secret drug use and homosexual affairs among the bored,
depressed or discarded wives of the upper crust.

Despite its slow pace, the book makes a fiery case against what its author calls
the oppression and fanaticism that dominates much of Saudi society. Her
unabashed conclusion: "The Saudis are the Taliban, in luxury."

Mrs. bin Ladin, a granddaughter of Persian aristocrats who was raised in wealth
in Switzerland and Iran, comes across not as a warrior but as rather shy and
vulnerable. She is in her late 40's, with heavy-lidded, warm green eyes. Settled
on a sofa in a lakeside hotel in Geneva, not far from her villa, Mrs. bin Ladin
smokes one ultrathin cigarette after another during the first of several
interviews. Her clothes are tight, very tight, an antidote perhaps to the bulky
black shrouds under which she had been forced to hide.

She wrote the book to explain to her three daughters why she had to break with
Saudi culture: she did not want to lose her children or see them turn into the
"faceless and voiceless women I lived among." She wanted them to understand why
their family rejected them, she says.

As the conversation wove on, Mrs. bin Ladin revealed another strong motive: a
kind of warning to the West against trusting "that self-assured, merciless
culture."

"I wanted to give a glimpse of how Saudi culture works on the inside, how their
fanaticism works," she said. "They will not show an outsider their true face. To
know them you have to be part of them."

Repeated phone calls for comment to Mr. bin Ladin's office in Geneva were not
returned. But his estranged wife now expects pressure from him, noting that this
week she was informed of a hefty cut in her alimony, which she also uses to
support the couple's children, Wafa, 26, Najia, 24, and Noor, 16.

The fairy tale gone sour began in 1973 when she met Yeslam while he was
vacationing in Geneva. The two fell in love, married and spent almost two years
in California, where he studied business and she took English courses. In 1976,
they settled in Jidda, headquarters of the mighty Binladin construction group.

The family patriarch, Muhammad bin Laden, an illiterate worker from Yemen who
created the business empire, had already died. But Mrs. bin Ladin began to meet
his offspring: 25 sons and 29 daughters, begotten with 22 wives. Osama was just
another brother, although more devout than most, Mrs. bin Ladin said. That
changed in 1979, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and he joined the
volunteers to fight Communism with the support of the Saudi government. "The
family talked a lot about him then. They admired what he was doing, he became a
hero," she said.

SHE has met Osama bin Laden a few times. At their first encounter, Mrs. bin
Ladin was at home, in Jidda, when he came by looking for his brother, Yeslam. As
soon as her brother-in-law saw her, she recalled, he turned his head and angrily
waved her away. "My face was not covered by a veil," she said. "He couldn't bear
it and walked off."

Other relatives knew how stern and ostensibly pious he was, she continued. Once,
during an outing to a family country home, she said, "Osama and his wife Najwah
were there." Their infant son, Abdallah, was practically dehydrated in the 100
degree heat and the baby was howling, too small to take water by spoon. But he
could not be given water from a bottle because "Osama had some dogmatic idea
about not allowing the baby a rubber teat," said Mrs. bin Ladin, who protested.
"The child's mother, the grandmother and none of the other women dared to
intervene."

To find some respite in her stultifying world among women who "did nothing, read
nothing, and were like pets kept by their husbands," she organized weekly dinner
parties, attended by diplomats and Western and Arab businessmen.

"After everyone left, the Saudis would stay behind and take off their masks,"
she said. They would gloat about their oil power, she said, and talk about their
concerns, "not about human rights or democracy but about how to retain their
power over Europe and the United States."

The book dwells at length on women's lives, "like being under an anesthetic,"
she writes. Although women may not travel without permission from a man, those
who can afford to, do. They fake illnesses and say they must travel abroad for
treatment. "There exists an underground women's network to trade passports and
permissions," she writes.

Over a salad lunch, she talked of the bin Laden brothers, who, she said, to the
outside world presented a united front but constantly bickered, undercut one
another and shifted allegiances. Each brother, she said, would cultivate
personal and business ties with members of the royal family.

The couple moved to Geneva in 1985, she said, because she could no longer stand
the oppression of Saudi society and its "decadence." "Yeslam could not bear to
continue the struggles with Bakr," the head of the clan.

In 1988, the couple separated, because, she said, "Yeslam was seeing other
women." She said she decided not to change her name, "because it is also my
daughters' name and because we have nothing to hide." The name, she said, "will
follow us anyway."

As for her crusading brother-in-law, Mrs. bin Ladin said, she has reason to
believe he or his family still receive a portion of the company's enormous
dividends. Osama bin Laden now has four wives and 16 children, she said.

"I'm sure he is still alive," she said. "Knowing the family clan, they would
make it known if he was not, to take the pressure off. They have to live with
the stigma."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Books and Magazines

PERSON: Carmen Bin Ladin

GRAPHIC: Photo: CARMEN BIN LADIN (Photo by Marie Baldo/Susanna Lea Associates)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL-QAEDA (89%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (89%); FAMILY (89%); PREGNANCY &
CHILDBIRTH (76%); GRANDCHILDREN (76%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (76%); IMMIGRATION
(73%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (71%); LITERATURE (71%); WRITERS (71%); SMOKING
(69%); BESTSELLERS (66%) Biographical Information; Books and Literature; Women;
Life Styles

OSAMA BIN LADEN (92%) Marlise Simons; Carmen Bin Ladin; Osama Bin Laden; Yeslam
Bin Ladin

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (74%); PARIS, FRANCE (69%); GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (57%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);
FRANCE (78%); EUROPE (70%); CENTRAL EUROPE (57%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             647 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Feminists and the Sex Trade

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 166 words


To the Editor:

Re "Stopping the Traffickers" (column, Jan. 31):

Nicholas D. Kristof's denunciation of feminist organizations shows a lack of
awareness about the role that feminist organizations played in putting the sex
trafficking issue on the United States policy agenda and about the role that we
continue to play in enforcement of anti-trafficking laws.

Equality Now, the Feminist Majority and the National Organization for Women
helped lead the drive to pass the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act of 2000.

The law, which the Bush administration inherited rather than initiated, was
signed into law by President Clinton, whose administration we frequently met
with to advocate for the strongest definition of trafficking.

Mr. Kristof also ignored the conference, the first of its kind, that our
National Center for Women and Policing held last May specifically to train
police in enforcement of the law.

ELEANOR SMEAL
President, Feminist Majority
Arlington, Va., Feb. 3, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WOMEN (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING
(90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); POLICE FORCES (65%)
Feminist Movement; Prostitution; Women

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (57%); EQUALITY NOW (57%);
NATIONAL CENTER FOR WOMEN & POLICING (56%) Feminist Majority (Orgn)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (53%) Eleanor Smeal; Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             652 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

20th-Century Atrocities

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 194 words



To the Editor:

You quote Abraham Foxman, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League,
as saying in response to a remark by Mel Gibson about the Holocaust, ''He
doesn't begin to understand the difference between dying in a famine and people
being cremated solely for what they are'' (''Gibson to Delete a Scene in
'Passion,' '' Arts pages, Feb. 4).

Mr. Gibson had said in an interview: ''The Second World War killed tens of
millions of people. Some of them were Jews in concentration camps. . . . In the
Ukraine several million starved to death between 1932 and 1933.''

Comments like Mr. Foxman's undermine the gravity of the atrocities committed
against the Ukrainian people. Between 7 million and 10 million Ukrainians were
systematically starved to death in 1932-33 simply because of who they were and
because of their resistance to Soviet dominance.

To play down and deny that shows a blatant disregard and insensitivity to a
nation that suffered under an oppressive regime.

Mr. Foxman should realize that all genocides should be reviled rather than
categorized.

MICHAEL SAWKIW JR.
President, Ukrainian Congress
Committee of America
Washington, Feb. 5, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STARVATION (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); FAMINE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); INTERVIEWS (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%) Nazi Policies
Toward Jews and Minorities; Famine; World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (84%)

PERSON: Mel Gibson; Abraham Foxman; Michael Jr Sawkiw

COUNTRY: UKRAINE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

REGION: Russia; Ukraine

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             653 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sierra Leone: Prosecutors Seek Rape Charges

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 76 words


Prosecutors have asked the United Nations-backed war crimes special court to add
sex crimes to indictments against three pro-government militia leaders during
the country's civil war. The prosecution charges the three, including the former
interior minister, with being responsible for fighters who raped civilian women
and forced them into sexual slavery. They already face charges of unlawful
killing, terrorizing civilians and recruiting child soldiers.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HOMICIDE (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); SLAVERY
(85%); CHILD SOLDIERS (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Sex Crimes; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Women;
Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (93%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             657 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interviews to Focus On Unit Accused Of Vietnam Killings

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: TOLEDO, Ohio, Feb. 15


Military investigators will interview former members of an elite Army platoon
accused of killing unarmed Vietnamese civilians in 1967, according to a
newspaper report.

The newspaper, The Blade, first reported in October that the Army's 101st
Airborne Division's Tiger Force killed unarmed civilians, including women,
children and elderly farmers, for seven months in 1967.

Tiger Force was created to spy on forces of North Vietnam in South Vietnam's
central highlands.

The interviews are ''part of the review and assessment of the original
investigation,'' Lt. Col. Kevin Curry, an Army spokesman, told The Blade for its
Sunday editions.

The review will be conducted under the direction of Les Brownlee, the acting
Army secretary, who was asked to look into the matter by Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld.

Investigators are expected to report their findings to Mr. Brownlee by March,
said a spokesman for Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio, who
has been pushing for a Congressional investigation.

Army officials have not said how many witnesses will be interviewed, when the
inquiry will end or whether charges will be sought against former soldiers and
officers, the newspaper said.

Investigators are expected to take statements from a former Army journalist,
Dennis Stout, and a former Tiger Force medic, Rion Causey, both witnesses to the
reported atrocities, The Blade said.

Mr. Stout and Mr. Causey told the newspaper they were surprised when they were
contacted last week by an Army investigator.

''I've waited years to talk to them,'' Mr. Stout, 58, said. ''I saw people
killed who didn't deserve to die.''

Mr. Causey, 56, said he was prepared to talk about attacks on villagers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (96%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(79%); VIETNAM WAR (79%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); JOURNALISM (78%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); WRITERS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (68%) Vietnam War; United
States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: DENNIS KUCINICH (73%)

CITY: TOLEDO, OH, USA (54%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); VIET NAM (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             661 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge's Illness a New Setback to Milosevic's War Crimes Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 21


Richard May, the British judge who presides over the war crimes trial of
Slobodan Milosevic, has fallen ill, adding a new setback to the two-year-old
process, which has been plagued with difficulties from the start.

Officials at the United Nations tribunal here say that the nature of the judge's
illness is a private matter and decline to discuss it. But because of its
seriousness, some said, officials are bracing for the possibility that the judge
may not be able to return to his duties any time soon and may have to be
replaced.

The 65-year old judge, who has a reputation for keeping tight control over his
courtroom, has headed the three-judge panel trying Mr. Milosevic, the former
president of Yugoslavia, since the trial began in February 2002. The others are
Patrick Robinson from Jamaica and O-Gon Kwon from South Korea.

Judge May has been absent from the court since late January. No official
announcement has been made, except that he was unwell. But the looming
disruption in the trial of Mr. Milosevic has already caused much consternation
at the tribunal and intense discussions behind the scenes on how to proceed.

Naming a new judge, lawyers at the court said, at the very least would add
further delays to a trial that has been regularly slowed or halted by the
frequent bouts of illness of Mr. Milosevic, who suffers from high blood pressure
and heart disease. A new judge would require time to plow through the
transcripts of almost 300 court days, including the testimony of as many
witnesses.

But other complications may arise. Mr. Milosevic, who acts as his own defense
counsel, under the rules would have to consent to naming a substitute judge. If
he objected, the judges could overrule him, legal experts said, but even then he
would have a right to appeal their decision. A greater worry, they said, is that
Mr. Milosevic could seek a ruling of a mistrial. Whatever his response might be,
Mr. Milosevic has in the past used many occasions to challenge the proceedings
of a court he has frequently called illegal.

The complex war crimes trial, the first of its kind for a modern head of state,
is just now reaching its halfway point as the prosecution prepares to rest its
case in the coming days. Prosecutors had hoped to close their case last
Thursday, but the final hearings have been postponed several times on orders of
Mr. Milosevic' doctors, who reported as they have in the past that his blood
pressure was too high for him to attend court. Since the start, the trial has
been postponed more than a dozen times because the defendant suffered from flu,
exhaustion or heart problems, causing him to miss 65 days in court.

Mr. Milosevic's ill health has always dogged the trial, raising the question of
whether it could be completed. At one point, as Mr. Milosevic's blood pressure
problems seemed to get worse, and witnesses coming from abroad had to be
rescheduled repeatedly. Geoffrey Nice, the lead prosecutor, even requested that
the judges order Mr. Milosevic to stop smoking to alleviate his condition. The
judges said it would be good if he did, but did not intervene.

Even now, Mr. Milosevic's trial is the longest before an international court. He
faces multiple charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity linked to three
wars -- in Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo in the 1990's. He is facing separate
charges of genocide, the gravest of all crimes, for the war in Bosnia.

If the trial has been a ''scheduling nightmare'' for the prosecution, as one
official called it, it has also been a management problem for the three judges,
who have had to deal with an unruly defendant. Judge May, who long practiced in
Britain, is one of the most unperturbable and experienced trial judges at the
tribunal. An English barrister who joined the tribunal in 1967, he is considered
an expert on evidence and criminal procedure.

''I think anybody running that trial would have to lose his temper, taking that
abuse day after day,'' said one former judge, referring to the disdainful tone
with which Mr. Milosevic addresses ''Mister May'' as the defendant calls the
judge. ''You have to make a huge effort to be seen to be fair and in the middle.
I believe he has been fair and polite, but also very dismissive of the defendant
when he keeps complaining.''

Jim Landale, the tribunal spokesman, declined to discuss the judge's illness.
''It's a private matter,'' Mr. Landale said. ''He is continuing to receive
treatment. At the moment we are continuing the trial with two judges. He has not
resigned.''

Under court rules, a chamber may hold hearings for five consecutive days with
only two out of the three judges present. After five days, it can only deal with
simple decisions. Judge May has missed three court days since late January,
which means that the final two days of hearings set aside for the prosecution
may continue without him.

After the prosecution rests its case, Mr. Milosevic will have three months to
prepare his defense. Although no lawyer assists him in court, he does have a
large legal team, some of whom were present in The Hague this week and said they
were preparing his case.

Several of the lawyers, who are based in Belgrade, have visited Mr. Milosevic at
the United Nations detention center in recent days. Among them was Zdenko
Tomanovic, who heads the Milosevic team. Mr. Tomanovic said he knew little about
judge May's illness, but he suggested a likely strategy for Mr. Milosevic.

''If a judge is ill, we can wait till his health is better,'' Mr. Tomanovic
said. ''But if a judge has to leave, then the accused has the right to ask for
the proceedings to start all over again.'' Mr. Tomanovic, who noted he had spent
several hours with Mr. Milosevic on Friday, said he was more worried about his
client's illness. ''Mr. Milosevic is in very bad health at this point,'' he
said. ''His blood pressure is high, his heart problem is bad. I'm not sure if he
can appear in court in the coming days.''

The court schedule calls for Mr. Milosevic to appear on Tuesday and Wednesday
for the hearings of the final four or five witnesses for the prosecution, before
it closes its case.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 23, 2004



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about the illness of the judge who has presided
over the war crimes trial of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader,
misstated the year he joined the tribunal at The Hague. It was 1997, not 1967.



GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Richard May is presiding over Slobodan Milosevic's trial.
(Photo by Associated Press Television News)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); JUDGES (92%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); MISTRIAL (78%); LAWYERS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); HEART DISEASE (76%); INFLUENZA (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
HYPERTENSION (69%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Richard (Judge) May; Slobodan Milosevic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             663 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 25, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suit Claims Group's Staff Is Pressured On Religion

BYLINE: By DANIEL J. WAKIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 713 words


Eighteen former and current employees from the social services arm of the
Salvation Army sued the organization in federal court yesterday, accusing it of
imposing a religious veil over secular, publicly financed activities like caring
for foster children and counseling young people with AIDS.

The plaintiffs charged that the Army's New York division tried forcing them to
sign forms revealing the churches they had attended over the past 10 years, name
their ministers and agree to the Army's mission ''to preach the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.''

Several employees say they were pushed out after years of working in secular
jobs when they objected. Others said the new religious focus violated the social
workers' ethics code and could have a chilling effect on their work -- for
example, preventing them from giving condoms to people infected with H.I.V. or
forbidding abortion counseling.

''I was harassed to the point where eventually I resigned,'' said Margaret
Geissman, a former human resources manager who said her superior asked for the
religions and sexual orientation of her staff. ''As a Christian, I deeply resent
the use of discriminatory employment practices in the name of Christianity.''

In a statement, the Salvation Army said it was reviewing the lawsuit and would
respond in detail at some point. The organization said its ''policies and
procedures were entirely consistent'' with laws governing the employment
practices of religious institutions. In the past, local Salvation Army officials
said that the forms had long been in use around the country and that their
policies were permitted under terms of contracts with New York City and New York
State. No employees are forced to uphold church beliefs unless they are in a
position of ministry, they have said.

While the Salvation Army is a worldwide evangelical religious body, it is better
known for its charitable works. In the New York area, it runs numerous programs
to help the poor using state and city money, which the plaintiffs say requires
it to obey anti-discrimination laws.

The suit focuses on the Army's children's services agency in New York. Public
funds for the agency amount to at least $50 million, making it the largest
publicly financed Army unit in the country, said Anne Lown, the agency's
associate director and a plaintiff. It has 900 employees and serves 2,300
children, the suit said.

The lawsuit was filed in United States District Court in Manhattan. The
employees are represented by the New York Civil Liberties Union and Martin
Garbus, a noted First Amendment lawyer.

The suit accuses the Army of religious discrimination. It also names New York
City and commissioners from the city and Nassau and Suffolk Counties, charging
them with violating the First Amendment clause against the establishment of
religion.

The plaintiffs include senior administrators and caseworkers. They are Jewish,
Catholic, Protestant and nonreligious.

The lawyers said the case fundamentally challenged the Bush administration's
effort to increase federal financing of church charities.

''What it really attacks is George Bush's faith-based initiative,'' said Mr.
Garbus, who joined a group of plaintiffs at a news conference at the civil
liberties union.

The plaintiffs' lawyers argue that while churches are allowed to exclude
nonbelievers in their own activities, the law forbids them to do so in publicly
financed programs in which churches effectively become arms of the government.

''It's critical at this stage of the game to put a stop to proselytizing with
government money,'' said Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York
Civil Liberties Union.

The lawsuit comes in response to an effort last year by the Salvation Army's
Greater New York Division, which encompasses the five boroughs, Long Island and
seven counties north of the city, to reassert its religious mission.

Employees in the social service arm feel oppressed by the new atmosphere, some
plaintiffs said.

''Whenever there's a prayer or 'blessings be upon you' in an e-mail, they're
watching the Army marching in,'' said Mary Jane Dessables, director of the
management information systems and a churchgoing Presbyterian. ''In a
professional environment,'' she said, ''I'm not looking to be blessed by my
supervisor.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (92%); LITIGATION (91%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); EMPLOYMENT (90%); CHURCH & STATE (89%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); ETHICS (78%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS
(78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES (78%); CHILD WELFARE (78%);
FREEDOM OF RELIGION (78%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%); CHILDREN
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); FOSTER CARE (77%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (73%); AIDS & HIV (72%); GAYS & LESBIANS (72%); DISCRIMINATION LAW
(71%); ARMIES (58%); ABORTION (53%) Church-State Relations; Christians and
Christianity; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: THE SALVATION ARMY (94%) Salvation Army; Salvation Army

PERSON: Daniel J Wakin

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             678 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 23, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poor Countries, Vulnerable Women

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 162 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Terror of Childbirth,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (Op-Ed, March 20):

Approximately 20 other countries do a better job at keeping their childbearing
women alive. Why suggest that the United States take up the challenge of
exporting its birth practices to Africa? What is needed here and there to
improve birthing conditions are increased quality of life, reduction in poverty
and a functional health care system including an emphasis on midwifery care.

Studies show that midwives provide quality and safe care for low-risk
pregnancies with extremely successful outcomes. Improvement in these social
conditions, however, takes political commitment, financial investment and a
humanitarian vision. How can the United States provide this for anyone else when
it can't provide this for itself?

Until young women realize that modern birthing practices are mired with abuse
and repression, nothing will improve.

ELIZABETH VOLKMANN
Northampton, Mass., March 21, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (91%); MIDWIVES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (88%); WOMEN (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (69%) Pregnancy and
Obstetrics

PERSON: Elizabeth Volkmann; Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Africa

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             682 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Atrocities in Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 127 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Starved for Safety,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, March 31):

After my visit to southern Sudan in 1999 to investigate the criminal assaults on
civilians there, the news media were totally uninterested in what I described as
one of the world's largest crime scenes. No credible court existed to prosecute
my shortlist of top suspects. Now there is: the International Criminal Court.

The Security Council should consider enforcement action in Sudan and ask the new
court to investigate the atrocities. The sputtering peace talks must also face
up to the dire need for justice. The African Union should help take the lead.

DAVID SCHEFFER
Washington, March 31, 2004

The writer was United States ambassador at large for war crimes issues,
1997-2001.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); ASSAULT &
BATTERY (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); CIVIL WAR (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%); ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS (71%); GENOCIDE (69%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(68%); TALKS & MEETINGS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (52%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%); AFRICAN UNION (57%) United Nations;
Security Council (Un); International Criminal Court

PERSON: David Scheffer; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             683 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Rwanda Witness

BYLINE: By Guy Lawson.

Guy Lawson is a writer at large for GQ.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 18; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW:
4-4-04: ENCOUNTER

LENGTH: 1819 words


For seven days in February, Romeo Dallaire, the Canadian general who commanded
the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Rwanda 10 years ago, sat on a witness
stand in a small courtroom in Arusha, Tanzania. Dallaire had served in Rwanda
during one of the worst massacres in modern history. In 100 days, some 800,000
Tutsis and Hutus viewed as sympathetic to them were murdered, and Dallaire was
powerless to stop it. During those months, his waking hours were a living
nightmare. The bodies were everywhere, strewn in fields and latrines and stacked
in neat rows next to the road as if someone were keeping score. Countless times,
Dallaire had to get out of his four-by-four and move remains from the middle of
the road to avoid driving over them. Denied authority by the United Nations to
intervene, Dallaire tried to broker a cease-fire, protect the innocent, prick
the world's conscience through the media. But his real mission, it came to pass,
was personally far more devastating -- to be a witness.

The general had returned to Africa to testify against Col. Theoneste Bagosora at
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The war-crimes tribunal has been
working in obscurity for nine years, but no defendant has been as significant as
Bagosora, who was the second in command at the Ministry of Defense and is
accused of being a mastermind behind the genocide. Dallaire recently published
an account of that time called ''Shake Hands With the Devil: The Failure of
Humanity in Rwanda.'' One of the devils was Bagosora.

At the trial, Dallaire kept a small pill case on the table in front of him, so
he would remember to take the medications he now relies upon to control anxiety
and depression. He sat at attention behind thick bulletproof glass and gazed
straight ahead to avoid enraging himself by looking at Bagosora. His manner was
blunt and precise, but he was given to long and complicated answers, as if any
elision or missed detail might do an injustice to the past. Apart from a few
reporters and the occasional curious tourist, the two rows of seats reserved for
spectators remained empty as defense lawyers tried to suggest that there had
been no genocide at all. The world, it seemed, had forgotten what happened in
Rwanda. Dallaire had not.

The events of those 100 days, which will be commemorated in Rwanda this month,
have haunted Dallaire. He is now 57, married with three grown children, and he
keeps a busy schedule giving speeches and promoting his book, which is a best
seller in Canada. He has been approached twice to run for political office. His
official job now is adviser on war-affected children to the Canadian government,
but he has influence far beyond his bureaucratic-sounding title. He has turned
himself into a self-appointed ambassador of memory for the forgotten wars of the
world.

Dallaire came to Rwanda in 1993 on a peacekeeping mission. Although a three-star
general in the Canadian Army, he had no combat experience and was thrilled, when
he arrived, to undertake his first foreign command. It quickly became apparent,
though, that the peace brokered between Tutsi rebels and the Hutu-dominated
government was in trouble. On the night of April 6, 1994, a plane carrying the
president of Rwanda was shot out of the sky over Kigali, the capital. Dallaire
and most observers say the massacre that followed was not the result of the
chaos of war but a deliberate plan to extinguish the Tutsi minority and any Hutu
who believed in coexistence -- to murder the very idea of living together.

Dallaire testified in Arusha that he considered Bagosora ''the kingpin'' of the
genocide. Three months before the plane crash, an informant told Dallaire that
hit lists of Tutsis and moderate Hutus were being drawn up. On the night of the
crash, government soldiers and irregulars in Kigali went door to door with
lists, murdering the inhabitants, just as foretold. Calls came in to the United
Nations mission pleading for protection, including one from a politician
Dallaire had befriended; he was killed while on the line. The general sent 10
Belgian soldiers to guard the prime minister. She was murdered at a United
Nations compound, and the Belgians disappeared.

Trying to find out what had happened to his peacekeepers, Dallaire testified, he
went to see Bagosora. Dallaire was told that the colonel was at lunch, so he
waited for him to return. ''I had never found somebody so calm and at ease with
what was going on,'' Dallaire told the tribunal. Bagosora received calls and
shuffled papers while saying he wanted to save the peace process. It was as if
he was on another planet, Dallaire remembered, as if the violence running wild
in the streets wasn't happening -- or as if he knew exactly what was going on.
''It was surreal,'' Dallaire testified. ''It dawned on me then that the plan was
moving.'' That night, he was taken to a morgue, where he saw the mutilated
bodies of the Belgian peacekeepers.

Months before the killing began, Dallaire had contacted his United Nations
superiors in New York, requesting permission to undertake deterrent operations;
seven times he asked, and seven times he was turned down. Not many months
earlier, dead American soldiers were being dragged through the streets of
Somalia. There was no stomach at the United Nations or in the Clinton
administration for a mission that might risk more Western casualties for a
humanitarian cause. Now as the killing grew fiercer, Dallaire's force was cut
from 2,600 to 450. His request that the United States jam the radio signal of
the extremist Hutu radio station inciting its listeners to murder Tutsis was not
acted upon. Dallaire's only order from New York was to evacuate foreigners.

During that period, he was in constant motion, operating on adrenaline and
desperation. Alone with his thoughts in the darkness of the African night,
caught all day in duplicity and indecision and murder, he felt despair steal
over his body. He would shake his security detail and roam alone in his jeep,
taunting fate. Maybe he'd run into an ambush or a land mine or a roadblock
manned by armed teenagers, drunk on banana beer, who had heard the radio
broadcasts urging listeners to kill the Canadian general with the mustache.

Dallaire left Rwanda that summer, after the genocide ended. He returned to
Canada, where he was promoted to deputy commander of the Canadian Army, and to a
seemingly normal life, but the spirits followed him. Back in the gray government
town of Ottawa, he was too afraid even to go into his bedroom. He moved office
furniture into his living room, and he slept, when he slept, passed out at his
desk.

It was then that he dreamed. He would be in a valley. ''I would literally be up
to my waistline in bodies,'' he recalled. ''I would have my hands spread out, to
the sky, and my whole body would be red with blood.'' In his dreams, he couldn't
move for fear of stirring the bodies. ''And you're trapped. You're trapped and
you're trapped and you're trapped, and all of a sudden you wake up screaming.''

He started taking wild, suicidal risks again. He steered his Jetta toward
concrete barriers on the drive between Ottawa and Montreal. He worked and
worked, trying to avoid even a moment's pause, sometimes becoming incoherent
from exhaustion. A military doctor told him he was working himself to death.

Dallaire remembered that he was aware he was out of control, a kind of
disassociation he likened to watching himself through two different sets of
eyes. ''Your inner eyes are very conscious but your outside eyes have gone
nuts,'' he said. ''I'd get mad at home, just for a word, and I'd get into a
rage. My inner eyes would say, 'Stop it, stupid, the kids are scared, it's not a
big thing.' However, my outside eyes were getting madder and madder and madder,
and I couldn't stop it.''

Dallaire was put on medical leave and left the army, but his descent continued
until April 2001, when he went to the river in Ottawa, determined to throw
himself in, only to be found, drunk and passed out, on a park bench. His
collapse made him famous in Canada. He started therapy in earnest and talked
openly about his demons. Here was a man who tried to do the right thing in
Rwanda and was willing to say what it had cost him. He said the genocide had not
been inevitable, and his conscience would not allow him to move on, or forgive.

On the streets in Canada, Dallaire is often stopped by strangers who want to
shake his hand and thank him, who describe him as a hero. The adulation
embarrasses him. A hero throws himself on a grenade to save the lives of his
comrades, he told me. He said he had argued with his therapist about his refusal
to allow himself comfort, let alone absolution. ''You can't be a hero when your
mission failed,'' he said. ''There's absolutely no solace in saying I did the
best I could. That is not going to erase the suffering of one million people. I
would find that the most insulting, self-righteous goddamn thing to say.''

Though Dallaire was no longer in the military, his sense of duty as United
Nations commander remained with him. After he finished his testimony in Arusha,
he turned toward Bagosora, who was sitting in the far corner of the courtroom,
and stood for a long time, silently staring at him. ''I felt a great pressure
had been lifted off my shoulders,'' Dallaire said. His responsibilities as
commander, he reckoned, had finally ended.

But there still was a part of him that seemed elsewhere -- not just distracted,
but damaged, irretrievable. ''I'm not the same man I was, the man my wife
married,'' he told me. ''And I liked how I was.'' Self-justifications and
tearful apologies for mistakes made didn't end it for Dallaire. ''I'm so
terribly lonely,'' he said. ''And cold. Always. I feel abandoned. I feel out of
place.''

This month, Dallaire will be in Rwanda for the commemoration of the genocide.
But he told me that he also has a plan of sorts to return one day on his own,
when no one will be watching. Dallaire described, in a kind of reverie, how he
will wander the country surviving on goat's milk and beans and rice. ''I will
live the life of a pilgrim in those mountains and valleys and villages. I would
be walking the thousand hills of Rwanda. I would stop at a village here, a
lookout point there. I would do a bit of work, help a farmer or cut some wood or
move some earth, in return for food. It's like walking in paradise.''

Dallaire still can't sleep without pills; the spirits come back often and
without warning, but he knows that his suffering can never compare with all of
the innocent people who died. ''Maybe going back I'll find some way to live with
my guilt,'' he said. ''The guilt of failure of my command. The guilt of failing
Rwandans.'' The general's gaze was direct, as ever, blue eyes ringed by red,
glassy and bewildered and filled with terrible knowledge, and always, somehow,
far away.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dallaire led the peacekeepers in Rwanda, but the U.N. did not
allow him to intervene to stop the killing. The memory of the slaughter still
torments him. (Photograph by Alessandra Petlin)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HISTORY (78%); CHILDREN
IN ARMED CONFLICT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(73%); LAWYERS (71%); LITERATURE (69%); APPOINTMENTS (67%); MENTAL ILLNESS
(63%); DEPRESSION (63%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (60%) Tutsi Tribe  ; Hutu Tribe;
Books and Literature; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (55%) United Nations

PERSON: Romeo (Gen) Dallaire; Guy Lawson

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); CANADA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA
(79%)

REGION: Rwanda; Canada

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             685 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Mourning: Portraits of Those Who Fell in War

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 138 words



To the Editor:

While recent war photographs have horrified me, the pictures of our men and
women in uniform shown in ''A Week of Death in Iraq'' (photos, April 15) shook
me to the core.

Regardless of where they called home (one was from my hometown, Gresham, Ore.),
these are our nation's sons and daughters, and for them to die so far from
America in a war that we should have never started truly makes no sense.

Yes, Saddam Hussein is a very evil man; what he did to the Iraqi people were
crimes against humanity. But other nations' leaders harm their citizens and we,
as Americans, should not be the major commanding force to push for regime change
in these often-hostile nations.

These images of our young men and women taken from us for no definable reason
will haunt me for a very long time.

TRACEE LARSON
Dallas, April 15, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (68%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Tracee Larson

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             688 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Promised Land

BYLINE: By Ira Berlin.

Ira Berlin teaches history at the University of Maryland and is the author of
''Generations of Captivity: A History of African-American Slaves.''

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1060 words



MISSISSIPPI IN AFRICA
By Alan Huffman.
328 pp. New York:
Gotham Books. $27.

OF the many tragedies set in motion by the enslavement of African people in the
United States, few are more sorrowful than the history of Liberia. Founded in
1816 as a refuge for black Americans by a peculiar alliance of slaveholders and
abolitionists, Liberia was advertised by its proponents -- so-called
colonizationists -- as a means of speeding slavery's demise and demonstrating
the capacities of people of African descent; it would also renew the continent
with an infusion of evangelical Christianity, American republicanism and
commercial capitalism.

But from the start, the promise proved empty. The initial settlement was more a
charnel house than a refuge, as ill-supplied immigrants succumbed to disease.
Rather than ending slavery, Liberia became both a place of enslavement and a
host to other forms of coerced labor that differed from slavery in name only.
The immigrants and their offspring mercilessly exploited the indigenous African
population. At the end of the 20th century, tensions between the
Americo-Liberians and the local peoples exploded in a series of civil wars that
killed, mutilated, exiled and impoverished hundreds of thousands. Only the most
optimistic give the recent cease-fire much chance to redeem the
colonizationists' original promise.

Liberia's opponents in the 19th century could hardly have imagined this
nightmare of genocidal warfare, but they were certain that no good would come
from the scheme. To them it seemed that the colonizationists were at best dupes
of Southern planters, who wanted to deport free people of color, thus ridding
themselves of those who, by their very presence, demonstrated the possibility of
black freedom. And it was pointed out that once these black subversives had been
''repatriated'' (their patria could never be the United States),
colonizationists generally ignored them. Or, often, they joined in the
exploitation of Africa, sometimes with the willing assistance of the
Americo-Liberians.

Between the dueling scenarios of the colonizationists and their opponents lie
stories of hundreds of men and women -- black and white -- who invested their
lives in the success of Liberia. Their motives were complex, not easily placed
in either camp. For some, colonization was an honest antislavery commitment at a
time when all other avenues to freedom were blocked. For many of the blacks, it
was a desperate attempt to escape American racism and a real desire to embrace
Mother Africa. The Mississippi journalist Alan Huffman found one such story in
his home state. ''Mississippi in Africa'' tells of heroism too often deprecated
and of depravity almost too painful to contemplate.

In the 1830's, at the height of slavery's ascendancy in Mississippi, Isaac Ross,
the master of Prospect Hill, a plantation located in one of the state's richest
cotton-producing counties, willed his slaves freedom and instructed his
executors to use the proceeds from the sale of his estate to send them to
Liberia. A careful man, mindful that his project would face countless obstacles,
Ross tried to prepare for every possible contingency. But as with so much of
America's racial history, matters did not go as planned.

Upon Ross's death, white relatives, who felt disinherited by what they deemed
crackpot benevolence, challenged the will. Using the courts, they delayed the
promised emancipation for more than a decade, while the frustrated blacks
continued to labor as slaves, with full knowledge of Ross's intentions. Some
rebelled and burned the mansion house, at least according to one version of the
tale. Retribution, according to yet another version, was immediate and harsh:
rebels were rounded up and lynched. In time, however, Ross's slaves gained the
freedom to migrate, although some chose to remain as slaves in Mississippi. In
1848, the first contingent sailed to Liberia. Eventually, they and their
descendants reproduced in Africa the plantation society that they had left in
Mississippi, down to the fine appointments on their Greek Revival mansions.

IT is easy to see why Huffman was attracted to this story: ''Over a span of 175
years or so . . . it has managed to touch just about every hot button in the
histories of the American South and colonial Africa -- slavery and exploitation,
conflict and greed -- while encompassing almost every imaginable human
predicament.'' Unfortunately, at nearly every point it remains hidden in the
conspicuous silences and turbid murkiness on both sides of the Atlantic. Ross's
motives are a mystery, although Huffman hints at blood connections between
Ross's white forebears and his slaves. The slave revolt and the mass lynching
cannot be confirmed beyond hearsay, although the story echoes through both the
white and the black communities in Mississippi. The mansions of Mississippi in
Africa were among the casualties of the Liberian civil wars, along with many of
their residents.

Unable to tell the story directly, Huffman offers an account of his research as
he travels from Mississippi to Mississippi in Africa, searching archives,
interviewing Liberians and checking the Internet. Considering the narrative from
both historical and contemporary perspectives provides extraordinary insight in
the matter of race in the modern world. Who cannot be taken by the irony of the
proud descendants of men and women whose ancestors once hoped to escape American
racism queuing at the American Embassy for visas to return? But combining the
past and the present blurs much of the country's history; too often, Huffman
collapses the events of 19th- and 20th-century Liberia. Many of the mansions
whose origins he assigns to the first settlers, for example, were built in the
20th century.

To these errors of interpretation are added numerous annoying small errors of
fact. Frederick Law Olmsted becomes ''Olmstead,'' and the distinguished African
historian Boubacar Barry becomes Barry Boucbacan. The depiction of slavery in
the United States often reads like a parade of plantation stereotypes, led by
Grace the domineering plantation cook. While well-meaning, and generous in
spirit, Huffman often seems naive about events in contemporary Liberia,
sometimes dangerously so. One leaves this book the way so many have left
Liberia, regretting a promise unfulfilled.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (79%); WRITERS (78%); RACE & RACISM (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%);
IMMIGRATION (74%); LITERATURE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (72%); RELIGION (70%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%); COTTON &
COTTONSEED (69%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%) Books and Literature; Reviews

PERSON: Ira (Prof) Berlin; Alan Huffman

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFRICA (94%); LIBERIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             692 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Arab World, Press Coverage Of Beheading Varies Widely

BYLINE: By ABEER ALLAM

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
MIDEAST NEWSPAPERS

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, May 12


The videotaped beheading of Nicholas Berg, the young American civilian, by
Islamic militants received widely divergent treatment in the Arab press on
Wednesday, with most papers playing it up but some ignoring it.

Most newspapers across the Middle East treated the gruesome videotape as
front-page news, though generally secondary to stories about the deaths of six
Israeli soldiers in the Gaza Strip.

But in Egypt, Al Akhbar, a semiofficial daily, tucked a 10-line news agency
report into its inside pages, while another leading daily, Al Ahram, ignored the
news altogether.

The Syrian papers also ignored the killing, though President Bush's announcement
of sanctions against Damascus received blanket coverage. A Kuwaiti paper, Al
Siyassah al Kuwaitia ran a front-page story with a photograph of one of the
militants holding up Mr. Berg's head.

While the news broke close to deadline for many Arab papers, a journalism expert
here said concern about protecting Americans from copycat killings was the main
reason for the scant coverage.

''It is a responsible decision to avoid giving much exposure to this type of
news,'' said Hussein Amin, chairman of the department of mass communication at
the American University in Cairo. ''People are highly emotional now because of
Abu Ghraib pictures. The government does not want to incite or give ideas to
young or extremist people to start taking matters into their own hands.''

A Lebanese newspaper, As Safir, published its report on the front page with the
by now familiar photograph of Mr. Berg sitting in front of the militants with a
headline reading, ''Zarqawi Slaughters an American to Avenge Iraqi Prisoners.''

The London-based pan-Arab newspapers both led their editions with the beheading
reports.

Asharq al Awsat ran the photo of Mr. Berg sitting in front of five militants
under the headline ''Zarqawi Slaughtered an American.'' Al Hayat published the
story without pictures, under the headline ''Zarqawi Executes an American in
Retaliation for the Torture.''

The main Arab satellite channels, Al Jazeera and Al Arabiya, broadcast just a
clip of the video showing Mr. Berg sitting before his executioners, with anchors
briefly reading the report.

''Every time when we have a tape, there is a give and take to run it or not to
run it,'' said Jihad Ballout, a spokesman for Al Jazeera. In this case, he said:
''There was no professional reason why we should air it. Showing the beheading
scene would be against decency altogether.''

Web sites of militant groups expressed joy over the beheading and ran photos
from the video side by side with photos of the abuse of Iraqi prisoners in Abu
Ghraib prison. One site mocked President Bush's praise for Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld, saying, ''Zarqawi is doing a superb job.'' Another wrote,
''Please send us a head every day.''

In Cairo, some moderate Muslim groups expressed regret that the killing eclipsed
the horror of the pictures of abuse at Abu Ghraib.

''I was disgusted, and I felt so sorry,'' said Dr. Essam al-Erian, a spokesman
for the Muslim Brotherhood, a group that seeks to establish an Islamic state in
Egypt by constitutional means. ''They are crazy people who defamed Muslims and
Islam and helped only Bush.

''They wasted all the gains the Arabs received from exposing the horrors of Abu
Ghraib prison and instead shifted all the attention to this shameful act.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CORRECTIONS (86%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); JOURNALISM (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); GENOCIDE (74%);
RELIGION (73%); TORTURE (68%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (66%); INTERNET & WWW (62%); ARMED FORCES (56%) News and News Media;
Recordings (Video); Computers and the Internet; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Abeer Allam; Nicholas E Berg

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (90%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); KUWAIT (92%); MIDDLE EAST (91%); SYRIA (79%); LEBANON
(79%)

REGION: Iraq; Syria; Egypt; Kuwait; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             694 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Supporters Are Split On How to Pursue Iraq Plan

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER and RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
POLITICAL FALLOUT

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


President Bush said on Wednesday that the beheading of an American working in
Iraq was part of an effort to ''shake our confidence,'' but he insisted that the
United States would ''complete our mission,'' despite what his aides freely
concede is a major loss of credibility in the Arab world.

Speaking briefly on the South Lawn of the White House, Mr. Bush appeared to try
to use the beheading of Nicholas Berg, a young Pennsylvania man seeking work
rebuilding Iraq, to refocus attention on the nature of the enemy the United
States faces rather than on the continuing investigation into the abuses of
Iraqi prisoners in American custody.

But some of Mr. Bush's aides and many of his outside advisers said in interviews
that conservatives who had backed the war were now badly fractured on how the
administration should pursue its Iraq strategy, and they fear that the
combination of the prisoner abuse scandal and the inability of American forces
to put down the insurgency are taking a toll on the Bush re-election race.

''You are seeing several camps develop,'' said William Kristol, the editor of
the conservative Weekly Standard. ''There are unapologetic hawks,'' a category
he puts himself in; ''we are critical of the president for failures of execution
but still think it is winnable. There are loyalists, who stick to the Republican
talking point that it is going well. There are supporters of the war who now
have second thoughts, and there is a category of conservatives who are saying
'be tough, but then get out.' ''

Mr. Bush made it clear Wednesday that he had no intention of getting out, and
said Mr. Berg's death was a reminder of why the United States is still fighting
in Iraq. Those killers said in statements released with digital images of the
beheading that they were acting in retaliation for the treatment of Iraqis at
Abu Ghraib prison. But White House officials on Wednesday dismissed those
comments as excuses offered by killers who are seeking justifications for
executing Americans.

''Their intention is to shake our will, their intention is to shake our
confidence,'' Mr. Bush said, declining to take any questions. ''We will complete
our mission. We will complete our task.''

To back up their assertion that the administration has not been blown off
course, officials went to some lengths on Wednesday to demonstrate that their
effort to create a new, democratic government was proceeding according to plan.

One senior administration official, calling reporters from Baghdad, said that
both the abuse of prisoners and the escalating violence had not set back plans
to form a transitional government that would take power on June 30. He described
in detail the makeup of that government -- a president, two vice presidents, a
prime minister and more than two dozen ministers -- and said that if there was
reluctance to move ahead with American and United Nations plans, ''I don't
encounter it in my discussions.''

The optimistic line from the White House contrasted sharply with the assessment
of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, Gen. Richard B. Myers, who told a
Senate panel on Wednesday that he expected an increase in violence between now
and the handover of sovereignty.

''Between now and the 30th of June, we know it's going to get worse,'' General
Myers said.

It was a measure of the troubles Mr. Bush is running into within his own party
that Senator Pete V. Domenici, a New Mexico Republican who usually sides with
the administration, expressed his frustration to Secretary of Defense Donald H.
Rumsfeld on Wednesday that he could find no clear vision in the administration's
Iraq strategy.

''I am very worried about how prepared the Iraqis are to take over this
responsibility and, secondly, what we have done to prepare ourselves and them to
work together to make this work,'' Mr. Domenici told Mr. Rumsfeld at a budget
hearing. ''I can envision that this situation will not work, and that we won't
have an organizational structure that will do anything other than have Americans
fighting and us supplying those fighters with more and more money.''

The unease among conservatives has also been given voice in recent days by a
number of influential commentators. George F. Will wrote in The Washington Post
on Tuesday of a series of ''failures'' by the administration for which no one
was held accountable, including post-war planning that was ''botched.'' On
Monday, the syndicated columnist Robert D. Novak wrote that there was a clear
consensus among Republicans in Congress, Republican fund-raisers, contributors
and others he had canvassed that Mr. Rumsfeld had to resign.

But The Wall Street Journal's editorial page on Wednesday appeared to better
capture the mood of many Republicans in the House, especially after the images
of the beheading became public. The Journal wrote that the American public was
primarily focused on ''the far larger question of American purpose'' and said
the real challenge for the White House is ''not who wins in November but who
wins in Iraq.''

Representative Roy Blunt of Missouri, the Republican majority whip, said the
televised images of the beheading had a palpable effect both on public opinion
and the mood among lawmakers after days in which the focus had been on
embarrassment and anger over prisoner abuse.

''If you had your thumb on the pulse of America, that pulse beat changed when
Americans heard about the beheading of Nick Berg,'' Mr. Blunt said in an
interview. ''It jolted everybody's memory again about why we were there in Iraq
and who we're dealing with.''

But more moderate Republicans said the images of the prisoners being abused
would continue to influence public opinion about the war. ''We're in an enormous
reconsideration cycle in this country,'' said Representative Jim Leach of Iowa,
a Republican who opposed the invasion of Iraq.

Even as they denounced the beheading of Mr. Berg as barbaric, Democrats signaled
that they would not stop criticizing the administration for its handling of
Iraq.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(88%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (79%); INTERVIEWS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); US
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
SCANDALS (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%) Election Issues; Presidential Election of
2004; United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) David E Sanger; Richard W Stevenson; George W (Pres)
Bush; Nicholas E Berg; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Pete V (Sen) Domenici

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             695 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kerry's Few Words on Iraq Are Too Many for G.O.P.

BYLINE: By JODI WILGOREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20; THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE
MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 12


Trying to stay focused on health care and education, Senator John Kerry has
spoken only sparingly this week on Iraq, but his words have been pointed. He
renewed a longstanding call for Defense Secretary Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld's
resignation, said higher-ups must be held accountable for the abuse of Iraqi
prisoners and condemned the beheading of an American civilian.

Republicans have seized on every scrap, accusing him of politicizing the war.

''It's striking to see the ease with which John Kerry thrust an important moment
for our country into the campaign's daily spin cycle,'' Marc Racicot, the
chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign, told reporters in a
conference call on Wednesday morning. Pointing to an e-mail campaign that urged
Kerry supporters to sign a petition pushing Mr. Rumsfeld's ouster and donate to
Mr. Kerry's presidential campaign, Mr. Racicot, the former governor of Montana,
accused Mr. Kerry of ''raw political opportunism.''

Pressed repeatedly during his conference call to explain why discussion of the
prisoner abuse scandal in Iraq was inappropriate - particularly when Republicans
have made the war in Iraq a central campaign issue - Mr. Racicot said linking
the prison scandal to fund-raising crossed a line. He took issue with Mr.
Kerry's suggestion on Tuesday that the abuse reflects ''America's overall
arrogance in its policy,'' as well a statement by Mr. Kerry's friend and adviser
Senator Edward M. Kennedy. ''Shamefully,'' Mr. Kennedy said, ''we now learn that
Saddam's torture chambers reopened under new management -- U.S. management.''

But Mr. Kerry, the presumptive Democratic nominee, had already disavowed Mr.
Kennedy's comments in a nationally broadcast interview with Don Imus, and Mr.
Kerry's press secretary, David Wade, said the ''Keep the ball rolling -- Donate
Now!'' button at the bottom of the Rumsfeld message was a routine signature for
all such missives. Another Kerry aide, Stephanie Cutter, said the campaign could
not determine how many donations resulted from those e-mail messages because
they were not intended for fund-raising and thus not coded to keep track.

Noting that Mr. Bush used images from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in his own
campaign advertisements, Mr. Wade denounced Mr. Racicot's heated comments as
''hyperbolic, baseless, false'' and ''dangerous to our democracy.'' Ms. Cutter,
asked, ''How can the Republicans charge that Democrats are playing politics with
this issue when they are the one holding the press conferences?''

Rick Davis, a Republican strategist who managed Senator John McCain's campaign
against Mr. Bush for their party's presidential nomination in 2000, said the
flap reflected a common campaign tactic: ''attack the attacker.''

''I'm sure they're just flailing,'' Mr. Davis said of Mr. Racicot and other Bush
backers. ''I'm sure they're trying to do whatever they can from a political
perspective to put their finger in the dike, and either change the subject or
make the people who are attacking them the issue.''

The conference call on Wednesday was only the latest Republican attack this week
on the Iraq front. Ed Gillespie, the chairman of the Republican Party, issued a
statement Sunday and held a news conference Monday lambasting the Kerry campaign
for a Friday e-mail message - featured Saturday in the Washington Times - that
cited the pictures from the Iraq prison, criticized President Bush for a ''slow
and inept response,'' and asked supporters to sign the anti-Rumsfeld position.
Also Monday, Mr. Kerry's campaign manager, Mary Beth Cahill, sent an e-mail
message to 803,000 people, congratulating the 275,000 who had signed the
petition so far and asking for more (it had reached 430,000 by Wednesday
afternoon). On Tuesday, Senator James Inhofe, an Oklahoma Republican, chastised
the Kerry campaign and read the e-mail message aloud during a Senate hearing
about the prison abuse, while the Republican National Committee put out a news
release calling Mr. Kennedy's comments Monday on the Senate floor ''blatant
political exploitation.''

On Wednesday, after spending two days mostly steering clear of the subject, Mr.
Kerry was the first to bring up Iraq.

''They had no plan for winning the peace, and now Americans are paying the
price,'' he said of the Bush administration in an interview with Associated
Press Radio. ''A couple of hundred billion dollars a year, and that is
disgraceful.''

A few minutes into his chat with Mr. Imus, he said, ''I called for Donald
Rumsfeld's resignation months ago, not because of the prison situation, but
because the miscalculations surrounding this war are extraordinary.'' Asked who
he would make secretary of defense, Mr. Kerry first named ''our good friend John
McCain,'' then also listed Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat, and John W.
Warner, a Virginia Republican, as well as William Perry, who ran the Pentagon in
the Clinton administration.

In a three-state health-care tour the last three days, Mr. Kerry spoke about
Iraq mainly when pushed by reporters, and he was careful to say that the prison
abuse should not besmirch ''99.9 percent'' of the troops in Iraq even as he
called for accountability up the chain of command.

''What's happened is not just something that a few privates or corporals or
sergeants engaged in,'' he said at a Louisville fund-raiser on Tuesday
afternoon. ''This is something that comes out of an attitude about the rights of
prisoners of war, it's an attitude that comes out of how we went there in the
first place, it's an attitude that comes out of America's overall arrogance in
its policy that is alienating countries all around the world.''

This set off Mr. Racicot, who invoked the ''arrogance'' line several times in
Wednesday's conference call.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John Kerry spoke about health care yesterday in Orlando,
Fla., but the Bush campaign hears only his comments about Iraq. (Photo by
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); FUNDRAISING (89%); CONFERENCE CALLS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%);
POLITICAL ADVERTISING (78%); SCANDALS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); TORTURE (77%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (75%); EMAIL
MARKETING (74%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); PRESS CONFERENCES (74%);
POLITICS (74%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (74%); PETITIONS (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GOVERNORS (69%); TERRORISM (60%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (50%) Election Issues; Presidential Election of 2004; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (94%); JOHN MCCAIN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); TED KENNEDY
(78%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Jodi Wilgoren; John (Sen) Kerry; George W (Pres)
Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Nicholas E Berg

CITY: LITTLE ROCK, AR, USA (79%); ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (77%)

STATE: ARKANSAS, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); MONTANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             697 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Harsh C.I.A. Methods Cited In Top Qaeda Interrogations

BYLINE: This article was reported and written by James Risen, David Johnston and
Neil A. Lewis.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
DETAINEES

LENGTH: 1666 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


The Central Intelligence Agency has used coercive interrogation methods against
a select group of high-level leaders and operatives of Al Qaeda that have
produced growing concerns inside the agency about abuses, according to current
and former counterterrorism officials.

At least one agency employee has been disciplined for threatening a detainee
with a gun during questioning, they said.

In the case of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a high-level detainee who is believed to
have helped plan the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, C.I.A. interrogators used
graduated levels of force, including a technique known as ''water boarding,'' in
which a prisoner is strapped down, forcibly pushed under water and made to
believe he might drown.

These techniques were authorized by a set of secret rules for the interrogation
of high-level Qaeda prisoners, none known to be housed in Iraq, that were
endorsed by the Justice Department and the C.I.A. The rules were among the first
adopted by the Bush administration after the Sept. 11 attacks for handling
detainees and may have helped establish a new understanding throughout the
government that officials would have greater freedom to deal harshly with
detainees.

Defenders of the operation said the methods stopped short of torture, did not
violate American anti-torture statutes, and were necessary to fight a war
against a nebulous enemy whose strength and intentions could only be gleaned by
extracting information from often uncooperative detainees. Interrogators were
trying to find out whether there might be another attack planned against the
United States.

The methods employed by the C.I.A. are so severe that senior officials of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation have directed its agents to stay out of many of
the interviews of the high-level detainees, counterterrorism officials said. The
F.B.I. officials have advised the bureau's director, Robert S. Mueller III, that
the interrogation techniques, which would be prohibited in criminal cases, could
compromise their agents in future criminal cases, the counterterrorism officials
said.

After the attacks of Sept. 11, President Bush signed a series of directives
authorizing the C.I.A. to conduct a covert war against Osama bin Laden's Qaeda
network. The directives empowered the C.I.A. to kill or capture Qaeda leaders,
but it is not clear whether the White House approved the specific rules for the
interrogations.

The White House and the C.I.A. declined to comment on the matter.

The C.I.A. detention program for Qaeda leaders is the most secretive component
of an extensive regime of detention and interrogation put into place by the
United States government after the Sept. 11 attacks and the war in Afghanistan
that includes the detention facilities run by the military in Iraq and
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

There is now concern at the agency that the Congressional and criminal inquiries
into abuses at Pentagon-run prisons and other detention centers in Iraq and
Afghanistan may lead to examinations of the C.I.A's handling of the Qaeda
detainees. That, in turn, could expose agency officers and operations to the
same kind of public exposure as the military now faces because of the Iraq
prison abuses.

So far, the agency has refused to grant any independent observer or human rights
group access to the high-level detainees, who have been held in strict secrecy.
Their whereabouts are such closely guarded secrets that one official said he had
been told that Mr. Bush had informed the C.I.A. that he did not want to know
where they were.

The authorized tactics are primarily those methods used in the training of
American Special Operations soldiers to prepare them for the possibility of
being captured and taken prisoners of war. The tactics simulate torture, but
officials say they are supposed to stop short of serious injury.

Counterrorism officials say detainees have also been sent to third countries,
where they are convinced that they might be executed, or tricked into believing
they were being sent to such places. Some have been hooded, roughed up, soaked
with water and deprived of food, light and medications.

Many authorities contend that torture and coercive treatment is as likely to
provide information that is unreliable as information that is helpful.

Concerns are mounting among C.I.A. officers about the potential consequences of
their actions. ''Some people involved in this have been concerned for quite a
while that eventually there would be a new president, or the mood in the country
would change, and they would be held accountable,'' one intelligence source
said. ''Now that's happening faster than anybody expected.''

The C.I.A.'s inspector general has begun an investigation into the deaths of
three lower-level detainees held by the C.I.A in Iraq and Afghanistan. The
Justice Department is also examining the deaths.

The secret detention system houses a group of 12 to 20 prisoners, government
officials said, some under direct American control, others ostensibly under the
supervision of foreign governments.

The C.I.A. high-level interrogation program seemed to show early results with
the capture of Abu Zubaida in April 2002. Mr. Zubaida was a close associate of
Mr. bin Laden's and had run Al Qaeda's recruiting, in which young men were
brought from other countries to training camps in Afghanistan.

Under such intensive questioning, Mr. Zubaida provided useful information
identifying Jose Padilla, a low-level Qaeda convert who was arrested in May 2002
in connection with an effort to build a dirty bomb. Mr. Zubaida also helped
identify Mr. Mohammed as a crucial figure in the 9/11 plot, counterterrorism
officials said.

A few other detainees have been identified by the Bush administration, like
Ramzi bin al-Shibh, another 9/11 plotter and Walid Ba'Attash, who helped plan
the East Africa embassy bombings in 1998 and the attack on the Navy destroyer
Cole in October 2000.

Some of the prisoners have never been identified by the government. Some may
have only peripheral ties to Al Qaeda. One Middle Eastern man, who had been
identified by intelligence officials as a money launderer for Mr. bin Laden, was
captured in the United Arab Emirates. He traveled there when some of the
emirates' banks froze his accounts. When the U.A.E. government alerted the the
C.I.A. that he was in the country, the man was arrested and subsequently
disappeared into the secret detention program.

In the interrogation of Mr. Mohammed, C.I.A. officials became convinced that he
was not being fully cooperative about his knowledge of the whereabouts of Mr.
bin Laden. Mr. Mohammed was carrying a letter written by Mr. bin Laden to a
family member when he was captured in Pakistan early in 2003. The C.I.A.
officials then authorized even harsher techniques, according to officials
familiar with the interrogation.

The C.I.A. has been operating its Qaeda detention system under a series of
secret legal opinions by the agency's and Justice Department lawyers. Those
rules have provided a legal basis for the use of harsh interrogation techniques,
including the water-boarding tactic used against Mr. Mohammed.

One set of legal memorandums, the officials said, advises government officials
that if they are contemplating procedures that may put them in violation of
American statutes that prohibit torture, degrading treatment or the Geneva
Conventions, they will not be responsible if it can be argued that the detainees
are formally in the custody of another country.

The Geneva Conventions prohibit ''violence to life and person, in particular  .
. . cruel treatment and torture'' and ''outrages upon personal dignity, in
particular, humiliating and degrading treatment.''

Regarding American anti-torture laws, one administration figure involved in
discussions about the memorandums said: ''The criminal statutes only apply to
American officials. The question is how involved are the American officials.''

The official said the legal opinions say restrictions on procedures would not
apply if the detainee could be deemed to be in the custody of a different
country, even though American officials were getting the benefit of the
interrogation. ''It would be the responsibility of the other country,'' the
official said. ''It depends on the level of involvement.''

Like the more numerous detainees at Guantanamo Bay, the high-level Qaeda
prisoners have also been defined as unlawful combatants, not as prisoners of
war. Those prisoners have no standing in American civilian or military courts.

The Bush administration began the program when intelligence agencies realized
that a few detainees captured in Afghanistan had such a high intelligence value
that they should be separated from the lower-level figures who had been sent to
a military installation at Guantanamo Bay, which officials felt was not
suitable.

There was little long-term planning. The agency initially had few interrogators
and no facilities to house the top detainees. After the Sept. 11 attacks, the
agency began to search for remote sites in friendly countries around the world
where Qaeda operatives could be kept quietly and securely.

''There was a debate after 9/11 about how to make people disappear,'' a former
intelligence official said.

The result was a series of secret agreements allowing the C.I.A. to use sites
overseas without outside scrutiny.

So far, the Bush administration has not said what it intends to do over the long
term with any of the high-level detainees, leaving them subject to being
imprisoned indefinitely without any access to lawyers, courts or any form of due
process.

Some officials have suggested that some of the high-level detainees may be tried
in military tribunals or officially turned over to other countries, but
counterterrorism officials have complained about the Bush administration's
failure to have an ''endgame'' for these detainees. One official said they could
also be imprisoned indefinitely at a new long-term prison being built at
Guantanamo.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed in image on F.B.I. Web site last year.
(Photo by F.B.I.)(pg. A13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (86%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); HIJACKING (76%); PRISONS
(74%); APPROVALS (73%); INTERVIEWS (68%) Terrorism; Torture; Airlines and
Airplanes; Hijacking; Terrorism; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (96%); AL-QAEDA (84%); FEDERAL BUREAU
OF INVESTIGATION (91%) Central Intelligence Agency; Federal Bureau of
Investigation

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ROBERT MUELLER (68%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) James
Risen; David Johnston; Neil A Lewis; Khalid Shaikh Mohammed; George W (Pres)
Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (65%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             701 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

General Took Guantanamo Rules To Iraq for Handling of Prisoners

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN and ERIC SCHMITT; Tim Golden reported from New York for
this article and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: PRISON
POLICIES

LENGTH: 1419 words


When Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller arrived in Iraq last August with a team of
military police and intelligence specialists, the group was confronted by chaos.

In one prison yard, a detainee was being held in a scorching hot shipping
container as punishment, one team member recalled. An important communications
antenna stood broken and unrepaired. Prisoners walked around barefoot, with
sores on their feet and signs of untreated illness. Garbage was everywhere.

Perhaps most important, with the insurgency raging in Iraq, there was no
effective system at the prisons for wringing intelligence from the prisoners,
officials said.

''They had no rules for interrogations,'' a military officer who traveled to
Iraq with General Miller said. ''People were escaping and getting shot. We tried
to offer them some very basic recommendations.''

According to information from a classified interview with the senior military
intelligence officer at Abu Ghraib prison, General Miller's recommendations
prompted a shift in the interrogation and detention procedures there. Military
intelligence officers were given greater authority in the prison, and military
police guards were asked to help gather information about the detainees.

Whether those changes contributed to the abuse of prisoners that grew
horrifically more serious last fall is now at the center of the widening prison
scandal.

General Miller's recommendations were based in large part on his command of the
detention camp in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he won praise from the Pentagon
for improving the flow of intelligence from terrorist suspects and prisoners of
the Afghanistan war.

In Iraq, General Miller's team gave officers at the prisons copies of the
procedures that had been developed at Guantanamo to interrogate and punish the
prisoners, according to the officer who traveled with him. Computer specialists
and intelligence analysts explained the systems they had used in Cuba to process
information and report it back to the United States.

General Miller also recommended streamlining the command structure at the
prisons, much as was done when military intelligence and military police units
were merged when he took command of Joint Task Force Guantanamo in November
2002.

But to at least a few of the officers who met General Miller in Iraq, the Abu
Ghraib crisis was partly rooted in what they described as his determination to
apply his Guantanamo experience in Iraq. Senators raised similar concerns on
Tuesday at the Armed Services Committee.

General Miller and some of his former aides have dismissed the notion that his
visit to Iraq helped unleash the abuses. They argue that if his prescriptions
had any link to the problems there, it was because they were misinterpreted by
ineffective commanders in a chaotic environment.

''When you don't have rules and you let lower-level people decide things on an
arbitrary and capricious basis, you're going to have problems,'' the officer who
accompanied General Miller said. ''Our reference to techniques was to say, 'You
need a policy.' ''

A Democratic Senate aide who reviewed General Miller's report on the Iraqi
prisons said he had sought to revamp the intelligence apparatus in Iraq
primarily to improve the collection and transmission of broader, strategic
information about the insurgency that was particularly important to senior
military officials.

To those officials, the work at Guantanamo by General Miller, a former
paratrooper from Menard, Tex., made him an obvious candidate for Iraq.

By the time he took over in Cuba, most of the detainees there had been in
custody for nearly a year. Still, General Miller was credited by Pentagon
officials with using interrogations there to produce a valuable historical
account of the workings and financing of terrorist training camps in
Afghanistan, among other subjects, officials said.

His hard-charging attitude has also raised questions that go beyond
interrogation methods. He was the official most responsible for pressing a case
last year against a Muslim chaplain at the base, Capt. James J. Yee, that was
initially billed as a major episode of espionage. In March, the military
announced that it would drop all charges.

At the Senate hearing on Tuesday, the deputy commander of American forces in the
Middle East, Lt. Gen. Lance Smith, said General Miller, now the chief of
interrogations and detentions in Iraq, had made it clear to the officers he
briefed on his 10-day visit to Iraq that some of the procedures developed in
Cuba could not be applied there.

But despite the vast differences between the settings, two officials who worked
with General Miller in Cuba suggested that he offered very similar solutions to
some problems he found in Iraq.

Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba, in his report on Iraqi prison abuses, said General
Miller's recommendation of a guard force that ''sets the conditions for the
successful interrogation and exploitation of internees/detainees'' violated Army
doctrine; the report hinted that it might also have contributed to the abuses.

The Taguba report also highlighted General Miller's recommendation that
commanders in Iraq form and train a prison guard force ''subordinate to the
Joint Interrogation Debriefing Center (J.I.D.C.) Commander'' that ''sets the
conditions for the successful interrogation and exploitation of
internees/detainees.''

The former director of that interrogation center, Lt. Col. Steve Jordan, was
implicated in the abuses by General Taguba and is under investigation in a
separate military inquiry.

At Guantanamo the role of guards in intelligence gathering was largely limited
to observing the detainees' behavior and trying to detect their leaders,
according to interrogators who worked there.

A fundamental difference between Iraq and Guantanamo was the Bush
administration's determination that the Geneva Conventions did not govern the
treatment of the detainees in Cuba. However, military officers who served in
Cuba said the controls on coercive interrogation methods appeared to have been
stronger at Guantanamo than they were in Iraq.

Because the administration had designated the Taliban and Al Qaeda detainees at
Guantanamo as ''enemy combatants'' -- to whom it would accord humane treatment
but not other rights granted by the Conventions -- military officers in Cuba
soon grew concerned that they were operating without clear rules.

According to several officers who served at Guantanamo, the methods, begun in
early 2002, included depriving detainees of sleep; leaving them in cold,
air-conditioned rooms; placing them in ''stress positions''; and forcing them to
stand or crouch for long periods, sometimes with their arms extended, until
exhausted.

Even before General Miller's arrival at Guantanamo, the military lawyer who had
taken over as the staff judge advocate there, Lt. Col. Diane Beaver, sought
formal clarification of what were acceptable interrogation methods, Pentagon
officials said. That request prompted a broad legal review of interrogation
techniques by a working group of Pentagon lawyers.

When the review was completed in February 2003, it included a spreadsheet with
24 approved techniques, officials who viewed it said. For each method, the
matrix indicated whether it posed problems under various United States and
international laws, and at what level of the military bureaucracy it needed to
be approved. The following month, a brief document spelling out specific
guidelines for approved interrogation techniques was sent to Guantanamo.

General Miller and another officer on his team said they urged commanders in
Iraq to draft their own guidelines. A chart of approved techniques, entitled the
''Interrogation Rules of Engagement,'' was drawn up for American forces in Iraq
on Oct. 12, 2003, barely a month after General Miller's visit.

''The recommendations that the team and I made was about how you could improve
the interrogation process and the development and collection of intelligence,''
General Miller told reporters last Saturday. ''Those recommendations that were
made were based on the system that provided humane detention and excellent
interrogation.''

Three officials familiar with the methods approved for Guantanamo said they
appeared to be more restrictive than those promulgated for Iraq. At Guantanamo,
methods like extended isolation and putting detainees into ''stress positions''
require approval from senior Pentagon officials; in Iraq, they need only that of
the task force commander.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller yesterday after meeting a rights
envoy. (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); POLICE FORCES
(78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); WAR CRIMES (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); NAVIES (73%); TERRORISM
(64%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (64%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Tim Golden; Eric Schmitt; Geoffrey (Maj Gen) Miller; Antonio M (Maj Gen)
Taguba

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             702 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fallout From Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 77 words



To the Editor:

Regarding Senator Charles E. Schumer's comment that more photos of mistreatment
of prisoners shouldn't be released because to do so ''would violate their
privacy'' (front page, May 13):

By blurring the faces of the prisoners, their privacy can be protected.

America must see those pictures, to seek justice. If we stop with the photos
already released, the demand to correct the system will fade away.

ERIC JAFFA
Brooklyn Center, Minn., May 13, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: CHARLES SCHUMER (90%) Eric Jaffa; Charles E (Sen) Schumer

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%); IRAQ (89%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             703 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

France and Germany Jointly Criticize Abuse of Iraqis and Express Horror at
Beheading

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: EUROPE

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 13


President Jacques Chirac of France and Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany on
Thursday criticized the abuse of Iraqi prisoners by American soldiers and
expressed horror over the beheading of an American civilian.

Their comments, made to reporters after a meeting at Elysee Palace, coincided
with a statement by France's new foreign minister, Michel Barnier, that France
would never send troops to Iraq, not even as part of a peacekeeping force.

''It is out of the question,'' Mr. Barnier said in an interview published
Thursday in Le Monde. ''There will be no French soldiers in Iraq, not now and
not later.''

A senior aide to Mr. Chirac, asked about Mr. Barnier's declaration, said Mr.
Chirac did not want the United States to think there was any possibility French
troops would go to Iraq, even if the United Nations Security Council adopted a
resolution endorsing the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi people on June 30.

Both France and Germany opposed the United States-led war in Iraq and refused to
contribute troops to the multinational occupation force there. Mr. Bernier's
statement was the clearest articulation of France's opposition as well to
providing troops to any peacekeeping force after the restoration of Iraqi
sovereignty.

Although Mr. Barnier did not directly blame the United States for the violence
raging throughout the Middle East, he described it in stark language unusual in
diplomacy and in contradiction to optimistic predictions by the Bush
administration that eventually the situation will improve.

''We must get out of this black hole that is sucking up the Middle East and,
beyond that, the world,'' Mr. Barnier said in the interview in Le Monde. ''What
shocks me is the spiral of horror, the blood, the inhumanity that we see now on
all fronts, from Falluja to Gaza, and in the terrible images of the
assassination of this unfortunate American hostage. All of this gives the
impression of a total loss of balance.''

The deterioration in occupied Iraq combined with President Bush's support for
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel's plans for a withdrawal from Gaza, has
frustrated some European governments and made them less inclined than they might
have been to help the United States in its efforts to stabilize Iraq. The
revelations of abuse of Iraqi prisoners by American soldiers have worsened the
atmosphere.

Asked about the photographs and stories of abuse by Americans against Iraqis,
Mr. Chirac said: ''We thought that those days were over, and that international
obligations were now recognized and applied by everyone.'' He added, however,
''Our American friends condemned these acts and have launched proceedings to
punish those responsible.''

Mr. Schroder also denounced the abuse of prisoners, but he commended the Bush
administration's response, saying, ''It speaks for the strength of American
democracy how they have immediately started getting to the bottom of this.''

The German chancellor was in Paris with most of his cabinet for the third in a
series of meetings this year to mark the 40th anniversary of the signing of the
Elysee Treaty, a friendship and reconciliation pact.

At their joint news conference, Mr. Chirac and Mr. Schroder said they were
horrified by the gruesome beheading of Nicholas E. Berg, a 26-year-old
businessman from Pennsylvania, by Islamic terrorists.

Mr. Chirac expressed ''horror and indignation'' over a killing he said was
carried out ''in conditions that were unimaginable in their barbarity.'' For his
part, Mr. Schroder said, ''Nothing can ever excuse such acts.''

They also declared their commitment to work together to produce a Security
Council resolution supporting the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi people.

Both France and Germany have expressed their determination that the transfer of
sovereignty in Iraq be genuine, and in their meeting on Thursday the two leaders
voiced concern that the United States intended to keep real power and influence
all important decisions in Iraq even after June 30, a senior French official
said.

Under present plans, after the transfer of sovereignty Iraq will be administered
by an interim government until national elections can be in January.

In his interview, Mr. Barnier pushed a proposal by France and Russia calling for
an international conference on Iraq, with the support of the United Nations and
countries in the region, to help create the caretaker government. But he
conceded that France had not yet persuaded the United States to go along.

''The real question is whether they are now ready to reach conclusions about the
deterioration of the situation by accepting an authentic transfer of
sovereignty,'' he said.

The categorical refusal by France to send troops to Iraq under any circumstances
follows a declaration in an interview last week by Spain's new prime minister,
Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, that he would never send Spanish soldiers back to
Iraq, even under the authority of the United Nations or NATO.

Mr. Zapatero incurred the wrath of the Bush administration when he fulfilled a
campaign promise and ordered Spanish troops out of Iraq as one of his first acts
after taking office last month.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Jacques Chirac of France and Chancellor Gerhard
Schroder of Germany appeared at a joint news conference at Elysee Palace. (Photo
by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); IRAQ WAR (73%);
GENOCIDE (68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%); PRIME MINISTERS (50%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (92%); GERHARD SCHRODER (90%) Elaine Sciolino; Jacques
(Pres) Chirac; Gerhard (Chancellor) Schroder; Michel (Min) Barnier; Nicholas E
Berg

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (98%); FRANCE (98%); GERMANY (94%); MIDDLE
EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); France; Germany; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Wrong Direction

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 660 words


Watching President Bush and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld this week, it
was hard to avoid the sinking feeling that they had already moved on from the
Abu Ghraib prison mess and were back to their well-established practice of
ignoring all bad news and marching blindly ahead as if nothing unusual had
happened. That was the impression that emerged from Mr. Bush's disconnected
performance on Monday, when he viewed photos and video stills of the atrocious
treatment of prisoners by soldiers under his and Mr. Rumsfeld's command, and
then announced that the defense secretary was doing a ''superb job.'' It was
stronger than ever yesterday, during Mr. Rumsfeld's road trip to Iraq, where he
drew a curious parallel between himself and Ulysses S. Grant and announced his
approach to the prison scandal: ''I've stopped reading newspapers.''

Mr. Rumsfeld told the soldiers that they had broad public support at home
despite the Abu Ghraib scandal. That is obviously true. It is also beside the
point. The proper way for Mr. Bush and Mr. Rumsfeld to show support for the
troops is not to use them as a screen from the heat over the mismanagement of
the military prisons. It is to fix the problem, now. The solution is real
changes, not cosmetic ones like yesterday's announcement that Abu Ghraib's
inmates would be moved within the prison grounds to new temporary quarters,
which have been dubbed Camp Redemption.

Each passing day has made it more clear that the routine treatment of prisoners
in military prisons violates international law, the Geneva Conventions and
American values of due process and humane behavior. This is a terrible burden
for the fine men and women serving in Iraq to bear, as they live their lives
among an ever more hostile populace. Rather than assuring his uniformed audience
-- and the world -- that the administration is moving heaven and earth to wipe
out the rottenness within the prison system, the defense secretary simply urged
the soldiers to ignore the politics back home.

There are things Mr. Bush can do quickly to demonstrate the American commitment
to the decent treatment of Iraqi prisoners without jeopardizing the fairness of
the coming trials of the soldiers charged with inexcusable actions at Abu
Ghraib. The first is to drop the Camp Redemption foolishness, remove the
prisoners from Abu Ghraib and raze the entire compound, a symbol of Saddam
Hussein's reign of terror that has become a symbol of American brutality. Beyond
that, the president should take these steps:

*Order Mr. Rumsfeld to get military intelligence personnel out of the business
of overseeing the detention and interrogation of Iraqi prisoners; an
overwhelming majority of the prisoners have no intelligence value.

*Ban private contractors from American military prisons.

*Take all of the available trained military prison guards and send them to Iraq
to relieve the exhausted troops who are doing work for which they were never
prepared.

*Order Mr. Rumsfeld to immediately issue new regulations that not only say that
prisoners and detainees must be treated according to the letter and spirit of
the Geneva Conventions, but also ban, one by one, the harsh practices inflicted
on prisoners.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Rumsfeld should also stop trying to dump the blame on the
shoulders of America's enlisted men and women. The entire chain of command in
Iraq must be part of the investigation. That includes Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez,
the commander in Iraq who authorized the use of dogs during interrogations. Maj.
Gen. Geoffrey Miller, who may have helped create the conditions that led to the
outrages at Abu Ghraib, should be replaced as the head of the military prisons
in Iraq.

Finally, Mr. Bush and his Republican allies in Congress should stop trying to
evade responsibility by accusing those who want to ask tough questions of being
disloyal to the troops and the war effort.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); PRISONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); MILITARY OFFENSES (75%); LAW OF WAR (75%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (73%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); DUE PROCESS (69%); SCANDALS (68%); GENOCIDE (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (63%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Editorials; Geneva Conventions

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H
(Sec) Rumsfeld

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             707 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

New Technology Loosens Controls Over Images of War

BYLINE: By AMY HARMON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
INTERNET

LENGTH: 882 words


In an era when pictures and video can be captured and distributed across the
world with a few clicks, the traditional establishment -- the military, the
government, the mainstream media -- appears to be losing control of the images
of war.

Digital technology, Internet experts and military historians said, is forcing a
major shift in the expectation of what can be kept private, and it may
ultimately hold everyone more accountable for their actions.

This week, millions of people logged on to the Internet to watch the gruesome
video of the decapitation of Nicholas Berg, an American in Iraq, by Islamic
terrorists. And some of the hundreds of pictures of American soldiers in Baghdad
abusing Iraqi prisoners appear to have been snapped informally by the soldiers,
burned to CD's and e-mailed home. Had they not eventually surfaced in the
mainstream media, they would almost certainly have made their way onto the
Internet, analysts said.

''This is, as far as I know, the first instance where digitally generated images
made by an amateur photographer have erupted onto the scene of current events
and had an impact,'' said A. D. Coleman, a New York photography critic and
historian. ''But it won't be the last.''

In some ways, the pictures from the Abu Ghraib prison are part of a long amateur
tradition among military personnel. During World War II, German soldiers
photographed the concentration camps, and it was common during the Vietnam War
for soldiers to carry cameras. But most of those pictures were circulated only
privately, Mr. Coleman noted, or are still moldering in shoe boxes.

The searing images of previous wars -- like the photograph of a naked Vietnamese
girl running from the flames of a napalm-bomb attack -- were filtered by
governments or news organizations, the only entities that could reach large
audiences. But digital technology allows individuals an equivalent power.

A Defense Department spokesman said e-mail from the troops in Iraq was usually
not monitored because it would be too cumbersome. Military regulations state
only that ''operationally sensitive'' information cannot be sent over the
Internet.

Paul Saffo, director of the Institute for the Future, said technology had turned
some of the dire predictions of total government surveillance on their head.
''Little Brother has a cellphone camera and he is watching back,'' Mr. Saffo
said. ''Like it or not, the military has just turned extremely transparent.''

Last month, a Web site dedicated to combating government secrecy published
hundreds pictures of military coffins arriving from Iraq at Dover Air Force
Base, images that it had obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.
The pictures, previously suppressed by the Department of Defense, were
immediately downloaded and published by mainstream news organizations.

A week earlier, Tami Silicio, who worked for a Pentagon contractor, used her
digital Nikon Coolpix camera to photograph coffins being loaded onto a transport
plane in Kuwait. She e-mailed the shot to a friend in the United States, who
sent it to The Seattle Times, which published it. Ms. Silicio was then fired
from her job; her superiors said she had violated Department of Defense and
company policies.

''This is a behind-the-walls world,'' said Jay Rosen, chairman of the journalism
department at New York University. ''But because of the democratization of the
tools, those walls don't really exist.''

But one major problem with digital pictures, Mr. Rosen cautioned, is the ease
with which they can be doctored.

The availability of the images seems to be setting off a political debate that
may not otherwise have taken place. On Yafro.com, a social networking site where
anyone can post digital photographs, a discussion is raging over an image posted
by ''Fun11B,'' who says he is a soldier in Iraq, of Iraqi prisoners sitting in a
gymnasium with bags over their heads. ''Just some prisoners that we got one
night,'' the caption reads.

Jason Schaefer of Boulder, Colo., wrote: ''You make me want to vomit. And you
make me ashamed of my own country.''

In response, Fun11B wrote, ''You are truly brainwashed by the recent incidents
that you have seen on the news to believing that all we do over here is torture
and kill innocent Iraqi civilians,'' and explained that the blindfolds were a
temporary security measure until the prisoners could be transported.

The outpouring of war images may be less politically motivated than a natural
outgrowth of the new documentary culture that has millions of people snapping
photographs of their lives.

At Fotolog.net, an online repository of digital images, people from around the
world upload 70,000 images daily.

Consumption Junction, one of the sites showing the video of Mr. Berg's
execution, has archived nearly 7,000 amateur videos over the last five years.
About half a million people had downloaded the video in the first 24 hours after
it was posted Tuesday.

''People just capture whatever goes on in front of their eyes, and then it's on
the Internet two minutes later and it has a worldwide audience,'' said Marc
Brown, co-founder of Buzznet, another online archive for amateur photographers.
''That's the whole ethos of this technology.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on May 10 about the long-term effect that images of
prisoner abuse in Iraq could have on United States policy referred incorrectly
to the famous 1972 photograph of a South Vietnamese girl running down a road
naked, having torn off her burning clothes after a napalm attack -- an image
that helped turn opinion against American action in Southeast Asia. The napalm
was mistakenly dropped from a South Vietnamese plane, not from an American one.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PHOTOGRAPHY (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); NEWS REPORTING (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); VIETNAM WAR (78%);
WORLD WAR II (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PUBLISHING
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CORRECTIONS (74%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); AIR
FORCES (73%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); TERRORISM (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); VISUAL ARTISTS (67%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
(65%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (61%); RELIGION (55%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
TELEPHONES (50%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Photography; Computers and the Internet; News and News Media

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Amy Harmon

CITY: DOVER, DE, USA (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (72%)

STATE: DELAWARE, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); VIET NAM (79%); GERMANY (54%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             708 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Precise Rules For Handling Iraq Prisoners

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
INTERROGATIONS

LENGTH: 731 words


The rules for interrogation of those detained by Americans became the subject of
debate yesterday at a Senate hearing in Washington.

An Army document for the military command in Iraq lists approved approaches for
all detainees. Their descriptions come from the Army's standard field manual on
interrogations. In bold-faced capital letters, the document states ''everyone is
responsible for ensuring compliance'' to the rules, adding that ''violations
must be reported immediately'' to the officer in charge.

Here is a glossary of some of the techniques:

DIRECT -- Straightforward questioning. The field manual says this method is
''often called no approach at all, but it is the most effective.''

INCENTIVE -- Rewards for cooperation. This can include giving detaines things to
which they are already entitled. The field manual notes, ''This can be effective
only if the source is unaware of his rights or privileges.''

INCENTIVE REMOVAL -- Taking away privileges from an uncooperative detainee.
''Interrogators may not withhold a source's rights under the Geneva
Conventions,'' the manual says.

EMOTIONAL APPROACH -- The ''emotional love'' variation relies on engaging
feelings for family, homeland or comrades. The ''emotional hate'' variation
focuses on a detainee's ''genuine hate, or possibly a desire for revenge''; the
manual states, ''This approach is usually most effective on a member of a racial
or religious minority who has suffered discrimination in both service and
civilian life.''

PRIDE AND EGO -- In the ''up approach,'' the interrogator, using a ''flattering
somewhat-in-awe tone of voice,'' speaks highly of the detainee and the
information he can reveal. In the ''down approach,'' the interrogator plays on a
detainee's sense of inferiority.

FUTILITY -- This approach, used to make a detainee believe it is useless to
resist, is ''most effective when the interrogator can play on doubts that
already exist in the source's mind.''

'ESTABLISH YOUR IDENTITY' -- The interrogator pretends the detainee is actually
an infamous criminal facing very serious charges and is trying to pose as
someone else. In order to refute these accusations, the detainee may disclose
details about his unit or operations.

FILE AND DOSSIER APPROACH -- Interrogators confront the detainee with a dossier
that they claim includes everything significant about the detainee. The field
manual suggests the file ''may be padded with extra paper, if necessary.''

RAPID FIRE -- One or more interrogators may be involved in this approach, in
which questions are fired so quickly that the detainee does not have time to
answer before the next question is asked. This is intended to lead to
contradictory answers; in trying to straighten out the confusion, the detainee
is likely to disclose more information.

 Other tactics listed require the commanding general's approval of a request
submitted in writing, for example:

CHANGE OF SCENERY

DIET -- In an article Wednesday in Stars and Stripes, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D.
Miller, who developed interrogation techniques in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and
Iraq, said this means keeping prisoners hungry. The field manual says its use
must be supervised by medical personnel.

ENVIRONMENTAL MANIPULATION -- This could include using loud music and bright
lights to disorient detainees.

SLEEP -- Interrogators reverse detainees' sleep schedules, keeping them awake at
night and allowing them to sleep during the day. According to General Miller,
interrogators may deprive detainees of sleep. This may be done for no more than
72 hours, the field manual says.

ISOLATION -- This is allowed for more than 30 days.

PRESENCE OF TRAINED DOGS

SENSORY DEPRIVATION -- Using blindfolds, earmuffs and other materials. The field
manual states this can be done for no more than 72 hours.

STRESS POSITIONS -- A detainee is made to sit or stand in painful positions. The
field manual says this can be done for no more than 45 minutes.

 The Army manual outlines these specific safeguards for detainees:

Techniques used in interrogation must be noted in writing.

''Approaches must always be humane and lawful.

''Detainees will NEVER be touched in a malicious or unwanted manner.

''Wounded or medically burdened detainees must be medically clear prior to
interrogation.''

The Geneva Conventions apply to operations in Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Glossary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW OF WAR (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES
(77%); REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (73%); DISCRIMINATION (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(69%); RACE & RACISM (69%); GENOCIDE (66%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             709 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Pressure to Go Along With Abuse Is Strong, But Some Soldiers Find Strength to
Refuse

BYLINE: By ANAHAD O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PSYCHOLOGY

LENGTH: 1099 words


The images of prisoner abuse still trickling out of Iraq show a side of human
behavior that psychologists have sought to understand for decades. But the murky
reports of a handful of soldiers who refused to take part bring to light a
behavior psychologists find even more puzzling: disobedience.

Buried in his report earlier this year on Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, Maj. Gen.
Antonio M. Taguba praised the actions of three men who tried to stop the
mistreatment of Iraqi detainees. They are nowhere to be seen in the portraits of
brutality that have touched off outrage around the world.

Although details of their actions are sketchy, it is known that one soldier, Lt.
David O. Sutton, put an end to one incident and alerted his commanders. William
J. Kimbro, a Navy dog handler, ''refused to participate in improper
interrogations despite significant pressure'' from military intelligence,
according to the report. And Specialist Joseph M. Darby gave military police the
evidence that sounded the alarm.

In numerous studies over the past few decades, psychologists have found that a
certain percentage of people simply refuse to give in to pressure -- by
authorities or by peers -- if they feel certain actions are wrong.

The soldiers have been reluctant to elaborate on what they saw and why they came
forward. In an interview with The Virginian-Pilot in Norfolk, Va., Lieutenant
Sutton, a Newport News police sergeant, said, ''I don't want to judge, but yes,
I witnessed something inappropriate and I reported it.''

The public will assume that there was widespread corruption, he told another
local paper, ''when in reality, it's just one bad apple.''

In the noted experiment 40 years ago when Dr. Stanley Milgram showed that most
people will deliver a lethal dose of electricity to another subject if
instructed to do so by a scientist in a white lab coat, a minority still said
no.

''These people are rare,'' said Dr. Elliot Aronson, a professor of psychology at
the University of California, Santa Cruz, who studies social influence. ''It's
really hard for us to predict in advance who is going to resist by looking at
things like demographic data or religious background.''

The men singled out by General Taguba dissented despite the threat of being
ridiculed or even court-martialed for not following orders. Psychologists
believe they may have been guided by a strong moral compass and past experiences
with conformity.

''It is sometimes the case that they themselves have been scapegoated or turned
on by the crowd,''said Dr. John Darley, a professor of psychology and public
affairs at Princeton. ''If you go back into the lives of these people you can
often find some incident that has made very vivid to them the pressures of
conformity working on the others in the group.''

People who break from the crowd to blow the whistle, history shows, are often
the most psychologically distanced from the situation. In 1968, Hugh Thompson, a
helicopter pilot, was flying over Vietnam as G.I.'s were killing civilians. The
soldiers on the ground had been told that the vilage, My Lai, was a Vietcong
stronghold. But from above Mr. Thompson could see there was no enemy fire. He
landed his helicopter, rescued some villagers, and told his commanders about the
massacre.

What happened there, and what ocurred at Abu Ghraib, Dr. Darley said, was a slow
escalation.

Referring to reports that the guards were told to ''soften up'' the prisoners
for interrogation, he said that it apparently ''drifted more and more toward
humiliation.''

''Perhaps they thought they were doing the right thing, he said. ''But someone
who didn't get caught up at the start, someone who walks in and hasn't been
involved in the escalation, like the pilot Thompson, can see the process for
what it really is.''

Mr. Thompson was supported by his gunner, Larry Colburn, who helped him round up
civilians and radioed for help.

It is not clear when the three men cited in General Taguba's report tried to
interfere with the interrogations or whether they had contact with one another.
But a transcript of a court-martial hearing on May 1 suggests that additional
officers who knew one another also tried to pass reports of the scandal up the
chain of command.

Dr. Solomon E. Asch showed in experiments on compliance half a century ago that
people are more likely to break from a group if they have an ally. Subjects in
his experiment were asked to look at different lines on a card and judge their
lengths. Each subject was unknowingly placed in a group of ''confederates'' who
deliberately chose a line that was obviously wrong. About a third of the time,
the subjects would give in and go along with the majority.

But if one confederate broke from the group and gave another answer, even a
wrong answer, the subjects were more likely to give the response they knew was
correct.

''The more you feel support for your dissent, the more likely you are to do
it,'' said Dr. Danny Axsom, an associate professor of psychology at Virginia
Tech.

A lack of supervision, which General Taguba pointed out in his report, and
confusion over the chain of command, Dr. Axsom said, may have also emboldened
the three soldiers.

''There was less perceived legitimacy,'' he said. ''If it's clear who the
authority is, then you're more likely to obey. If it's not, then the legitimacy
of the whole undertaking is undermined.''

The power to resist coercion reflects what psychologists call internal locus of
control, or the ability to determine one's own destiny. People at the other end
of the scale, with external locus of control, are more heavily influenced by
authority figures. They prefer to put their fate in the hands of others.

''If they fail a test, it's the teacher's fault; if they do poorly at a job,
it's the boss's fault,'' said Dr. Thomas Ollendick, a professor of psychology at
Virginia Tech. ''They put the blame for everything outside of themselves. They
are high in conformity because they believe someone else in charge.''

The average person, research shows, falls somewhere in the middle of the scale.
People who voluntarily enlist in the military, knowing they will take orders,
Dr. Ollendick suggested, may be more likely to conform. ''These are people who
are being told what to do,'' he said. ''The ones who are conforming from the
outset feel they can't change the system they're in. Those who blow the whistle
can go above the situation and survive. They can basically endure whatever
negative consequences might come from their actions.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 22, 2004



CORRECTION: An article on May 14 about psychological factors that motivate some
people to resist wrongful orders misstated the title of Dr. Elliot Aronson, an
expert on social influence at the University of California, Santa Cruz. He is an
emeritus professor of psychology, not a professor.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); BEHAVIOR & COGNITION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); DOGS
(73%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); INTERVIEWS (65%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (61%); RELIGION (50%); CORRUPTION (50%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Anahad O'Connor; Antonio M (Maj Gen) Taguba; David O (Lt) Sutton;
William J Kimbro; Joseph M (Specialist) Darby

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             711 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Says Photos Showing Abuse Are Fake

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
BRITISH TROOPS

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 13


The British government said Thursday that its investigation into a series of
published photographs purporting to show the brutal treatment of an Iraqi
prisoner has concluded that the photos were not taken in Iraq and had been
faked.

The images of the reported abuse were emblazoned on the pages of The Daily
Mirror earlier this month under the headline ''Vile!'' at roughly the same time
similar photos emerged of American soldiers abusing prisoners at the Abu Ghraib
prison near Baghdad.

On the front page of The Mirror, a photo portrayed a hooded man it identified as
an Iraqi prisoner who had been kicked, beaten and urinated on by soldiers of the
Queen's Lancashire Regiment.

The authenticity of the image was almost immediately called into question by
British Army officials who pointed out that the soldiers and the Iraqi both
looked well scrubbed, their clothes freshly pressed and that the truck that was
said to be the scene of the beating appeared to be in spotless condition. Iraq
is notoriously dusty.

On Wednesday, Defense Ministry officials said the truck itself had been located
-- in Britain -- and had been taken into evidence.

''The truck in which the photographs were taken was never in Iraq,'' Adam
Ingram, the armed forces minister, told Parliament. ''Those pictures were
categorically not taken in Iraq.''

Declining to give further details in a continuing investigation, he told
lawmakers, ''this is not only the opinion of the Special Investigations branch''
of the British military, but that it also had been ''independently
corroborated.''

There were immediate calls in Parliament for Piers Morgan, the editor of The
Daily Mirror, to resign and for the paper to publish a front-page apology. Mr.
Ingram said ''those involved'' in faking the photos ''may have committed
criminal offenses under military laws.''

''It's an absolute disgrace that The Daily Mirror, in order to further its own
political line and to damage the prime minister, has been prepared to besmirch
the name of the Queen's Lancashire Regiment,'' said David Barrow, a member of
Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor Party.

In a statement on behalf of The Mirror, Mr. Morgan defended the newspaper by
arguing that because some members of the regiment are under investigation for
brutal beatings, including at least one that led to the death of a hotel clerk
in the southern Iraqi city of Basra, the photos approximated real behavior.

''There is, of course, a much bigger issue here that we make no apology for
highlighting,'' Mr. Morgan said, ''which is that the pictures accurately
illustrated the reality about the appalling conduct of some British troops.''

But Keith Simpson, the defense spokesman for the opposition Conservative Party,
said ''those who connived with the production of those photographs and those who
have published them did a great wrong.'' He added that not only the good name,
but ''possibly the lives'' of British troops ''have been traded for what now
appear to be cheap news headlines.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Adam Ingram, Britain's armed forces minister, told the House of
Commons that photographs published in a newspaper purporting to show British
troops abusing an Iraqi prisoner ''were categorically not taken in Iraq.''
(Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%);
ARMIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (67%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Hoaxes; Photography

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%) Patrick E Tyler

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Great Britain; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             712 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fallout From Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 149 words



To the Editor:

As the activities and abuses that occurred at the Abu Ghraib prison become more
fully disclosed (''Lawmakers View Images From Iraq,'' front page, May 13), the
president, Congress and the country should understand what effect this has on
the war on terrorism.

These activities and abuses do not diminish the likelihood of terrorism in
America or to Americans: quite the opposite. They give terrorists more resolve,
encourage support for terrorism against the United States and reduce assistance
for our effort against terrorism.

The war on terror is a complex, comprehensive effort that is won not simply by
dropping bombs or shooting bullets. It must be carefully and diligently managed
on many different fronts.

If it is truly the president's objective to eliminate the threat of terrorism
for Americans, Abu Ghraib is a major setback.

BILL BECKMANN
Cross River, N.Y., May 13, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (87%); WAR
CRIMES (87%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

PERSON: Bill Beckmann

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             713 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

When Al Qaeda Is Interrogated

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 171 words



To the Editor:

While many Americans may see harsh interrogation techniques used on detained
operatives of Al Qaeda as justifiable, the current Iraqi prisoner abuse scandal
has demonstrated the slippery slope that the government, intelligence agencies
and the military find themselves on when such methods are used (''Harsh C.I.A.
Methods Cited in Top Qaeda Interrogations,'' front page, May 13).

In conflating the struggle against Al Qaeda with the invasion of Iraq by
referring to both as ''the war on terror,'' the Bush administration has
accelerated the inevitable slide into a mind-set in which abuse and, to be
blunt, torture are acceptable ways of treating the enemy.

While the Iraqi prisoners abused by American troops may have included some
''terrorists,'' the majority surely were insurgents and common criminals.

We must reaffirm our commitment to humane treatment of all prisoners and
detainees, if we are to regain the respect of the world and, indeed, our
self-respect.

THOMAS J. MINET
Montclair, N.J., May 13, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (88%); SCANDALS (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(88%); IRAQ WAR (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%);
GENOCIDE (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (71%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (69%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism;
Torture; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Thomas Minet; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             715 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AT IRAQI PRISON, RUMSFELD VOWS TO PUNISH ABUSE

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
SECRETARY

LENGTH: 1379 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 13


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, entering the heart of the global furor
over the mistreatment of Iraqi detainees, walked inside the faded yellow walls
and razor wire of Abu Ghraib prison on Thursday to pledge that the world will
see America mete out punishment openly and freely to any soldier guilty of
abuse.

''In recent months we've seen abuses here, under our responsibility, and it's
been a body blow for all of us,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

''The people who engaged in abuses will be brought to justice,'' he added. ''The
world will see how a free system, a democratic system, functions and operates
transparently, with no cover-up.''

On a whirlwind visit that was not announced until his arrival in Baghdad, Mr.
Rumsfeld was then driven around Abu Ghraib prison, passing just outside the wall
of the ''hard tier'' cellblock where the abuses occurred, and were photographed,
late last year.

Hundreds of detainees rushed toward the concertina wire barriers of one sector
of the camp, aware that Mr. Rumsfeld was rolling past inside an armored bus.
Most of the detainees stood mutely in the dusty, windswept compound. Some waved
clothes, some jeered. A few held up signs or T-shirts carrying hand-lettered
messages in English.

''What are you going to do about scandl?'' said one. ''Why we are here?'' said
another. A third read, ''Most of us are inocents.''

Mr. Rumsfeld spoke with no detainees, but in meetings with prison commanders and
a large gathering of military police who replaced those serving during the time
of abuses, the defense secretary said any acts of violence or humiliation had
been carried out by a tiny fraction of the United States military in Iraq.

''It doesn't represent America,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''It doesn't represent
American values. It doesn't represent the values of each of you here in this
room.''

In a move that is as practical as it is symbolic, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, the
new deputy commanding general for detention operations in Iraq, said Thursday
that all prisoners under American control would be moved out of the old Abu
Ghraib structures and into new facilities by the end of this month.

The new ''Camp Redemption'' will be within the Abu Ghraib compound, but the old
prison blocks will be solely for criminals incarcerated by the new Iraqi
government.

Abu Ghraib prison was for decades the scene of murder and torture under Saddam
Hussein, a place, Mr. Rumsfeld said, where ''thousands and thousands and
thousands of human being were mistreated, tortured and killed.''

But today the prison has become a symbol of abuse by American military jailers
as well. As the June 30 date for returning sovereignty to a new government in
Baghdad approaches, Bush administration officials express concerns that the
signature image of the war may no longer be cheering Iraqis toppling Mr.
Hussein's statue in Baghdad, but may instead become American soldiers laughing
and giving ''thumbs up'' as Iraqi detainees are abused and humiliated.

''We care about the detainees being treated right,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''We
care about soldiers behaving right. We care about command systems working.''

Mr. Rumsfeld acknowledged that his one-day trip would be scrutinized by people
throughout Iraq, including some who might claim jurisdiction to try the American
soldiers in their own courts once sovereignty is returned.

''The United States government is going to take care of the people who end up
being convicted of some wrongdoing,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''The justice system of
the United States is serious, professional, and it's under way.''

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, flew with Mr.
Rumsfeld to Iraq. That was another sign of the unusual nature of the trip, as
the Pentagon's most senior civilian leader and top military officer rarely
travel aboard the same aircraft.

They took a 14-hour flight to Kuwait, a 90-minute flight to Baghdad and then a
7-minute helicopter ride from the American military headquarters westward to Abu
Ghraib.

General Myers said opinion around the world, and especially in the Arab world,
could best be satisfied by allowing the military justice system to run its
course and punish those found guilty.

He warned that the cry for public release of all photographs and video images
from Abu Ghraib confiscated as part of a criminal investigation could violate
the rights of the accused, who then could argue for their charges to be
dismissed.

''The worst possible outcome is that they get off, that somehow through all of
the discussions that we've been having, and somehow through releasing evidence
that we have, that the people who deserve to be punished are somehow released,''
the general said.

But rather than continue to suffer through a drip-drip of release of selected
photographs broadcast by television or printed in newspapers and magazines, Mr.
Rumsfeld said, ''As far as I'm concerned, I'd be happy to release them all to
the public and get it behind us.''

He added, though, that a number of legal advisers throughout the executive
branch were not recommending such an action.

For the first leg of his voyage, conducted under tight secrecy and heavy
security, Mr. Rumsfeld flew nonstop to Kuwait aboard one of the four
''doomsday'' jets designed to allow the president, the defense secretary or the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs to communicate from aloft in case of nuclear war.

The modified, Boeing 747, called the E-4B National Airborne Operations Center,
can be refueled in flight, saving time on the lengthy round trip to Iraq.

Thursday's visit to Abu Ghraib was Mr. Rumsfeld's second to the sprawling
prison. He toured the facility last September, guided by Brig. Gen. Janis
Karpinski, the reservist commander of the 800th Military Police Brigade, who has
received a letter of admonishment growing out of the inquiry into abuse under
her command.

Her replacement, General Miller, who has been in charge of the detention system
for 31 days, said he had quickly reorganized Abu Ghraib prison.

He said he had reinstituted clear and separate responsibilities for the military
intelligence unit, which would oversee interrogations, and the military police,
responsible for the security of the prison and detainee transport.

They are ''separate, parallel missions,'' General Miller said, and the
commanders of both units ''report to me.''

Military investigators have said that one cause of the breakdown in discipline
at Abu Ghraib was a confusing command structure in which control of the prison
was taken away from the military police and given to military intelligence last
November.

General Miller repeated his assertion that his review of Iraqi detention
centers, written last year while he was in charge of the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, had in no way urged the military police to undertake harsh
methods to help prepare detainees for interrogation.

The detainee population at Abu Ghraib has dropped to about 3,800 from a high of
over 7,000.

                             --------------------


Fighting Rages in Karbala
(By The New York Times)

 KARBALA, Iraq, May 13 -- Fighting continued Thursday in the center of this
Shiite holy city, where insurgents loyal to the rebel cleric Moktada al-Sadr
attacked American soldiers and Iraqi policemen in the area around an occupied
mosque.

The Americans took over the Mukhaiyam Mosque, a stronghold of Mr. Sadr's
militia, early Wednesday after an overnight battle in which at least 22
insurgents were killed. Guerrillas struck back at the occupation forces with
mortars, rocket-propelled grenades and AK-47's.

One American soldier was severely wounded by shrapnel and driven to nearby Camp
Juliet, a military base, and flown out by a helicopter.

Militiamen have taken up positions at two central holy sites, the Shrine of
Hussein and the Shrine of Abbas, and are staging attacks on the American forces
from there, military officials said. American commanders have declared the
shrines ''restricted areas'' and prevented soldiers from directly attacking
insurgents there.

A captain said insurgents appeared to be dispersing through central Karbala in
two-man teams.

The First Armored Division placed tanks near the Mukhaiyam Mosque and soldiers
patrolled parts of Karbala in specially equipped Humvees, trying to draw fire
from insurgents.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: With Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller at his side, Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld made a whirlwind visit yesterday to the Abu Ghraib prison.
(Pool photo by David Hume Kennerly)(pg. A1)
 An American soldier wounded in a battle with insurgents in southern Iraq was
being flown to Baghdad yesterday for treatment. (Photo by Ashley Gilbertson for
The New York Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); PRISONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); ARMED FORCES
(69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (63%); MURDER (57%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Thom Shanker; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Geoffrey
(Maj Gen) Miller

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             716 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nicholas Berg's Death

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 264 words


It's easy to say he should not have been in Iraq, but Nicholas Berg was a type
familiar to all danger zones: an adventurous and naive young man who was perhaps
keen to do a bit of business, but keener yet to test himself; old enough to
understand the danger, but young enough to defy it. It is impossible not to feel
grief, and horror, at his terrible end.

The claim of this young American's murderers that they were retaliating for the
mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners is a cruel ruse. They killed him out of the same
madness that drove their comrades in Al Qaeda to slaughter thousands on Sept.
11, 2001. But this manipulative attempt to establish a moral equivalence between
the gruesome execution of Mr. Berg and the torture of Iraqi prisoners is now
being mimicked by some hard-core supporters of the American war in Iraq. They
are cynically trying to use the images of Mr. Berg to wipe away the images of
Abu Ghraib, turning the abhorrence for the murderers into an excuse for
demonizing Arabs and Muslims, or for sanctioning their torture.

Mr. Berg's parents have legitimate questions for the United States government
about how he came to be in Iraqi police custody immediately before his
kidnapping, what happened to him there and what knowledge American officials had
about his situation. The occupation authority needs to stop passing off those
questions to the Iraqi police force, which does not exist other than as an agent
of American power. The Berg family deserves answers so they can grieve for their
son's death in peace.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); GENOCIDE (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); POLICE FORCES (70%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); AL-QAEDA (69%); MURDER (56%); RELIGION (52%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Editorials

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Nicholas E Berg

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             718 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Saving Private England

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1792 words


IT'S almost too perfect. Two young working-class women from opposite ends of
West Virginia go off to war. One is blond and has aspirations to be a
schoolteacher. The other is dark, a smoker, divorced and now carrying an
out-of-wedlock baby. One becomes the heroic poster child for Operation Iraqi
Freedom, the subject of a hagiographic book and TV movie; the other becomes the
hideous, leering face of American wartime criminality, Exhibit A in the
indictment of our country's descent into the gulag. In the words of Time
magazine, Pfc. Lynndie England is ''a Jessica Lynch gone wrong.''

Maybe that's true -- we are just starting to hear Private England speak for
herself -- but there's a more revealing story in these women than the cheap
ironies of their good witch/wicked witch twinship might suggest. Our 13-month
journey from Jessica Lynch's profile in courage to Lynndie England's profile in
sadism is less the tale of two women at the bottom of the chain of command than
a gauge of the hubris by which those at the top have lost the war in both the
international and American courts of public opinion. And the supposedly
uplifting Lynch half of the double bill is as revealing of what's gone wrong for
us in Iraq -- and gone wrong from the start -- as is her doppelganger's
denouement at Abu Ghraib.

Flash back for a moment to the creation of Jessica Lynch Superstar. It was in
early April 2003 that the stories first surfaced about the female Rambo who had
shot her way out of an ambush.'' 'She Was Fighting to the Death' '' read the
headline in The Washington Post, an account that was then regurgitated without
question by much of the press. Later we learned that this story was almost
entirely fiction, from the heroine's gunplay to the reports of her being slapped
around by her Iraqi captors to the breathless cliffhanger of her rescue.
Meanwhile, Jessica Lynch herself, unable to speak, was reduced to a mere pawn,
an innocent bystander to her own big-budget biopic. When she emerged six months
later, Diane Sawyer asked if it bothered her that she had been showcased by the
military. ''Yeah, it does,'' she answered. ''It does that they used me as a way
to symbolize all this stuff. Yeah, it's wrong.''

This wrong was not committed by accident but by design. In the revelatory new
documentary about Al Jazeera, ''Control Room,'' opening in New York this Friday
before fanning out nationally, we are taken into our own Central Command's media
center in Doha, Qatar, in early April 2003 to see American mythmaking in action.
The Lynch episode came at a troubling moment in the war; our troops were being
stretched thin, the coalition had mistakenly shot up a van full of Iraqi women
and children, and three Marines had just been killed in the latest helicopter
crash. But as we see in ''Control Room,'' the CentCom press operation was
determined to drown out such bad news by disseminating the triumphant
prepackaged saga of its manufactured heroine no matter what.

The documentary captures some of the briefing at which the dramatic Lynch story
was first laid out. An American journalist on hand, the veteran CNN
correspondent Tom Mintier, grumbles afterward about how the ''minute-by-minute''
account of the rescue has superseded the major news he and his colleagues had
been waiting for: the fate of troops just entering Baghdad. His cavils were
useless, however; the instant legend was moving too fast to be derailed. Soon
the military would buttress it with a complementary video, shot and edited by
its own movie crew: an action-packed montage of the guns-blazing Special
Operations rescue raid, bathed in the iridescent ''Matrix''-green glow of
night-vision photography. But the marketing of this Jerry Bruckheimer-style
video was itself an exercise in hype, meant to blur and inflate the Lynch
episode further.

The director of ''Control Room'' is Jehane Noujaim, an Egyptian-American who is
a protege of D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus, the chroniclers of the '92
Clinton campaign in ''The War Room.'' Though Ms. Noujaim's principal subject may
be the Arab satellite news station that has been widely condemned as a fount of
anti-American propaganda, her eye for the American media is no less keen. The
true control room in ''Control Room'' is not so much the Al Jazeera HQ as the
coalition media center. It is there, from a costly Hollywood set, that the
military commanded its own propaganda effort, which was aided and abetted by an
American press sometimes as eager to slant the news as its Arab counterpart. The
attractively forthright American press officer we follow throughout the
documentary, Lt. Josh Rushing of the Marines, doesn't deny the symmetry: ''When
I watch Al Jazeera, I can tell what they are showing and then I can tell what
they are not showing -- by choice. Same thing when I watch Fox on the other end
of the spectrum.''

Revisiting the invasion of Iraq again in ''Control Room,'' we can see how much
the Bush administration was seduced into complacency early on, not just by the
relative ease with which it took Iraq but by its success at news management. The
Lynch triumph was followed within days by the toppling of the Saddam Hussein
statue (which looks more like a staged event than a spontaneous Iraqi outpouring
when Ms. Noujaim shows it in wide-angle shots). Next up was ''Top Gun.'' Yet we
were very good at feigning ignorance about our own propaganda while decrying Al
Jazeera's fictionalizations. In one particularly embarrassing illustration of
American hypocrisy, we're reminded of how Donald Rumsfeld berated the Arab
channel for violating the Geneva Convention by broadcasting pictures of American
prisoners of war. By the time of his outburst -- March 2003 -- we were very
likely already violating the Geneva Convention ourselves. The confidential Red
Cross report uncovered this week by The Wall Street Journal reveals that
complaints about our abuse of Iraqi prisoners had already started by then, some
10 months before the Pentagon launched the Taguba investigation.

In retrospect, much of what we saw during Operation Iraqi Freedom was as
fictionalized as CentCom's version of ''Saving Private Jessica.'' When we
weren't staging the news, we were covering it up. ''A war with hundreds of
coalition and tens of thousands of Iraqi casualties'' was transformed ''into
something closer to a defense contractor's training video: a lot of action, but
no consequences, as if shells simply disappeared into the air and an invisible
enemy magically ceased to exist.'' That was the conclusion reached by one of the
leaders of a research project at George Washington University's School of Media
and Public Affairs, which examined 600 hours of war coverage on CNN, Fox and ABC
from the war's March 20, 2003, start to the April 9 fall of Baghdad, ''to see
how 'real' the war looked on TV.'' Of the 1,710 stories they surveyed, ''only
13.5 percent included any shots of dead or wounded coalition soldiers, Iraqi
soldiers or civilians.''

That brief war, since renamed ''major combat operations,'' seems like a century
ago. As ''Saving Private Jessica'' symbolizes how effectively the military and
administration controlled the news during Operation Iraqi Freedom, so the photos
of Lynndie England and her cohort symbolize their utter loss of that control
now. More scoops are on the way, and not just those of torture. ''Everybody
wants to cut to the chase, but the movie has just started,'' a top Republican
aide told The New York Times this week. We are only beginning to learn, for
instance, about the shadowy roles played by America's most sizable ally in ''the
coalition of the willing'' -- not the British, with some 9,000 troops, but the
mercenaries, whose duties and ranks (now at some 20,000) have crept up largely
out of our view.

It has taken a while for Mr. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard Myers to figure out just
how much their power to enforce their own narrative of this war has waned. Their
many successes in news management have been their undoing, leaving them besotted
by their own invincibility and ill-equipped for failure. Clearly they still
believed they could control the pictures. According to Mr. Rumsfeld's own
congressional testimony, he was ''surprised'' that lowly enlisted men could be
''running around with digital cameras'' e-mailing grotesque Kodak snapshots all
over the world. Even after making that discovery, such was his and General
Myers's habitual arrogance that they didn't bother to get ahead of the Abu
Ghraib story -- or to familiarize themselves with its particulars -- once CBS
gave them a full two weeks of head's up before ''60 Minutes II'' broadcast it to
the world. Or maybe they just hoped that the press's wartime self-censorship
would continue. After all, in happier times, Larry Flynt had done the patriotic
thing by refusing to publish half-nude snapshots of Jessica Lynch that fell into
his hands at the time of her greatest celebrity.

In desperation, some torture apologists are trying to concoct the fictions the
administration used to ply so well. Rush Limbaugh has been especially creative.
The photos of the abuses at Abu Ghraib ''look like standard good old American
pornography,'' he said as the story spread, as if he might grandfather wartime
atrocities into an entertainment industry that, however deplorable to Islam, has
more fans in our Christian country than Major League Baseball. In Mr. Limbaugh's
view, the guards humiliating the Iraqis were just ''having a good time'' and
their pictures look ''just like anything you'd see Madonna or Britney Spears do
onstage . . . I mean, this is something that you can see onstage at Lincoln
Center from an N.E.A. grant, maybe on 'Sex and the City . . .' ''

But this movie has just started, and it's beyond anyone's power to spin it any
longer. Yet when the president traveled to the Pentagon on Monday to look at
previews of the coming attractions, he seemed as out of touch with reality as
Mr. Limbaugh. It was nothing if not an odd moment to congratulate the secretary
of defense, who has literally thrown the reputation of our honorable military
and our country to the dogs, for doing a ''superb job.'' But to understand where
Mr. Bush is coming from, one need only recall the interview he gave last fall to
Brit Hume of Fox News, in which he griped about the press (''the filter,'' as he
calls it) that was now challenging administration propaganda from Iraq. ''The
best way to get the news is from objective sources,'' the president said back
then, ''and the most objective sources I have are people on my staff who tell me
what's happening in the world.'' Perhaps someone on that staff might tell him
that, according to the latest polls, most of the country has changed the
channel.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 16, 2004



CORRECTION: The front-page Frank Rich column in Arts & Leisure today about
perceptions of Pfc. Jessica Lynch and Pfc. Lynndie England includes an outdated
reference in some copies to Private England's public silence. On Tuesday night,
after the section had gone to press, she gave her first interview, to a Denver
television station.



GRAPHIC: Photos: Two privates from West Virginia, Jessica Lynch and Lynndie
England. (Photo by Reuters)
 (Photo by European Pressphoto Agency)(pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
INDICTMENTS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); NATURISTS & NATURISM (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); DRAMA FILMS (73%); WAR ON TERROR (71%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES
(71%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); PROFILES &
BIOGRAPHIES (67%); MILITARY WEAPONS (64%); SHOOTINGS (63%); TELEVISION
PROGRAMMING (56%) United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; Nudism and Nudity

COMPANY: GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (57%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC (53%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (57%); NAICS517110 WIRED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (57%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (57%);
NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%)

PERSON: FRANK RICH (59%); DIANE SAWYER (56%) Jessica (Pfc) Lynch; Lynndie R
(Pfc) England; Frank Rich; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: DOHA, QATAR (65%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); QATAR (92%); ENGLAND (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             720 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Powell Faces Arabs' Doubts on Iraq and Israel

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: SHUNEH, Jordan, May 16


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, at a gathering of the Arab elite, offered a
direct apology on Sunday to Iraqi prisoners in Baghdad abused by Americans, and
castigated Israel for demolishing Palestinian homes in Gaza.

But, as Mr. Powell ended a brief foray into the Arab world hoping to rebuild
American credibility, there was little evidence that the twin gestures had
mollified Arabs mistrustful of American policies in both Iraq and the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In recent weeks, the United States' reputation in the Arab world has been deeply
tarnished, both by its acceptance of proposals by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of
Israel -- yet to be endorsed within that country -- for a unilateral
disengagement from Gaza and by the spectacle of uniformed Americans abusing
naked and hooded Iraqi detainees.

At a joint news conference with Marwan Muasher, his Jordanian counterpart, Mr.
Powell went further than in the past to offer American apologies for the abuse.

''The president has expressed an apology on behalf of the nation,'' he said. ''I
will reinforce that apology. We are devastated by what happened at Abu Ghraib.
We apologize to those who were abused in such an awful manner.''

In a speech on Saturday, Mr. Powell promised that those who committed the abuse
in Baghdad would be brought to justice. He also pledged that the White House was
''starting again'' in the effort to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

But the sometimes emotional address on Saturday evoked skepticism and hostility
among many of the participants, including policy makers and business leaders.
The Americans ''are not solving the issues concerning the Iraqis or the
Israelis,'' said Omar Othman, 45, a Saudi petroleum company executive. ''What
they are giving us is only a rosy picture, and we want the reality.''

Rami Khouri, editor in chief of the English-language Daily Star in Beirut,
called the speech ''inappropriate and insensitive because he was telling us the
same old stuff and he seems unaware or not caring about the widespread criticism
of United States policy in the region, which was conveyed to him.''

At his news conference on Sunday, Mr. Powell sought anew to win support. ''We
are doing everything we can to deal with what you describe as the frustrations
within the Arab world,'' he told a questioner. ''Everybody says we should return
sovereignty to the Iraqi people so that it no longer looks like an occupation.
That's exactly what we are trying to do and what we plan to accomplish by the
end of June.''

Even as he spoke of a new start to peace efforts between Israelis and
Palestinians, though, Arab officials complained that Israel's destruction of
Palestinian homes in the Rafah refugee camp in Gaza seemed to undermine an offer
by Mr. Sharon to dismantle Jewish settlements in Gaza and pull out Israeli
troops.

Foreign Minister Ahmed Maher of Egypt, a delegate at the World Economic Forum,
told CNN, ''The plan that the Americans are talking about is a plan that didn't
float at all.'' He added that ''the way Mr. Sharon is implementing it is to
destroy more homes in Gaza -- I mean what sort of Gaza does he want to leave?''

At his news conference, Mr. Powell said: ''We oppose the destruction of homes.
We don't think that is productive.''

Mr. Powell was asked at his news conference to comment on remarks attributed to
Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, calling on his followers to ''terrorize
your enemy.''

''Mr. Arafat continues to take actions and make statements to make it
exceptionally difficult to move forward,'' Mr. Powell said. He complained that
the Palestinian leader ''refuses to allow consolidation of security forces.''

At a session of the World Economic Forum, however, Nabil Shaath, the Palestinian
foreign minister, angrily took issue with what he depicted as a one-sided
American attitude on the issue. The United States ''must put a full stop on the
violence by both sides,'' he said. ''Stop blaming it all on the Palestinians.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PUBLIC POLICY (79%);
EXECUTIVES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(75%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); REFUGEES (73%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (68%); PEACE PROCESS (66%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (50%); PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS (50%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Palestinians

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Alan Cowell; Colin L (Sec) Powell

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (98%); IRAQ (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (96%); JORDAN (92%); LEBANON (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Israel; Gaza Strip

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             722 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Better Late Than Never

BYLINE: By Michael J. Klarman.

Michael J. Klarman, a professor of law and history at the University of
Virginia, is author of ''From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and
the Struggle for Racial Equality.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va.


The Supreme Court has never been in the vanguard of social reform. Few people
would credit it with playing a pivotal role in the women's movement, the
environmental movement or the gay rights movement. Yet many people, citing the
court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, insist that it played a crucial
role in the civil rights movement.

The justices who decided the case knew better. Brown was possible only because
significant changes in racial attitudes and practices were already taking place
in America. Justice Felix Frankfurter later observed that had a challenge to
school segregation reached the court in the 1940's, he would have voted to
reject it because ''public opinion had not then crystallized against
segregation.'' The N.A.A.C.P. understood this, too, and refrained from directly
challenging school segregation until 1950.

Although the origins of the civil rights movement are complex, the search for a
catalyst goes back at least as far as World War II. The ideology of the war was
antifascist and prodemocratic. In 1942, for example, The New York Times urged
America to end racial discrimination in order to avoid ''the sinister hypocrisy
of fighting abroad for what it is not willing to accept at home.''

Thousands of African-American soldiers became civil rights pioneers, reasoning
that if they were good enough to risk their lives for democracy, they should
enjoy some of it at home. During the 1940's, one and a half million
African-Americans moved from the rural South, where they had been almost
universally disenfranchised, to the urban North, where they not only voted
without restriction but often tipped the balance between evenly divided
political parties. As the cold war dawned, the United States government
identified racial discrimination as a potentially crippling liability because it
''furnishes grist for the Communist propaganda mills.''

These and other forces were having noticeable effects even before Brown. Jackie
Robinson desegregated Major League Baseball in 1947. President Harry Truman
desegregated the federal military and civil service in 1948. Even in the South,
significant racial reforms were afoot; black voter registration increased to 20
percent in 1950 from 3 percent in 1940. By the time of Brown, dozens of Southern
cities had hired their first black police officers since Reconstruction.

The Supreme Court justices who decided Brown were aware of these developments.
Sherman Minton detected ''a different world today.'' Felix Frankfurter noted
''the great changes in the relations between white and colored people since the
First World War,'' and remarked that ''the pace of progress has surprised even
those most eager in its promotion.'' Robert Jackson went the furthest: ''Negro
progress under segregation has been spectacular. His rise is one of the swiftest
and most dramatic advances in the annals of man.''

None of this is to say that Brown did not matter. The decision was hugely
symbolic to African-Americans; many shared the view of one black newspaper that
called Brown ''the greatest victory for the Negro people since the Emancipation
Proclamation.'' The ruling also motivated Southern blacks to pursue school
desegregation -- an objective that, in some areas, would have been inconceivable
but for Brown.

Perhaps most important, the decision crystallized Southern whites' resistance to
racial change, radicalized Southern politics, and increased the likelihood that
protest, once it erupted, would incite a violent response. It was the beating of
peaceful black demonstrators by Southern white law enforcement officers -- many
of whom were carried into office by the wave of racial fanaticism that swept
Southern politics after Brown -- that repulsed national opinion and led to the
passage of landmark civil rights legislation.

Brown reflected a social and political sea change at least as much as it caused
one. Supreme Court justices are, first and foremost, products of their time and
place; as such, they are ill positioned to start social revolutions. Those who
served at midcentury were not tempted to invalidate school segregation until
fully half the nation supported such a ruling. They declined to enforce Brown
aggressively until the civil rights movement had made Northern whites as keen to
eliminate Jim Crow as Southern whites were to preserve it.

Brown certainly played a role in shaping both the civil rights movement and the
violent response it received from Southern whites. But racial reform in the
United States was ineluctable. In the end, what the Supreme Court did or did not
do was of limited importance.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Illustrations by Thomas Fuchs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (91%); RACE & RACISM (91%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (91%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); VOTERS &
VOTING (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (77%); COLD WAR (77%);
GAYS & LESBIANS (77%); WORLD WAR II (74%); BASEBALL (73%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL
RESOURCES (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%); POLITICS (69%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(68%); WORLD WAR I (67%); CIVIL SERVICES (67%); ARMED FORCES (65%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (63%); US PRESIDENTS (63%); RIOTS (60%) Education and Schools;
Blacks; Brown V Board of Education (1954 School Integration Suit); Equal
Educational Opportunities; Demonstrations and Riots; Public Opinion; Education
and Schools

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (56%)
National Assn for the Advancement of Colored People; Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: Michael J Klarman

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             723 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Divided Mission In Iraq Tempers Views of G.I.'s

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
SOLDIERS

LENGTH: 1642 words

DATELINE: KARBALA, Iraq, May 16


Six weeks ago, soldiers of the First Armored Division were renovating schools.
Now they are raiding them for hidden munitions.

Children wave to them along the roads, while insurgents with mortars and
rocket-propelled grenades make them targets.

''Our mission is to rebuild this country, but the thing is, the bad guys won't
let us do it,'' said Specialist Jennifer Marie Bencze, 20, of Santa Rosa, Calif.
''At the same time we've got engineers rebuilding schools, fixing roads, doing
all the humanitarian projects, we've got infantry fighting the bad guys. So the
mission is really confused.''

Here in the Shiite heartland, the division is caught up in the fiercest and
deadliest fighting now under way in Iraq. That is a far cry from May 2003, when
it rolled into Iraq thinking the war was all but over, ready to plant
Western-style institutions in this arid land. Interviews with dozens of soldiers
over the last two weeks suggest that their idealism has been tempered.

All agree the war is at a crucial juncture, but few soldiers can say with
certainty how to achieve victory -- or even what might constitute victory.

''I think Bush is a good man, but over here, it's not as easy as he makes it
sound,'' said Specialist Matthew DeGregorio, 35, a reservist in civil affairs
charged with persuading Iraqis to work on projects with the Americans. ''Nobody
buys the fact that it's so easy.''

''To be honest, I'd say there are things that need to be worked out,'' he added.
''I'd say they need even more men in the entire country. I think it goes back to
the cuts in the military. I think they're leaning too heavily on the National
Guard and the Reserves.''

The abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib concerns soldiers, too. They ask whether
their work has been irrevocably tarnished in the minds of Americans and Iraqis.
''Now we wonder what people back home think of us,'' said First Lt. Erik Iliff,
24, of Columbia, S.C. ''Will it be like Vietnam, where everyone who's fought
there is labeled a baby killer?''

As for Iraqi opinion, Specialist DeGregorio said the scandal ''adds fuel to the
fire.''

''We're not only seen as an occupier, but we're seen messing with their people
and doing sick stuff,'' he said. ''Rumors and stuff you see on TV are huge here.
They've already had it driven into their heads by Saddam Hussein that America is
the Great Satan.''

Many of the soldiers are tired. They were supposed to go home at the end of
April, but their tour was extended four months when it became clear that troop
numbers were too low. They share a sense of camaraderie though, forged by
working together during what is for most of them the toughest year of their
lives.

At Camp Lima, a military base on the outskirts of Karbala, they sleep scores to
a tent in 100-plus degree heat. They are barred from indulging in sex and
alcohol. When they do leave the base, it is often to get shot at or to kill
people.

The strength of the insurgency persuades some soldiers here that a strong
American military presence must remain in Iraq. ''We're just trying to take this
big ball of mess and keep it from exploding,'' said Lt. Josey Sandoval, 24, of
Seattle. ''If the U.S. Army left right now, this country would tear itself
apart.''

For others, the mission that began with clear objectives is murkier than ever.

They were assigned in Baghdad to do reconstruction work and patrol the streets.
Then came the two-front uprising last month, in Falluja, west of Baghdad, and in
Karbala and other southern cities, and with that the division rushed south to
fight militiamen loyal to the rebel Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr.

Over the year, some ambitious goals fell by the wayside. Lieutenant Iliff
recalled the day he had to cancel elections in December for seats on a
neighborhood council in Baghdad. First, the men tried to bar women from voting.
Then they mobbed the ballot box. The lieutenant ended up hand-picking three
people for the seats.

Whatever government does take root, ''I think it'll have to be an Iraqi version
of it,'' he said, adding: ''Westernized democracy just won't work. They haven't
been taught from a young age to think the way we think in the West. They don't
have an understanding of the same rights.''

Cpl. Jonathan Torres, 20, of Puerto Rico, echoed that sentiment: ''It's going to
take a lot longer than they thought it would. Here, people are used to another
way of living. They thought they could change it in one or two years. It's going
to take a lot longer.''

Asked to describe his mission, Sgt. Daniel Rigole, 23, a tent-mate of Corporal
Torres, said: ''It just seems like we're trying to police. In my personal
opinion, it's a job for the United Nations.'' ''Our job as combat engineers has
nothing to do with driving around, policing people up,'' he added. In their hot
and fetid tent, Sergeant Rigole and several soldiers talked of American
casualties suffered in recent fighting around the Mukhaiyam Mosque. Three
soldiers have been killed and at least 55 wounded since the First Armored
Division opened the offensive against Mr. Sadr's militia two weeks ago. Daily
battles rage in downtown Karbala. The division's casualty rate is running higher
than at any time in the last year.

Sergeant Rigole said he believed that outside Iraq, ''nobody cares anymore,
because it's just becoming another part of life.''

''When it's somebody of your own, that's somebody who was watching your back and
you were watching his back,'' he said. ''It's part of your family, you know.
Even when it's someone who's part of another unit, you still care.''

Corporal Torres observed: ''It builds some type of anger. It makes you angry at
the enemy.''

A soldier close to an infantryman killed by a sniper stopped by a reporter's
room at the base and almost punched the wall. He was on the verge of tears. ''I
want you to tell people that this is ridiculous,'' he said. ''We know where the
enemy is. We could take them out. But we're holding back because of politics.''

He was speaking of the balance adopted by American commanders, who have
refrained from attacking insurgents holed up around two especially important
shrines in downtown Karbala out of fear that they could inflame Shiite Muslims
the world over. Most of the mortars and rocket-propelled grenades being fired at
Americans are coming from that area. It is a dilemma intrinsic to the kind of
urban warfare the Americans have been drawn into -- weighing the potential of a
public backlash against the need to win a decisive victory with the fewest
casualties.

''It does limit some of our options,'' said Lt. Col. Garry P. Bishop, the
commander of American forces in Karbala. ''But you can win a battle and lose a
war if we turn the will of the people against us.''

Many soldiers say the allegiance of the Iraqi people is still up in the air, and
whichever way it swings will determine the outcome of the war. At the moment,
some say, the insurgents are crushing the Americans in the propaganda campaign.

''They're really working us over,'' said Capt. Charles Fowler, 37, a reservist
in civil affairs from Vidalia, Ga. ''We're doing a lot of great, great stuff. We
really are. We're just not getting credit for it.''

The captain said he was failing to win over noncommittal Iraqis, those he called
fence riders. Without criticizing American politicians or civilian officials, he
said administrators seemed to be constantly changing their plans for Iraq,
sowing uncertainty among Iraqis. That seemed especially true of the muddled
proposals for setting up an interim government to take ''limited sovereignty''
after June 30.

''I think we should have clarified it and told people we had a definite concrete
plan, something like, 'Look, this is what's going to happen,' '' he said.
''They're really just waiting to see what's going to happen.''

''They ask me what's going to happen,'' the captain added. ''Hell, I don't even
know. It makes it very difficult right now. It makes it very difficult for me.
One thing I can't do is make promises that we can't keep.''

Lieutenant Iliff, the officer who tried organizing elections in Baghdad, said:
''People are so easily swayed. That's a source of frustration. One week they're
waving at us; the next week they throw rocks at us. Then we build a playground,
and they're waving at us again.''

Many soldiers also expressed disappointment at the waning support in the United
States for the war effort. Some said they feared that support would further
erode in light of the disclosures of Abu Ghraib. They condemned the acts of the
prison guards, but also said they were not paying much attention to the scandal
since they had almost no access to the news.

Specialist Bencze said: ''It's hard knowing that the actions of a few people can
try to ruin the work we've done for the last year. I felt we'd been making a lot
of progress here, and this was a roadblock.''

Some soldiers blamed the news media's coverage of the fighting for fanning
antiwar sentiments back home.

''For 10 months, it was my position that the American public saw too much of the
shooting and the killing and not enough of the humanitarian side of things,''
Colonel Bishop said. ''In my area in Baghdad, there were 80 schools renovated,
$1.7 million of aid given out and 29 different sewer renovation projects.''

In the end, the soldiers grasped at small signs that told them they were doing
some good here. On a recent morning, as a convoy was returning to base after a
battle at an amusement park, children ran out of their homes and waved to the
soldiers. Specialist Ryan Stewart, 26, a surfer from Santa Paula, Calif., took a
hand off his M-240 SAW machine gun and waved back. ''That makes things seem a
bit better,'' he said.

He was wounded by shrapnel more than a week later and flown out to Germany for
care. His fiancee awaited him there. For him, the war was over.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At top, Lt. Col. Garry Bishop briefed G.I.'s and Polish
soldiers on a mission against insurgents in Karbala. At left, Pfc. Ryan
Williamson after an overnight operation. At right, Lt. Josey Sandoval during the
mission. (Photographs by Ashley Gilbertson for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
Sgt. Shawn Boothby of Maine was among soldiers in Karbala who were treated for
dehydration during fighting in intense heat.
Lt. Erik Iliff of Colombia, S.C., jumped through rubble in part of a mosque that
housed a huge weapons cache belong to the Mahdi Army militia. At right,
Specialist Ryan Stewart, a surfer from California, on an operation in full
battle outfit and night vision scope.
 In a dust storm, Capt. Charles Fowler, a civil affairs reservist from Georgia,
provided security en route to a meeting with sheiks in Karbala. ''We're doing a
lot of great, great stuff,'' he says of his work with the Iraqis. ''We're just
not getting credit for it.'' (Photographs by ASHLEY GILBERTSON for The New York
Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BUILDING RENOVATION (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); CHILDREN (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); CORRECTIONS
(67%); HOMICIDE (64%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (61%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Propaganda

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%) Edward Wong

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); COLUMBIA, SC, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); POLAND (59%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Karbala (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             724 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SOME IRAQIS HELD OUTSIDE CONTROL OF TOP GENERAL

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL; Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting from
Washington for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PRISONERS

LENGTH: 1870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


About 100 high-ranking Iraqi prisoners held for months at a time in spartan
conditions on the outskirts of Baghdad International Airport are being detained
under a special chain of command, under conditions not subject to approval by
the top American commander in Iraq, according to military officials.

The unusual lines of authority in the detainees' handling are part of a tangled
network of authority over prisoners in Iraq, in which the military police,
military intelligence, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence
Agency, various military commanders and the Pentagon itself have all played a
role. Congressional investigators who are looking into the scandal over the
abuse of Iraqi prisoners say those arrangements have made it difficult to
determine where the final authority lies.

At least as of February, many of the 100 or so prisoners categorized by American
officials as ''high value detainees'' because of the special intelligence they
are believed to possess, had been held since June 2003 for nearly 23 hours a day
in strict solitary confinement in small concrete cells without sunlight,
according to a report by the International Committee of the Red Cross.

While not tantamount to the sexual humiliation and other abuses inflicted on
Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib prison, the conditions have been described by the
Red Cross as a violation of the Geneva Conventions, the international treaty
that the Bush administration has said it regards as ''fully applicable'' to all
prisoners held by the United States in Iraq.

Under arrangements in effect since October, military officials said at a
Pentagon briefing on Friday, explicit authorization from the American commander,
Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, has been required in each of about 25 cases in
which prisoners have been subjected to isolation for longer than 30 days. But on
Sunday, a senior military officer said that statement did not apply to the
prisoners being held at the airport, because ''we were not the authority'' for
the high-value detainees.

The officer referred questions about the high-value Iraqi prisoners to the
United States Central Command, in Tampa, Fla., where a spokesman said he could
not answer them on Sunday.

Defense Department officials said the principal responsibility for the
high-value prisoners and their treatment belonged to the Iraq Survey Group,
which is headed by Maj. Gen. Keith Dayton of the Defense Intelligence Agency.

The 1,400-member Iraq Survey Group was formed last June, principally to take
charge of the hunt for Iraq's illicit weapons, although its mandate has also
included gathering information about Iraqi war crimes. The survey group falls
under the overall authority of the Central Intelligence Agency, under George J.
Tenet, for matters related to the illicit weapons hunt. But on other matters it
reports to the Central Command, under Gen. John P. Abizaid.

The high-value Iraqi detainees said by military officials to be held at Camp
Cropper on the airport's outskirts do not include Saddam Hussein, who was not
captured until December and is being held by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
elsewhere in Iraq, American government officials have said. These officials say
Mr. Hussein has also been held in isolation.

The group does, however, include Tariq Aziz, a top Hussein aide, and other
former senior officials depicted on a deck of cards created by the Pentagon to
represent a 55-member most wanted list.

The designation of a ''high value detainee'' was described by military officials
as subjective, assigned to prisoners based on an assessment of the intelligence
information they might have about matters like illicit weapons, the
anti-American insurgency or the conduct of Mr. Hussein's government.

In the report that it completed in February, the Red Cross committee said it had
written to American officials last October recommending an end to the isolation
imposed on the high-value prisoners. ''The internment of persons in solitary
confinement for months at a time in cells devoid of daylight for nearly 23 hours
a day is more severe than the forms of internment provided for'' under the
Geneva Conventions, the Red Cross said in the report.

But there has been no indication that the United States has called a halt to the
procedure. On Friday, military officials in Washington who announced that
harsher forms of treatment would no longer be available to interrogators and
guards in Iraq also said General Sanchez, the commander in Iraq, was leaving
open the option of continuing to authorize the isolation of prisoners.

The question of whether harsh treatment of the detainees was authorized by
senior Pentagon officials is among the main topics of the Congressional
inquiries into prison abuse. An article by Seymour Hersh in the May 24 issue of
The New Yorker says the tone for the abuse reflected secret directives from the
Pentagon that were initially intended to give Special Operations troops and
intelligence operatives a freer hand in pursuing Al Qaeda members.

In a statement on Saturday, the Pentagon described that article as
''outlandish'' and ''filled with error.''

''No responsible official of the Department of Defense approved any program that
could conceivably have been intended to result in such abuses as witnessed in
the recent photos and videos,'' it said.

However, Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia and chairman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, said in a commencement address on Sunday that
in light of the allegations, his committee would look ''up and down and sideways
in the chain of command and get to the bottom of this,'' said a spokesman for
the senator.

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, appearing on the CBS News
program ''Face the Nation,'' said, ''The question is: do we have an
out-of-control prison or an out-of-control system?''

In response to questions, Mr. Graham, Mr. Warner and other lawmakers who spoke
publicly on Sunday said they had not yet been able to determine whether The New
Yorker account was accurate.

Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, the top Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee, said that if the New Yorker article was accurate, ''it raises this
issue a whole new level.''

''The question,'' he said, ''is whether there was this kind of a secret program,
which authorized this additional level of abuse.''

A report in this week's Newsweek quotes a memo written Jan. 25, 2002, by Alberto
R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, to Secretary of State Colin L. Powell
saying that ''this new paradigm of terrorism renders obsolete'' the ''strict
limitation on questioning of enemy prisoners'' spelled out in the Geneva
accords.

Asked about it on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Powell said he
could not recall the specific memo but said he had always argued that the Bush
administration should comply with the provisions of the Geneva accords --
''either by the letter, if it's appropriate to those individuals in our custody
that they are really directly under the Geneva Convention, or if they're illegal
noncombatants and not directly under the convention, we should treat them
nevertheless in a humane manner in accordance with what is expected of by
international law and the Geneva Convention.''

To date, military and intelligence officials have declined to describe the
conditions under which the senior Iraqi officials have been held in Iraq.

Mr. Hussein had been in the custody of the Central Intelligence Agency in the
early weeks after his capture in December, intelligence officials have said, but
has been transferred to the F.B.I. in anticipation of his being transferred in
turn to the Iraqi authorities to stand trial in Iraq, probably next year.

All of the American-run detention centers in Iraq, including the Abu Ghraib
prison and the high-value detention site at Camp Cropper, are run by the
military and guarded by the military police, military and Congressional
officials said. In general, the military has been assigned the leading role in
the questioning of Iraqi detainees, to the extent that military intelligence
officials are supposed to sit in even on interrogations conducted by C.I.A.
officers, a senior intelligence official said.

But the exact role played by officers from the C.I.A. and D.I.A. is not clear,
and neither is the role played by members of the covert task forces run by the
military that have taken the lead in the hunt for weapons in Iraq and for Mr.
Hussein.

The task forces, which include C.I.A. officers and elite Special Operations
troops including members of the Army's Delta Force and Navy Seals, have been
given different names over time. But one of them, Task Force 121, played a
leading role in the capture of Mr. Hussein, and a successor unit is still
operating in both Iraq and Afghanistan.

Intelligence officials have acknowledged that the C.I.A. played a role in
interrogating about two dozen prisoners at Abu Ghraib, and that one prisoner
died there during questioning in November, in a case that is being investigated
by the agency's inspector general as a possible criminal homicide.

They also say C.I.A. interrogators have questioned prisoners held at the site at
the airport, and they have acknowledged that agency employees for a time
enlisted military guards at Abu Ghraib to try to hide ''ghost detainees'' from
the Red Cross.

That latter practice -- intended ''to keep the capture of a small number of
terrorists quiet for some time'' -- was discontinued in January, a senior
intelligence official said Sunday.

In practice, however, Bush administration officials have also acknowledged that
some of the overall direction has come from senior civilians at the Pentagon,
including Stephen Cambone, the under secretary of defense for intelligence,
military officials said.

In testimony last week before Congress, Mr. Cambone acknowledged that it was he,
among others, who encouraged Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, who was then running the
American prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to head a delegation that traveled to
Iraq last summer to seek recommendations on improving the interrogation process
there.

Mr. Cambone has said he was never briefed about that trip by General Miller
himself, but received only a secondhand briefing from his own top deputy, Lt.
Gen. William G. Boykin, the deputy under secretary of defense for intelligence.

Mr. Cambone has said the trip resulted in some important organizational changes,
including the establishment under General Sanchez of a new ''fusion cell'' aimed
at integrating intelligence information from a wide variety of sources.

Over breakfast with reporters last November, before the problems at Abu Ghraib
had begun to surface, Mr. Cambone referred broadly to a trip made to Iraq last
August by a delegation that he said ''included people from the C.I.A.'' that
made recommendations for ''an increased level of intelligence support.''

''They came back with a list of somewhere close to 80 or 90 recommendations on
some of the changes and adjustments that needed to be made,'' Mr. Cambone said
of the group. ''Some were small: make sure you have the proper software down at
a certain level of command and so forth. Others were rather larger.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); AIRPORTS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAW OF
WAR (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); SCANDALS (75%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); APPROVALS (72%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); GENOCIDE (65%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (63%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(60%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva
Conventions; Geneva Conventions

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%); DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (55%);
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (55%) Central Intelligence
Agency; Defense Intelligence Agency; Red Cross

PERSON: Douglas Jehl; George W (Pres) Bush; Keith (Maj Gen) Dayton; John P (Gen)
Abizaid; Tariq Aziz; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             728 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Captive Demands U.S. Pay Damages

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ

LENGTH: 229 words


An Iraqi-born Swedish citizen claiming to have been tortured at Abu Ghraib
prison is seeking more than $100,000 from the American military.

A Michigan lawyer filed a claim with the Army last Wednesday on behalf of the
man, identified in the filing only as Mr. Saleh.

''Hopefully we'll reach an amicable settlement, and if not we'll seek relief in
federal court,'' said the lawyer, Shereef H. Akeel.

Mr. Akeel said Mr. Saleh, 42, whose mother is identified in the filing as an
American citizen, was now staying with relatives in Dearborn, Mich., while
seeking repayment of tens of thousands of dollars he says was confiscated by the
military, as well as damages for emotional distress.

Mr. Saleh gave his account over the weekend to CNN and the Swedish Broadcasting
Corporation but, Mr. Akeel said, is no longer speaking to the news media because
the matter is too painful. The lawyer said he was withholding Mr. Saleh's first
name to protect his privacy, but did provide his prisoner number.

An operator at the military's press desk in Baghdad said late Monday afternoon,
Eastern time, that no one was available to evaluate the claim because it was the
middle of the night there.

Contacted in the evening, Capt. David Romley, a marine at the Pentagon's press
office, said that ''any allegations of mistreatment are pursued vigorously
through the appropriate command channels.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); DAMAGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
TORTURE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); LAWYERS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); EMOTIONAL DISTRESS
(76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%);
TERRORISM (59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Suits and Litigation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); SWEDEN (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             729 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prison Abuse Exceeded Directives, Guards Say

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
TESTIMONY

LENGTH: 497 words


Interrogators from military intelligence and other government agencies told
guards at the Abu Ghraib prison to deprive detainees of sleep and food, and
would strip detainees and make them sleep naked in their cells, but their orders
stopped well short of the abuse at the center of the prison scandal, guards and
investigators have testified at a preliminary hearing for one of the soldiers
accused of abuse.

According to a transcript of the hearing for the soldier, Sgt. Javal S. Davis,
witnesses said that there were written ''sleep management plans'' and eating
plans and that military intelligence members would regularly take away
detainees' clothes.

But the testimony offered no evidence to back up what lawyers for the accused
soldiers have said: that their clients were following orders when they threw
naked detainees in a pile, stomped on their hands and feet, forced them to
masturbate and photographed them.

''They would tell us to take away something from an inmate, like a pillow or
something, to make him uncomfortable,'' said Sgt. William Cathcart, a guard in
the 372nd Military Police Company, the accused soldiers' unit. ''I would tell
them to put it in writing. If I had sensed they wanted someone 'roughed up,'
then I would have said something.''

The charges against Sergeant Davis include accusations that he jumped into a
pile of detainees and stomped on their fingers and toes. ''Policy is not to pile
detainees on the floor,'' Sergeant Cathcart said. ''There is no policy to dive
on a pile of detainees or physically assault detainees.''

A transcript of the hearing obtained by The New York Times suggests that
interrogators gave guards orders to treat detainees harshly to get them to talk.
But it leaves open questions about how far those instructions went and how
precise they were, and how harsh the behavior was that they authorized.

Some witnesses testified that the orders had been only ''implied,'' others said
they had been written. Other guards insisted that they had been told to create
uncomfortable conditions for detainees, but not to treat them roughly, and that
the soldiers accused of abuse went far beyond direct orders.

''No one asked us to soften or roughen up detainees,'' said Sgt. Hydrue S.
Joyner, a guard with the 372nd. ''Maybe 'give them a little more attention.' ''

But Sergeant Joyner said: ''No one would have to tell me not to assault any
detainees. No one would have to tell me to not allow masturbation. I would
wholeheartedly want it to stop.''

''If M.I. told me to make detainees masturbate together,'' he testified,
referring to military intelligence, ''I would cut off his air supply until he
turned blue in the face. This is not acceptable instruction to me.''

In other testimony, Specialist Bruce Brown said: ''There were situations where
they gave us ideas on how to treat detainees. They had sleep management plans
and eating plans. When we first got there, everything was just verbal. Later it
was put in writing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); NATURISTS & NATURISM
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); TRANSCRIPTS (76%); EVIDENCE (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); GENOCIDE (74%); LAWYERS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); TERRORISM
(59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Photography;
Nudism and Nudity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Javal S (Sgt) Davis

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Police Department Gives Officers A Guide for Detecting Terrorists

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 371 words


The Police Department has issued a pocket-sized reference card for patrol
officers detailing guidelines it says are designed to help them spot terrorists.

The department tells its officers to watch out for people with drivers' licenses
from more than one state, passports from more than one country, and
identification papers with different names and people videotaping or
photographing bridges, tunnels, utilities, landmarks and government facilities.

The card, an insert to be carried in officers' memo books, was issued this week.
It is described as a ''general guide'' and notes that the presence of one or
more of these indicators does not necessarily mean that terrorist activity is
planned. It tells officers to contact counterterrorism investigators for further
assistance, and warns them to take care to avoid interfering with
constitutionally protected speech and not to target people based on their race
or religion.

But one of the tips, headed ''Possible Indicators of Terrorist Activity,'' has
generated some concern because of fear it might invite civil liberties abuses.

It advises officers to watch for anyone who is ''overtly hostile'' and expresses
''hatred for America and advocates violence against America and/or Americans.''

Christopher Dunn, the associate legal director of the New York Civil Liberties
Union, said the group is always concerned when law enforcement authorities use
political statements as the basis for a criminal investigation. ''The Police
Department must be very careful that it does not confuse criticism for terrorist
activity,'' Mr. Dunn said.

Paul J. Browne, the department's deputy commissioner for public information,
said the insert clearly states that the guidelines are ''general'' and that the
indicators ''may'' merit further inquiry; both words are underlined on the card.
''I think it adequately explained that this in no way is to be interpreted to
interfere with free speech,'' he said.

The guide was issued to officers, he said, because Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly
''wants to get as much useful information and guidance to the patrol level as we
develop it,'' adding that other counterterrorism information bulletins have
already been issued.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); POLICE FORCES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%); DRIVERS LICENSES (57%);
BRIDGES & TUNNELS (56%); RELIGION (53%) Terrorism; Police; Discrimination;
Freedom of Speech and Expression

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%) American Civil Liberties
Union

PERSON: William K Rashbaum

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             733 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sarin? What Sarin?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE.

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 701 words


You probably missed the news because it didn't get much play, but a small, crude
weapon of mass destruction may have been used by Saddam's terrorists in Iraq
this week.

The apparent weapon was sarin gas, a highly toxic nerve agent that causes
victims to choke to death. Developed by the Nazis, it has been used in the past
by terrorists in Japan to kill a dozen subway riders and panic thousands, and by
Saddam Hussein, who produced tons of it to kill Iraqi Kurds.

Rigged as an ''improvised explosive device,'' or roadside bomb, the
155-millimeter howitzer shell was accidentally detonated by a U.S. ordnance
team. Two men were treated for what an Army spokesman called ''minor exposure''
to the nerve gas.

You never saw such a rush to dismiss this as not news. U.N. weapons inspectors
whose reputations rest on denial of Saddam's W.M.D. pooh-poohed the report. ''It
doesn't strike me as a big deal,'' said David Kay.

''Sarin Bomb Is Likely a Leftover From the 80's'' was USA Today's Page 10
brushoff; maybe the terrorists didn't know their shell was loaded with sarin.
Besides, say our lionized apostles of defeat, a poison-gas bomb does not a
''stockpile'' make. Even the Defense Department, on the defensive, strained not
to appear alarmist, saying confirmation was needed for the field tests.

In this rush to misjudgment, we can see an example of the ''Four Noes'' that
have become the defeatists' platform.

The first ''no'' is no stockpiles of W.M.D., used to justify the war, were
found. With the qualifier ''so far'' left out, the absence of evidence is taken
to be evidence of absence. In weeks or years to come -- when the pendulum has
swung, and it becomes newsworthy to show how cut-and-runners in 2004 were
mistaken -- logic suggests we will see a rash of articles and blockbuster books
to that end.

These may well reveal the successful concealment of W.M.D., as well as prewar
shipments thereof to Syria and plans for production and missile delivery, by
Saddam's Special Republican Guard and fedayeen, as part of his planned guerrilla
war -- the grandmother of all battles. The present story line of ''Saddam was
stupid, fooled by his generals'' would then be replaced by ''Saddam was shrewder
than we thought.''

This will be especially true for bacteriological weapons, which are small and
easier to hide. In a sovereign and free Iraq, when germ-warfare scientists are
fearful of being tried as prewar criminals, their impetus will be to sing -- and
point to caches of anthrax and other mass killers.

Defeatism's second ''no'' is no connection was made between Saddam and Al Qaeda
or any of its terrorist affiliates. This is asserted as revealed truth with
great fervor, despite an extensive listing of communications and meetings
between Iraqi officials and terrorists submitted to Congress months ago.

Most damning is the rise to terror's top rank of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who
escaped Afghanistan to receive medical treatment in Baghdad. He joined Ansar
al-Islam, a Qaeda offshoot whose presence in Iraq to murder Kurds at Saddam's
behest was noted in this space in the weeks after 9/11. His activity in Iraq was
cited by President Bush six months before our invasion. Osama's disciple Zarqawi
is now thought to be the televised beheader of a captive American.

The third ''no'' is no human-rights high ground can be claimed by us regarding
Saddam's torture chambers because we mistreated Iraqi prisoners. This equates
sleep deprivation with life deprivation, illegal individual humiliation with
official mass murder. We flagellate ourselves for mistreatment by a few of our
guards, who will be punished; he delightedly oversaw the shoveling of 300,000
innocent Iraqis into unmarked graves. Iraqis know the difference.

The fourth ''no'' is no Arab nation is culturally ready for political freedom
and our attempt to impose democracy in Iraq is arrogant Wilsonian idealism.

In coming years, this will be blasted by revisionist reportage as an ignoble
ethnic-racist slur. Iraqis will gain the power, with our help, to put down the
terrorists and find their own brand of political equilibrium.

Will today's defeatists then admit they were wrong? That's a fifth ''no.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(91%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); BOMBINGS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (77%); ARMED FORCES (74%); ARMIES (73%); WEAPONS
INSPECTIONS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%); MICROBIOLOGY (61%) Biological and
Chemical Warfare; News and News Media; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Bombs and Explosives; Sarin (Nerve Gas);
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) William Safire

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); JAPAN (90%); SYRIA (73%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             735 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Journalists Report Abuse As Detainees in U.S. Hands

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
PRESS

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 18


Three Iraqis working for Reuters said Tuesday that American troops beat them and
subjected them to sexual and religious taunts and humiliation in January during
their detention in a military camp near Falluja.

The three first told Reuters of the ordeal after their release, but decided to
make it public only after the United States military said there was no evidence
they had been abused and after the exposure of similar mistreatment of detainees
at Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad.

An Iraqi journalist working for NBC News who was arrested with the three men
also said he had been beaten and mistreated, NBC News said Tuesday.

Two of the three men said that they had been forced to insert fingers into their
anuses and then lick them, and that they had been forced to put shoes in their
mouths, a particularly humiliating act in Arab culture because the sole of the
shoe is a symbol of uncleanliness.

All three said they had been forced to make demeaning gestures as soldiers
laughed, taunted them and took photographs. They said they had not wanted to
give details publicly earlier because of the degrading nature of the abuse.

The men said the soldiers had deprived them of sleep, placed bags over their
heads, kicked and hit them, forced them to remain in uncomfortable positions for
long periods, and told them they would be taken to the United States prison camp
at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.

The United States military has denied the men's accusations. A report issued by
the military before the abuse at Abu Ghraib became public said an investigation
by the Army's 82nd Airborne Division had found no evidence that the Reuters
staff members had been tortured or abused.

''The detainees were purposefully and carefully put under stress, to include
sleep deprivation, in order to facilitate interrogation; they were not
tortured,'' the report said. The version received Monday used the phrase ''sleep
management'' instead. The military said it had not interviewed the detainees for
the investigation.

Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, commander of ground forces in Iraq, said in a letter
received by Reuters on Monday but dated March 5 that he was confident that the
investigation was ''thorough and objective'' and that its findings were sound.

The Pentagon has yet to respond to a request by the global managing editor for
Reuters, David Schlesinger, to review the military's findings about the incident
in light of the scandal over the treatment of prisoners at Abu Ghraib.

Asked for comment on Tuesday, a Pentagon spokesman, Bryan Whitman, said: ''There
are a number of lines of inquiry under way with respect to prison operations in
Iraq. If during the course of any inquiry, the commander believes it is
appropriate to review a specific aspect of detention, he has the authority to do
so.''

The Reuters staff members -- Salem Ureibi, a cameraman based in Baghdad; Ahmad
Muhammad Hussein al-Badrani, a freelance television journalist based in Falluja;
and Sattar Jabar al-Badrani, a driver -- said they were detained Jan. 2 while
covering the downing of an American helicopter near Falluja. They said they were
held for three days, first near Falluja at Forward Operating Base Volturno,
where the abuse happened, and then at Forward Operating Base Ste. Mere.

''When I saw the Abu Ghraib photographs, I wept,'' Mr. Ureibi said Tuesday. ''I
saw they had suffered like we had.''

Mr. Ureibi said soldiers had told him they wanted to have sex with him, and that
he had been afraid he would be raped.

A reporter working on contract with NBC News, Ali Muhammad Hussein Ali
al-Badrani, was detained along with the Reuters employees, NBC News said. The
report said that a hood had been placed over his head for hours, that he had
been forced to perform physically debilitating exercises, and that he had been
prevented from sleeping and struck and kicked several times.

''Despite repeated requests, we have yet to receive the results of the Army
investigation,'' said Bill Wheatley, a vice president at NBC News.

The Army said it was investigating and requested further information.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WRITERS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMIES (78%); SCANDALS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); POWS & MIAS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CORRECTIONS (76%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (75%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); BROADCASTING
INDUSTRY (74%); SLEEP DISORDERS (71%); ARRESTS (71%); RESEARCH REPORTS (70%);
MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (65%) News and News Media; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Television; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (91%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Reuters Plc; National Broadcasting Co

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (91%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (91%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (96%); CUBA (69%)

REGION: Iraq; Falluja (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             743 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Database Tagged 120,000 As Possible Terrorist Suspects

BYLINE: The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 478 words


Before helping to start the criminal information project known as Matrix, a
database contractor gave United States and Florida authorities the names of
120,000 people who showed a statistical likelihood of being terrorists,
resulting in some investigations and arrests.

The ''high terrorism factor'' scoring system also became a critical selling
point for the involvement of the database company, Seisint Inc., in the project.

Public records obtained by The Associated Press from several states show that
Justice Department officials cited the scoring technology in appointing Seisint
the sole contractor on the $12 million federal project.

Seisint and the law enforcement officials who oversee Matrix insist that the
terrorism scoring system was ultimately kept out of the project, largely because
of privacy concerns.

But new details about Seisint's development of the ''terrorism quotient,''
including the revelation that the authorities apparently acted on the list of
120,000, are raising questions about Matrix's potential power.

''Assuming they have in fact abandoned the terrorist quotient, there's nothing
that stops them from bringing it back,'' said Barry Steinhardt, director of the
technology and liberty program at the American Civil Liberties Union, which
learned about the list of 120,000 through its own records request in Utah.

Matrix, short for Multistate Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange, combines state
records and data culled by Seisint to give investigators fast access to
information on crime and terrorism suspects. It was begun in 2002.

Because the system includes information on innocent people as well as known
criminals, Matrix has drawn objections from liberal and conservative privacy
groups. Utah and at least eight other states have pulled out, leaving
Connecticut, Florida, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania still in the program.

Officials involved with Matrix have said that the statistical method was removed
from the final product. ''I'll put my 26 years of law enforcement experience on
the line,'' said Mark Zadra, chief investigator for the Florida Department of
Law Enforcement. ''It is not in there.''

Mr. Zadra said that Matrix, which has four billion records, merely speeds access
to material that the police have always been able to get from disparate sources
and that it did not automatically identify suspects.

Bill Shrewsbury, a Seisint executive and former federal drug agent, said the
terrorism scoring algorithm that produced the names was ''put on the shelf''
after it was demonstrated after Sept. 11, 2001.

The scoring incorporated such factors as age, sex, ethnicity, credit history,
''investigational data,'' information about pilot and driver licenses, and
connections to ''dirty'' addresses known to have been used by other suspects.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (88%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (78%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ETHNICITY (72%);
NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (72%); CONSERVATISM (69%); LIBERALISM (64%); DRIVERS
LICENSES (50%) Terrorism; Computers and the Internet; Surveillance of Citizens
by Government; Privacy; Crime and Criminals; Identification Devices; Terrorism

COMPANY: SEISINT INC (84%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%) Seisint; Matrix (Multistate
Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (94%); UTAH, USA (92%); OHIO, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA
(79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Florida

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             744 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Policies On Questioning Landed in Iraq

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE INTERROGATORS;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1524 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


The interrogation center at Abu Ghraib prison was run by a military intelligence
unit that had served in Afghanistan and that had taken to Iraq the aggressive
rules and procedures it had developed for the Afghan conflict, according to
documents and testimony.

Some members of the unit, part of the 519th Military Intelligence Battalion,
from Fort Bragg, N.C., have already been quietly punished in connection with the
abuse of an Iraqi woman at the prison, according to documents recently released
by the Army.

In August 2003, the officer in charge of the unit, Capt. Carolyn A. Wood, an
experienced Army interrogator, posted her own list of ''interrogation rules of
engagement,'' which were inconsistent with those later issued for Iraq by the
top American commander, Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, according to Congressional
officials.

The Abu Ghraib prison's questioning area, the existence of which was classified
information, was formally called the Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center.

It was not in the cellblock where the severe abuses that have come to light in
recent weeks occurred.

Interrogations took place in buildings outside the cellblock, and military
police were not present.

To date, the only people charged with crimes in the abuse have been members of
the 372nd Military Police Company, who served as guards in the cellblock.

But lawyers representing some of the accused say some photographs of the abuses
also show unidentified military intelligence officers and contractors assigned
to the interrogation center.

Some of the accused have said they were told or encouraged to harshly treat
prisoners by military intelligence officers, as part of a broader effort to
soften the detainees up for interrogation.

''Only one with Pollyannaish myopia could conclude that the M.I. community is
not deeply involved in the abuse,'' said Gary Myers, a lawyer whose client,
Staff Sgt. Ivan L. Frederick II, is facing a court-martial in the case.

The Washington Post published in its Friday edition sworn accounts of prisoners
who said they were abused at the prisons, as well as previously undisclosed
pictures and images from a video of guards beating and humiliating naked
detainees and forcing a number of them to form a human pyramid.

The article quoted the detainees as saying that soldiers abused them as
punishment for breaking the rules of the prison.

In addition to the threats and humiliations that have previously been reported,
the newspaper said the detainees were forced to retrieve food from toilets, were
ridden like animals and were force-fed pork and liquor. One prisoner declared he
had seen an Army translator having sex with a teenage boy detainee. Some of the
detainees identified soldiers already charged in the case.

Neither the statements, nor the picture shed any new light on who might have
ordered the abuse.

General Sanchez issued no rules to govern procedures for interrogations until
after a visit last fall by Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller. The rules he later
issue emerged in stages, and some were contradictory. In a closed briefing on
Capitol Hill on Wednesday, a senior Army lawyer acknowledged that the process
might have left unclear to some officers the degree to which harsh measures,
including sensory and sleep deprivation, were permissible.

The interrogation center is the focus of a continuing inquiry into the role of
military intelligence officers and civilian contractors who oversaw it.

Until now, very little information about the interrogators or the evolution of
interrogation rules has emerged publicly.

But the role played by the center, formally established in September by Brig.
Gen. Barbara G. Fast, the top intelligence officer in Iraq, has emerged in
documents, testimony and interviews.

Beginning in September, the center was headed by Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan.
Captain Wood acted as officer in charge.

Elements of the 519th Battalion, including Captain Wood, had served as
interrogators in Afghanistan, where the American military runs detention centers
at Bagram Air Base and at a site in Kandahar, in southern Afghanistan.

They were among several units that brought to Iraq ''their own policies that had
been used in other theaters,'' Col. Marc Warren, the top lawyer at the Army's
headquarters in Iraq, said at a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing on
Wednesday.

In Afghanistan, military officials said, American forces use harsher tactics for
interrogations than in Iraq, where it has insisted that the Geneva Conventions
apply to all prisoners in American custody.

Colonel Warren and other Army officials have not said whether they believe the
military intelligence unit put into practice at Abu Ghraib the harsher
procedures used in Afghanistan.

A report by The Denver Post in April -- based on Army records and published in
April, before the broader Abu Ghraib scandal became known -- disclosed that
three soldiers from the 519th Battalion had been fined and demoted in a closed
proceeding stemming from the abuse of an Iraqi woman at Abu Ghraib. It is not
clear whether those soldiers reported to Captain Wood.

The records obtained by The Post were heavily edited by the military to delete
the names of the soldiers involved and other details of the incident. Spokesmen
for the XVIII Airborne Corps did not respond to repeated inquiries for more
information about the incidents.

Captain Wood had served 10 years in enlisted ranks as an interrogator, and her
unit specializes in ''tactical exploitation'' of intelligence, including
interrogation of prisoners, Army officials said. It remained unclear on Thursday
exactly when and where Captain Wood and her unit served in Afghanistan; a
spokesman for the XVIII Corps in Fort Bragg said he was not able to provide that
information on short notice.

Maj. Rich Patterson, the spokesman, also said that Captain Wood was no longer
assigned to the 519th Battalion. An official at the Command and General Staff
College, at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., said she had graduated from an advanced
officer's course there earlier this week.

Major Patterson confirmed that Captain Wood and her unit had been assigned to
the interrogation center at Abu Ghraib last year.

No one has made public accusations of wrongdoing against Captain Wood or any
members of her unit. But she and several other of its officers are named in
military court documents as being among witnesses being sought by a lawyer
defending a military police officer charged in connection with the abuse.

Among the questions that investigators are examining is how the rules that
Captain Wood posted at Abu Ghraib differed from the directives issued by General
Sanchez, including unsigned memorandums on Sept. 10 and Sept. 28, and signed
directives on Sept. 14 and Oct. 12, each of which spelled out different rules.

Those directives are still classified, but their contents were described by
Colonel Warren on Wednesday and Thursday by several Senate aides who were
briefed by senior Army officials.

The unsigned Sept. 10 draft authorized approaches spelled out in Army Field
Manual 34-52 and other widely used interrogation techniques, as well as sensory
deprivation, which could mean the hooding of prisoners.

On Sept. 14, General Sanchez approved the first formal policy for Iraq that
allowed the use of ''sleep management'' techniques, like limiting prisoners to
four hours' rest each 24 hours, and stress positions, including standing or
crouching for up to an hour at a time, Senate aides said.

That policy was sent to the Central Command and to other military, legal and
intelligence experts for review. On Oct. 12, in response to objections from
military lawyers, General Sanchez issued a second, much narrower policy that
Colonel Warren said Wednesday complied with the Geneva Conventions.

Most of the harsher methods that had been automatically authorized in the Sept.
14 directive, like long-term isolation of a prisoner, were dropped in the
October version, except in cases in which General Sanchez sanctioned them.

The Oct. 12 directive also ordered that interrogators take control of the
''lighting, heating, and configuration of the interrogation room, as well as
food, clothing and shelter'' given to those questioned at Abu Ghraib, a Senate
aide said. The memo directed interrogators to work closely with military police
guarding the prisoners to ''manipulate internees' emotions and weaknesses'' to
gain their cooperation.

As the officer in charge of the interrogation center at Abu Ghraib, Captain Wood
reported to Colonel Jordan, an Army reservist who arrived at the prison in
September to take charge of the unit, which was established Sept. 20, according
to a chronology provided by Senate officials.

In a report by Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba, Colonel Jordan, Col. Thomas M.
Pappas and two civilian contractors were identified as having been ''directly or
indirectly responsible'' for the abuses.

Captain Wood's unit and Colonel Jordan both reported to the 205th Military
Intelligence Brigade under Colonel Pappas, who moved his headquarters to Abu
Ghraib in September and was the top Army officer at the prison.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Family members of prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad
waited for hours yesterday to visit detainees. (Photo by Michael Kamber for The
New York Times)
(The New York Times
 photographs of Generals Miller and Sanchez by Carol T. Powers for The New York
Times)(pg. A10)Chart: ''Changing Rules''The rules in place to govern
interrogations in Iraq changed several times, according to Army and Senate
officials.ABOUT JULY 25, 2003 -- Capt. Carolyn A. Wood of the 519th Military
Intelligence Battalion, arrives at Abu Ghraib prison to head interrogations. She
had served in an interrogation unit in Afghanistan.ABOUT AUG. 27 -- Captain Wood
prepares a briefing slide of the interrogation ''rules of engagement.''SEPT. 2
-- During a review of Iraqi prisons, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, right, head
of detention operations at Guantnamo Bay, Cuba, sees Captain Wood's slide and
praises it as a good start.SEPT. 10 -- An unsigned draft copy of the new
interrogation rules is produced. It uses the standard approaches outlined in
Army Field Manual 34-52, Captain Wood's slide, common law-enforcement
interrogation techniques and sensory deprivation.SEPT. 14 -- Lt. Gen. Ricardo S.
Sanchez, right, issues an initial interrogation policy, which includes the
standard field manual approaches, isolation for greater than 30 days (with
approval of the 205th Military Intelligence Brigade commander), sleep
management, and stress positions to include sitting, kneeling and standing for
not more than an hour at a time.SEPT. 20 -- The Joint Interrogation and
Debriefing Center is established at Abu Ghraib. Brig. Gen. Barbara G. Fast,
below, the director of intelligence for coalition forces in Baghdad, is in
charge of setting it up, and Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan is brought in to run
it.OCT. 12 -- After review by Central Command and other legal experts, General
Sanchez issues an interrogation policy that requires his approval for harsher
approaches like stress positions.MAY 13, 2004 -- General Sanchez restricts
interrogation rules to include only the standard field manual approaches and,
with his approval, segregation up to 30 days. (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); TESTIMONY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); MILITARY COURTS (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); LAWYERS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (65%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (60%); TERRORISM (59%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva
Conventions; Intelligence Services; Terrorism; Women; Police

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (53%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (53%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (53%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (53%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (53%)

PERSON: Carolyn A (Capt) Wood; Ricardo (Lt Gen) Sanchez; Douglas Jehl; Eric
Schmitt

CITY: FAYETTEVILLE, NC, USA (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             746 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

My Nightmare, My Neighbor

BYLINE: By LYLE REXER

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; ART; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1336 words


TEN years ago this April, the most focused, intense and efficient campaign of
genocide in modern history took place in Rwanda. In the space of a few months,
800,000 Tutsis and tens of thousands of Hutus died in an orchestrated campaign
of violence, organized by Hutu extremists. Everyone from church workers to
children became murderers. The killing even pitted members of the same family
against one another. When the massacres stopped and the Hutu regime that
sponsored them had been driven from power, Rwanda faced a task as least as
complicated as mourning or forgetting -- the task of justice. The criminal
justice system is so small that it would take many years to get through the
entire caseload. So a system of local tribunals, or gacacas (pronounced
ga-CHA-chas), was established, staffed by elders and people elected by their
community and conducted in the open air of villages. Rather than focusing on
retribution, these tribunals offered freedom or reduced sentences for those who
confessed to their crimes.

The photographer Michal Ronnen Safdie and Samantha Power, the Pulitzer
Prize-winning author of ''A Problem From Hell: America and the Age of
Genocide,'' went to Rwanda in October 2002 to record the progress toward
justice. Their work is displayed in ''Rwanda: After,'' a special exhibition on
view this Tuesday evening only at the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries in Manhattan
before moving to the International Criminal Court in The Hague and other
international venues. A catalog with essays by Ms. Power, the Harvard professor
Homi Bhabha and Luis Moreno Ocampo, Rwanda's chief prosecutor at the Court,
accompanies the show.

For Ms. Ronnen Safdie, the child of a Holocaust survivor, Rwanda presented a
profound challenge. ''In a time when images are being used to incite people
around the world, how do you use them to reflect on the 'other'?'' she said in a
recent telephone interview. ''And in Rwanda, with the violence over, how do you
show what can't be seen: loss, memory and reconciliation?'' For the most part,
Ms. Ronnen Safdie chose to focus on the very thing that struck Ms. Power as the
greatest roadblock to normalcy: the intimacy of killers and survivors. Accusers
and accused often knew one another, and sat side by side at the hearings. Some
prisoners were distinguishable only by their crisp pink shirts and berets, and
many wore no prison identification at all. Despite minimal security, trouble
almost never broke out.

By the same token, the atmosphere was a surreal mix of pain and celebration. The
gacacas served to reunite families, as many prisoners saw loved ones after
extended separations. Children on both sides of the divide wept for their
missing parents. ''When I last went to Rwanda in 1998, there was no sense of
remorse,'' Ms. Power said, ''only the feeling that the winners got to determine
who was right and wrong. But this time, the confessions came in a flood.'' For
Hutus, it was a chance to exit the hellish limbo of prison without trial. For
Tutsis, who are still a small minority (15 percent) in Rwanda, it was a first
opportunity to be heard -- and to find out at long last what had happened to
relatives. ''A crowd of 150 people sat for hours in silence so thick you could
cut it, just listening,'' Ms. Power said.

The fierce testimony in muted tones, the horrific memories summoned in an almost
festive atmosphere -- these paradoxes caused Ms. Ronnen Safdie to rethink her
documentary approach. ''I planned to photograph only in black and white,'' she
said. ''It seemed appropriate to the gravity of the subject.'' But she was
unprepared for the beauty of the country, for its orange-red earth and verdant
green hills, for the brilliant colors of women's dresses and the open
friendliness of the Rwandans, Hutus and Tutsis alike. Only color could capture
what Ms. Safdie came to see as the overwhelming enigma of genocide. ''It was
under just such a blue sky, in the midst of a place of great beauty, among
people seemingly so familiar with each other, that these terrible crimes were
committed,'' she said. ''Having been to Rwanda, it seems more mysterious than
ever.''   LYLE REXER

During the genocide, some 5,000 people crowded into the church at Ntrama, hoping
it would provide sanctuary. Instead, Hutus broke in and killed nearly everyone.
Now the church is a memorial, one of many that dot Rwanda's landscape. An
ossuary is attached, displaying the skulls and other bones of hundreds who died.
Rwanda is a country of unburied dead, and many of the displayed remains still
bear traces of skin. At Ntrama, survivors of genocide tend the bones, placing
crucifixes and figures of the Virgin among the skulls. The church itself, which
has never been fully cleaned, contains no information or explanation, only two
burlap sacks of skulls.

As Michal Ronnen Safdie and Samantha Power were leaving a gacaca, a truck
crammed with prisoners stopped with a flat tire. Suddenly, people seemed to
appear out of nowhere -- friends and relatives of the convicts who had been
following the truck back to prison. Children and wives called to their fathers
and husbands. People ran to fetch water and others played music. ''I was struck
by how densely woven into the fabric of life here was the genocide and its
consequences,'' Ms. Ronnen Safdie said. ''Every one of the prisoners is part of
a community, has family, is missed.'' In an effort to create a new sense of
community and reduce the ethnic differences that helped spur genocide, the
Rwandan government has eliminated the old system of identity cards specifying a
person as Tutsi or Hutu.

The aftermath of genocide created a huge population of prisoners, and
overcrowding is the norm. During the first three years after the killings, more
than 120,000 of the accused, including children and the elderly, occupied
prisons built to house only 10,000. The situation continues to be so severe that
prisoners have to take turns sleeping since there is not enough room for
everyone to lie down at once. This truck transporting prisoners to a tribunal
was so tightly packed that when it stopped at the trial site, ''people literally
poured out,'' Ms. Ronnen Safdie said. ''Until then, all their relatives could
see of them was their hands.'' Overcrowding is one of the most powerful
incentives for the government to promote the trials and for prisoners, most of
whom have been held for years, to confess.

The term gacaca refers to the leaves on which traditional Rwandan leaders sat
while they resolved community disputes. But in these trials everyone, including
the prisoners, has to carry his own seating. As the line of hundreds of
villagers and prisoners snakes through the hills, leaving the trial site, there
is a sense of orderliness despite the presence of only a handful of armed
guards. With Hutus making up the majority of the crowd, it would be easy to
overwhelm the captors, but that hasn't happened. Ms. Ronnen Safdie and Ms. Power
asked prisoners why they didn't flee. One said: ''We are an obedient people. We
were told to kill and we killed. Now we are told not to run away, and so we
stay.'' Ms. Power added: ''The most consistent defense among the prisoners was
the one common to all genocide trials since Nuremberg -- they were only
following orders.''

Prisoners and accused sat side by side at the trials, the latter identified only
by their pink prison shirts and berets. Many of the prisoners took great care
with their appearance, knowing they would be seeing family members. Yet the
initially festive spirit yielded to the drama of accusation and confession, as
crowds sat in rapt silence from morning until early evening. One woman recounted
how 11 members of her family were killed and how she and her sisters and
children were saved only when her husband gave himself up to his attackers, who
hacked him to pieces. ''I want them to tell me why they attacked with such
brutality,'' she said. Later she wrote Ms. Ronnen Safdie, ''I am sorry that when
you were here all we spoke of was genocide.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Photographs courtesy of the Robert Klein Gallery, Boston, and
Salander-O'Reilly Galleries, New York)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (78%); ENTERTAINMENT &
ARTS AWARDS (77%); SENTENCING (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); HOLOCAUST (73%); VISUAL
ARTISTS (72%); INTERVIEWS (72%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (70%); EXHIBITIONS
(70%); WRITERS (67%); MURDER (57%) Photography; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Tutsi Tribe; Hutu Tribe; Photography

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%)

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (89%) Michal Ronnen Safdie; Samantha Power; Lyle Rexer

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             750 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bomb Case Against Lawyer Is Rejected

BYLINE: By SARAH KERSHAW and ERIC LICHTBLAU; Sarah Kershaw reported from Seattle
for this article, and Eric Lichtblau from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, May 24


A federal judge in Portland, Ore., on Monday threw out the case against an
American lawyer jailed for two weeks as a material witness in the Madrid train
bombing. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said it had mistakenly matched his
fingerprints with prints on a plastic bag found near the scene of the attacks
that killed 191 people last March.

F.B.I. officials said that the erroneous fingerprint evidence against the
lawyer, Brandon Mayfield, 37, of Aloha, Ore., stemmed from the poor quality of a
digital image of the print sent from Spain and that they were conducting a
review into the use of such procedures. The officials said they were no longer
investigating Mr. Mayfield, a Muslim convert who was released from a Portland
jail last week.

Late in the day, F.B.I. officials in Washington issued a statement saying, ''The
F.B.I. apologizes to Mr. Mayfield and his family for the hardships that this
matter has caused.''

Mr. Mayfield shook as he spoke at his news conference earlier in the day,
thanking his family and supporters. ''This is a serious infringement on our
civil liberties,'' Mr. Mayfield said.

He added, ''In a climate of fear, this war on terrorism has gone to the extreme
and innocent people are victims as a result.''

At a news conference in Portland and in court documents, the F.B.I. explained
how the fingerprint error had happened. But those explanations did little to
dilute what was clearly an embarrassment for the government.

The Mayfield episode is likely to lead to calls for a broad examination of both
the laboratory work by the F.B.I. and the increasingly aggressive the Justice
Department's use of the federal material witness statute to detain people who it
says may have information about a crime.

The Justice Department is known to have used the statute at least 50 times since
the Sept. 11 attacks, and civil liberties advocates said Monday that the
Mayfield case demonstrated the potential for abuse.

''This is indicative of how the Justice Department has overreached and cut
constitutional corners since 9/11,'' said David Fidanque, executive director of
the American Civil Liberties Union of Oregon. ''The Justice Department is using
the material witness statute in a way that it was never meant to be used, and
this is just the most dramatic example of that trend.''

Mr. Mayfield said that in the weeks before his arrest he had sensed that he was
being watched and that things were not quite right in the house, in the Portland
suburb of Aloha, where he lives with his wife, Mona, an Egyptian immigrant, and
their three children. He said a bolt on the front door had been locked, when no
one in the family used it. Blinds were raised higher than usual, and there was a
large footprint in the living room carpet, much larger than the shoe sizes of
any of the Mayfields, he said.

''I feel that I was being surveyed or watched,'' he said. ''Any of us sitting in
this room could be subject to it. They will fiddle around with your possessions;
they may take things or bring them back. People should wake up, is what I'm
saying. We need to start protecting our civil liberties. You can't trade your
freedom for security, because if you do, you're going to lose both.''

Mr. Mayfield, a former lieutenant in the Army who was raised in a small town in
Kansas, converted to Islam in 1989. He had also represented Jeffrey Leon Battle,
who had been convicted of conspiring to aid the Taliban and Al Qaeda, in a
custody case. He said he believed he had been investigated and arrested because
he was a Muslim and because of his representation of Mr. Battle. But Karin J.
Immergut, the United States attorney in Portland, said at a news conference that
the investigation of Mr. Mayfield had nothing to do with his religion.

Ms. Immergut said that ''although it is regrettable that the new information''
about the fingerprint ''came to light just now, I can assure you that we moved
immediately to remedy the situation.''

But questions were raised Monday about whether the F.B.I. had listened to doubts
the Spaniards raised early on about the fingerprint match.

Steven T. Wax, Mr. Mayfield's lawyer and a public defender in Oregon, said:
''What we know is that very early in this investigation, after the F.B.I.
received the prints, the F.B.I. examiners met with Spanish fingerprint examiners
and we are advised that very early on, the F.B.I. was told, 'We do not agree
with your analysis, and we don't see a connection.'''Mr. Mayfield declined to
say whether he was considering taking legal action against the government.

The F.B.I. said that after the Madrid attacks, it had received digital images
from Spanish officials showing partial latent fingerprints from plastic bags
containing detonator caps. The Spaniards asked the F.B.I. to analyze the images,
and they were run through a database comparing unknown prints to millions of
known prints, the F.B.I. said. Mr. Mayfield's fingerprints were on file because
of his Army service.

The agency said its in-house fingerprint examiners ''determined that the latent
fingerprint was of value for identification purposes.''

It added, ''This print was subsequently linked to Brandon Mayfield.''

The bureau said the results were independently analyzed and confirmed by an
outside fingerprint expert.

A motion by the Justice Department on Monday seeking the dismissal of the
proceedings against Mr. Mayfield revealed additional details about the
investigation and how it collapsed.

Prosecutors said that before what was thought to be a fingerprint match, Mr.
Mayfield ''was not under investigation and federal law enforcement authorities
had no reason to believe that Mayfield had any information about the Madrid
bombings.''

It was the fingerprint match alone that led the F.B.I. to Mr. Mayfield,
prosecutors said.

Mr. Mayfield was released last week after officials in Spain matched the
fingerprint found in the bag near the Madrid bombing site with those of an
Algerian. After Mr. Mayfield's release, officials said, two F.B.I. examiners
traveled to Madrid to investigate the prints.

After the agents returned , they concluded that the latent print originally
linked to Mr. Mayfield was ''of no value for identification purposes,'' and it
withdrew its finding of a match.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Brandon Mayfield, left, with his lawyer, Steven T. Wax,
yesterday in Portland, Ore., and above, the United States attorney there, Karin
J. Immergut. (Photographs by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); FINGERPRINTING
(90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); JUDGES (78%); ARRESTS
(78%); FORENSICS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (70%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%)

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (92%); MADRID, SPAIN (90%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (94%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SPAIN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             751 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 64 words


An article on May 8 about the abuse of detainees at Abu Ghraib prison referred
incompletely to an agreement in a federal lawsuit by inmates against the Texas
Department of Corrections that was intended to improve treatment of those held
in Texas prisons. While the agreement was in force while President Bush was
governor of Texas, it began before then, in 1981, and was lifted in 2002.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); LITIGATION (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Correction
Stories

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: TEXAS, USA (96%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Texas; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             752 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Spot Portrays Kerry as Flip-Flopper

BYLINE: By JIM RUTENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; THE AD CAMPAIGN; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 494 words



This spot from President Bush began running on stations in 19 swing states on
Tuesday and on some national cable networks.

PRODUCER: Maverick Media

ON THE SCREEN: The spot shows dueling images of Mr. Bush at a lectern and of his
hand signing a piece of paper. The words ''Patriot Act'' and ''Fight Terrorism''
flash on the screen. Alongside a picture of Mr. Kerry, writing says, ''John
Kerry voted for Patriot Act'' and then ''John Kerry changed his position.''
Then, black writing appears: ''Kerry would now repeal Patriot Act's use of
wiretaps, subpoenas and surveillance.'' The spot ends with a picture of Mr.
Kerry and the words: ''John Kerry. Playing politics with national security.''

THE SCRIPT: President Bush says, ''I'm George W. Bush and I approve of this
message.'' An announcer says, ''President Bush signed the Patriot Act giving law
enforcement vital tools to fight terrorism. John Kerry? He voted for the Patriot
Act, but pressured by fellow liberals, he's changed his position. While
wiretaps, subpoena powers and surveillances are routinely used against drug
dealers and organized crime, Kerry would now repeal the Patriot Act's use of
these tools against terrorists. John Kerry. Playing politics with national
security.''

ACCURACY: The Bush campaign has offered no proof that Mr. Kerry changed his
stand on the law because he was ''pressured by fellow liberals,'' other than to
say Mr. Kerry's criticism of the law followed that of the American Civil
Liberties Union and Howard Dean of Vermont. Several Republicans who voted for
the act have since expressed misgivings about it, too, without prodding from
liberals. In October, the Bush campaign's chairman, Marc Racicot, told a
questioner at an Arab-American Institute conference that changes in the law
might be in the offing, saying that members of Congress ''presently have
legislation pending to provide refinements to that act, to bring that balance
even truer than it has been, so that it does not end up invading the civil
rights of any American.'' Contrary to this advertisement's claim, Mr. Kerry has
not called for the repeal of the act's expanded use of wiretaps and other
surveillance tools in terrorism investigations. He has, rather, called for a
greater level of judicial oversight.

SCORECARD: This spot is consistent with two of Mr. Bush's more prominent lines
of attack against Mr. Kerry: that he is a perennial flip-flopper who is weak on
national security. Mr. Bush's aides say that for all of the objections Democrats
and journalists can raise about the commercial's claims, voters will be left
with the clear impression that Mr. Kerry has yet again switched positions on an
important issue. But it is unclear what voters think of the law these days. The
spot was introduced on the same day that an Oregon lawyer who was mistakenly
jailed as a material witness to the Madrid train bombings complained about
violations of his civil liberties in the war on terrorism.   JIM RUTENBERG

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PATRIOT ACT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); POLITICS (90%); POLITICAL
ADVERTISING (90%); SUBPOENAS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%);
LIBERALISM (89%); WIRETAPPING (88%); ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); WRITERS
(71%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (69%); PENDING LEGISLATION (67%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (67%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (66%); CIVIL RIGHTS (63%)
Presidential Election of 2004; Political Advertising; Election Issues

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (94%) Jim Rutenberg; George W (Pres)
Bush; John (Sen) Kerry

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             753 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Posing as Captive, G.I. Beaten

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky., May 25


The Army confirmed Tuesday that a former military police officer was injured
while posing as an uncooperative prisoner during a training session at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, last year.

But Maj. Laurie Arellano, a spokeswoman for the Southern Command in Miami, said
the medical discharge of the military police officer, Specialist Sean Baker, was
not related to a head injury he received during training at the detention
center.

Mr. Baker, of Georgetown, Ky., had said he was beaten so badly by four American
soldiers that he suffered a brain injury. Efforts to reach him on Tuesday were
unsuccessful.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%);
ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); HEAD INJURIES (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); NAVIES (86%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); TERRORISM (85%);
BRAIN INJURIES (85%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Armies; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Sean Baker

CITY: LOUISVILLE, KY, USA (52%)

STATE: KENTUCKY, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             755 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ABUSE OF CAPTIVES MORE WIDESPREAD, SAYS ARMY SURVEY

BYLINE: This article was reported and written by Douglas Jehl, Steven Lee Myers
and Eric Schmitt.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
INVESTIGATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1516 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


An Army summary of deaths and mistreatment involving prisoners in American
custody in Iraq and Afghanistan shows a widespread pattern of abuse involving
more military units than previously known.

The cases from Iraq date back to April 15, 2003, a few days after Saddam
Hussein's statue was toppled in a Baghdad square, and they extend up to last
month, when a prisoner detained by Navy commandos died in a suspected case of
homicide blamed on ''blunt force trauma to the torso and positional asphyxia.''

Among previously unknown incidents are the abuse of detainees by Army
interrogators from a National Guard unit attached to the Third Infantry
Division, who are described in a document obtained by The New York Times as
having ''forced into asphyxiation numerous detainees in an attempt to obtain
information'' during a 10-week period last spring.

The document, dated May 5, is a synopsis prepared by the Criminal Investigation
Command at the request of Army officials grappling with intense scrutiny
prompted by the circulation the preceding week of photographs of prisoner abuse
at Abu Ghraib. It lists the status of investigations into three dozen cases,
including the continuing investigation into the notorious abuses at Abu Ghraib.

In one of the oldest cases, involving the death of a prisoner in Afghanistan in
December 2002, enlisted personnel from an active-duty military intelligence unit
at Fort Bragg, N.C., and an Army Reserve military-police unit from Ohio are
believed to have been ''involved at various times in assaulting and mistreating
the detainee.''

The Army summary is consistent with recent public statements by senior military
officials, who have said the Army is actively investigating nine suspected
homicides of prisoners held by Americans in Iraq and Afghanistan in late 2002.

But the details paint a broad picture of misconduct, and show that in many cases
among the 37 prisoners who have died in American custody in Iraq and
Afghanistan, the Army did not conduct autopsies and says it cannot determine the
causes of the deaths.

In his speech on Monday night, President Bush portrayed the abuse of prisoners
by American soldiers in narrow terms. He described incidents at Abu Ghraib
prison in Iraq, which were the first and most serious to come to light, as
involving actions ''by a few American troops who disregarded our country and
disregarded our values.''

According to the Army summary, the deaths that are now being investigated most
vigorously by Army officials may be those from Afghanistan in December 2002,
where two prisoners died in one week at what was known as the Bagram Collection
Point, where interrogations were overseen by a platoon from Company A, 519th
Military Intelligence Battalion, from Fort Bragg.

The document says the investigation into the two deaths ''is continuing with
recent re-interviews,'' both of military intelligence personnel from Fort Bragg
and of Army Reserve military police officers from Ohio and surrounding states,
who were serving as guards at the facility. It was not clear from the document
exactly which Army Reserve unit was being investigated.

On March 4, 2003, The New York Times reported on the two deaths, noting that the
cause given on one of the death certificates was ''homicide,'' a result of
''blunt force injuries to lower extremities complicating coronary artery
disease.'' It was signed by an Army pathologist.

Both deaths were ruled homicides within days, but military spokesmen in
Afghanistan initially portrayed at least one as being the result of natural
causes. Personnel from the unit in charge of interrogations at the facility, led
by Capt. Carolyn Wood, were later assigned to Iraq, and to the Joint
Interrogation and Debriefing Center at Abu Ghraib.

Lt. Col. Billy Buckner, a spokesman for the 18th Airborne Corps, said in an
e-mail message on Monday that no one from the 519th Military Intelligence
Battalion had yet been disciplined in connection with any deaths or other
misconduct in Iraq. He declined to say if anyone from the unit was the subject
of an ongoing investigation.

The document also categorizes as a sexual assault a case of abuse at Abu Ghraib
last fall that involved three soldiers from that unit, who were later fined and
demoted but whose names the Army has refused to provide.

As part of the incident, the document says, the three soldiers ''entered the
female wing of the prison and took a female detainee to a vacant cell.''

''While one allegedly stood as look-out and one held the detainee's hand, the
third soldier allegedly kissed the detainee,'' the report said. It says that the
female detainee was reportedly threatened with being left with a naked male
detainee, but that ''investigation failed to either prove or disprove the
indecent-assault allegations.''

The May 5 document said the three soldiers from the 519th were demoted: two to
privates first class and one to specialist. One was fined $750, the other two
$500 each.

In what appeared to be a serious case of abuse over a prolonged period of time,
unidentified enlisted members of the 223rd Military Intelligence Battalion, part
of the California National Guard, were accused of abusing Iraqi detainees at a
center in Samarra, north of Baghdad.

The unit, based in San Francisco, operated under the command of the Third
Infantry Division, the armored force that led the Army assault on Baghdad last
April and continued to patrol the city and the surrounding region into the
summer.

According to the Army summary, members of the 223rd ''struck and pulled the hair
of detainees'' during interrogations over a period that lasted 10 weeks. The
summary said they ''forced into asphyxiations numerous detainees in an attempt
to obtain information.''

The accusations were based on the statement of a soldier. No other details of
the abuse -- not the number of suspected soldiers nor the progress of the
investigation -- were disclosed.

A spokeswoman for the California National Guard in Sacramento, Maj. Denise
Varner, said she could not discuss any investigation.

Another incident, whose general outlines had been previously known, involved the
death in custody of a senior Iraqi officer, Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush, who
died last November at a detention center run by the Third Armored Cavalry, of
Fort Carson, Colo. Soldiers acknowledged to investigators that interviews with
the general on Nov. 24 and 25 involved ''physical assaults.''

In fact, investigators determined that General Mowhoush died after being shoved
head-first into a sleeping bag, and questioned while being rolled repeatedly
from his back to his stomach. That finding was first reported in The Denver
Post.

According to Army officials and documents, at least 12 prisoners have died of
natural or undetermined causes, including nine in Abu Ghraib. In six of those
cases, the military conducted no autopsy to confirm the presumed cause of death.
As a result, the investigations into their deaths were closed by Army
investigators.

In another case, an autopsy found that a detainee, Muhammad Najem Abed, died of
cardiac arrest complicated by diabetes, without noting, as the investigation
summary does, that he died after ''a self-motivated hunger strike.''

In two cases, involving the deaths of prisoners at Abu Ghraib on Jan. 16 and
Feb. 19, investigations continue even though the causes are believed to be
natural. In the Feb. 19 case, Muhammad Saad Abdullah was found dead with ''acute
inflammation of the abdomen.'' An autopsy classified the death as natural,
apparently caused by ''peritonitis secondary to perforating gastric ulcer.''

Army officials have been reluctant to discuss the type of detail that the
document describes, even when investigations into the cases are closed. The Army
has refused to make public the synopses of Army criminal investigations into the
deaths or assaults of Iraqi or Afghan prisoners while in custody.

At a Pentagon briefing on Friday, a senior military official and a senior
Pentagon medical official said the Army was investigating the deaths of 37
detainees in Iraq and Afghanistan, an increase from at least 25 deaths that a
senior Army general described on May 4.

Army officials have given rough breakdowns of those deaths, including those
ruled natural deaths, homicides and ongoing investigations. But Army officials
have been stingy with details. Of the two homicide cases the Army has closed,
for instance, officials have given only spare details about a soldier who shot
and killed an Iraqi detainee who was throwing rocks at the guards. The soldier
was demoted and dishonorably discharged from the Army.

When asked Friday about details of pending investigations that military medical
examiners had characterized as homicides, and that had been described in news
accounts, a senior official would only confirm, ''That's an ongoing
investigation.''

The official described the dates, locations and number of deaths involved in
four cases ruled justifiable homicide, all in Iraq, including three at Abu
Ghraib. But the official did not give details about the individual cases.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two detainees were held yesterday at Camp Lima outside Karbala.
They were detained after a raid on a village north of the city on Monday. (Photo
by Ashley Gilbertson for The New York Times)
 Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush, shown with his grandson in a family photo, died
last November in American custody in Iraq. (pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); AUTOPSIES (89%); HOMICIDE (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (78%); MISCONDUCT (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); DEATHS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); GENOCIDE (74%);
INTERVIEWS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); POLICE FORCES (67%) Terrorism; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of
War; Autopsies; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Intelligence Services

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Douglas Jehl; Steven Lee
Myers; Eric Schmitt

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); FAYETTEVILLE, NC, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Bagram (Afghanistan); Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             756 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kissinger Tapes Describe Crises, War and Stark Photos of Abuse

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


News had just broken of a terrible wrongdoing committed by American soldiers,
and the secretary of defense and the national security adviser debated whether
there was any way to stop newspapers and television news programs from showing
graphic photographs of the victims.

''They're pretty terrible,'' said Melvin R. Laird, the secretary of defense, of
the color photographs of the men, women and children killed in the My Lai
massacre in South Vietnam.

Henry A. Kissinger, the national security adviser, responded that one of
President Nixon's top aides had ''heard that the Army is trying to impound the
pictures -- that can't be done.''

A transcript of this 1969 telephone conversation, with its uncanny echoes of the
Iraq war and the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison, at least in the fact of the
photographs, if not in the severity of the wrongdoing, was released on Wednesday
by the National Archives as part of 20,000 pages of records of Mr. Kissinger's
telephone conversations. The documents cover the years from the beginning of his
service in 1969 until August 1974, when Nixon resigned.

The conversations portray a senior adviser trying to juggle foreign policy
crises under a president increasingly distracted by the Watergate scandal and,
on at least one occasion, too drunk to talk to the British prime minister.

They also show Mr. Kissinger using his charm on Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet
ambassador to the United States. One minute the two men are joking about Mr.
Kissinger's date with a former Playboy playmate, the next they are discussing
the Mideast or disarmament treaties, all on a secure phone line to avoid having
to share their conversations with the State Department.

The transcripts were released over the objections of Mr. Kissinger after the
National Security Archive, a nonprofit organization, initiated legal proceedings
to make them public.

Mr. Kissinger issued a statement Wednesday saying he had not seen the released
material and would have no comment.

''It's nice to have these juicy details, especially now when I feel like I'm
seeing deja vu all over again,'' said Stanley Karnow, the author of ''Vietnam: A
History'' and a war correspondent who covered the Indochina conflict.

The episode involving Nixon's drinking occurred on Oct. 11, 1973, shortly after
the 1973 Arab-Israeli war erupted. Aides to Prime Minister Edward Heath of
Britain telephoned shortly before 8 p.m., hoping to reach the president so the
two leaders could discuss the war.

Mr. Kissinger asked: ''Can we tell them no? When I talked to the president, he
was loaded.''

Brent Scowcroft, then an assistant to Mr. Kissinger, said: ''Right, O.K. I will
say the president will not be available until first thing in the morning but you
will be this evening.''

The papers cover major events of the cold war, like the opening of China, which
was soon followed by calls to Mr. Kissinger from influential figures like David
Rockefeller, chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, and Jack Valenti, president of
the Motion Picture Association of America, who wanted help getting the first
visas to Beijing.

But war and conflict were the most constant topics.

In their conversation on Nov. 21, 1969, about the My Lai massacre, Mr. Laird
told Mr. Kissinger that while he would like ''to sweep it under the rug,'' the
photographs prevented it.

''There are so many kids just laying there; these pictures are authentic,'' Mr.
Laird said.

The telephone transcripts show how frustrated Nixon was becoming with the
Vietnam War and his failing effort to withdraw American troops from Vietnam by
expanding the war into Cambodia.

He became especially angry on Dec. 9, 1970, with what he considered the
lackluster bombing campaign by the United States Air Force against targets in
Cambodia.

''They're not only not imaginative but they are just running these things --
bombing jungles,'' Nixon said. ''They have got to go in there and I mean really
go in.''

Mr. Kissinger then cautioned: ''The Air Force is designed to fight an air battle
against the Soviet Union. They are not designed for this war.''

But the president persisted, suggesting that the bombing campaign could be
disguised as an airlift of supplies.

''I want them to hit everything,'' he said. ''I want them to use the big planes,
the small planes, everything they can that will help out there, and let's start
giving them a little shock.''

He ended by saying, ''Right now there is a chance to win this goddamn war, and
that's probably what we are going to have to do because we are not going to do
anything at the conference table.''

Mr. Kissinger immediately relayed the order: ''A massive bombing campaign in
Cambodia. Anything that flies on anything that moves.''

Few foreign officials had a more complicated relationship with Mr. Kissinger
than Mr. Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador.

At first they were formal with each other, testing whether this new back channel
would make it easier for the rival superpowers to avoid war and possibly
cooperate on arms reduction treaties or defusing tensions in the Middle East.

They were soon on a first-name basis -- Henry and Anatoly -- and treating each
other like old buddies.

One afternoon Mr. Dobrynin teased Mr. Kissinger about his latest date.

''I guess I have her picture,'' said the Soviet diplomat. ''I think she was on
this Playboy calendar.''

''Oh-h-h-h, you're a dirty old man,'' Mr. Kissinger said.

As peace negotiations progressed with Hanoi, it was Mr. Dobrynin who brought
proposals from the Vietnamese Communists to Mr. Kissinger, who would win a Nobel
Peace Prize for the treaty that brought an end to America's involvement in the
war.

In the spring of 1972 Mr. Kissinger telephoned the president with news of
something of a breakthrough from the Vietnamese.

''We got some pretty quick action out of our Soviet friends -- Dobrynin was in
slobbering over me,'' said Mr. Kissinger. ''He had a message from the North
Vietnamese for us which was a lot more conciliatory than the one that they gave
us in Paris.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger in the Oval Office in 1973,
shortly after Mr. Kissinger was made secretary of state. The National Archives
released records of Mr. Kissinger's telephone conversations yesterday. (Photo by
Associated Press)(pg. A22)
 Henry A. Kissinger, left, and President Richard M. Nixon at the White House in
October 1973. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VIETNAM WAR (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (79%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); CULTURE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (77%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (77%); US PRESIDENTS (75%);
GENOCIDE (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (73%);
WRITERS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (71%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (70%); PRIME MINISTERS
(70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (69%); IRAQ WAR
(69%) Vietnam War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Recordings
(Audio); Photography; Vietnam War; Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Vietnam War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) National Security Archive

PERSON: RICHARD NIXON (91%) Elizabeth Becker; Henry A (Dr) Kissinger; Richard
Milhous (1913-94) Nixon; Melvin R Laird; Anatoly Dobrynin

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (93%); VIET NAM (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); ISRAEL (79%); CAMBODIA (79%)

REGION: My Lai (Vietnam); Cambodia; Russia; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             758 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 56 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Congressional concern
over American correctional executives who were assigned to Iraq despite prior
accusations of prisoner abuse misstated the name of an online magazine that
carried a first-person account by one such person, Lane McCotter. It is
Corrections.com, not Correction.com.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Correction Stories

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             759 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Million-Dollar Settlement In Swim Club Bigotry Case

BYLINE: By RICHARD LEZIN JONES

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, May 26


Two years ago, when Annemarie Giordano presented the owner of Le Terrace Swim
Club in Nutley with a list of children who were invited to her daughter's
11th-birthday party, she met with an unusual response, her husband, Philip,
said.

''He proceeds to systematically go down the entire list: 'White. Black.
Hispanic. What kind of names are these?''' recalled Mr. Giordano, a 46-year-old
Bloomfield resident, who is white. ''I couldn't believe that in New Jersey in
2002 that this existed.''

A year earlier, Marci Shepard, who is African-American, went to the club as a
guest and was turned away, she said, while other guests -- all of them white --
were allowed inside. ''I really felt like at the moment, I should have looked up
and saw a sign that said 'whites only' there,'' said Ms. Shepard, 20.

The sting that Ms. Shepard and Mr. Giordano said they received may have been
salved a bit on Wednesday, when the owner of the club agreed to pay $1 million
to settle a lawsuit brought on their behalf by the American Civil Liberties
Union. Legal experts said that the case was one of New Jersey's largest
settlements ever of a lawsuit involving allegations of violating so-called
public accommodations laws.

But those involved in filing the suit said that just as important as the
landmark financial terms of the settlement was the message that those who still
cling to the ugly vestiges of the Jim Crow era may yet face stiff -- and
expensive -- penalties.

''Hopefully this one million dollars will send a message to the citizens of New
Jersey, the business people in New Jersey and elsewhere across this nation that
there's a heavy, heavy price to be paid for discrimination,'' said Anne P.
McHugh, who represented Ms. Shepard and the Giordanos in their suit.

The swim club owners, Patrick and Rae Nardone, said through their lawyer on
Wednesday that the settlement should not be construed as an admission of guilt,
and they denied that they had discriminated against anyone. The lawyer, Donna
duBeth Gardiner, said that the couple had agreed to the settlement because they
were elderly and wanted to avoid the stress of a trial.

''We absolutely, categorically, deny the charges,'' Ms. Gardiner said. ''We deny
that there were any discriminatory practices.''

Regarding the incident when Ms. Shepard was denied entry, Ms. Gardiner said that
the Nardones did not personally exclude Ms. Shepard -- Ms. Gardiner could not
identify who did so -- and that they were unaware of the incident until later.

In the incident involving the Giordanos and their guest list, Ms. Gardiner said
that Mr. Nardone had been involved in a dispute over the logistics of the party
with the Giordanos.

''The allegation that he questioned the ethnicities of the children is
absolutely denied,'' Ms. Gardiner said.

Ms. McHugh, who worked on the case without a fee, rebutted Ms. Gardiner's
assertion and countered that there were only two requirements of members at Le
Terrace: ''As long as you had money to pay your dues and the right color skin,
you could get in.''

She said that shortly after the Giordanos went public with their account of what
had happened at the club, others came forward to describe what Ms. McHugh said
were discriminatory practices that stretched back over two decades.

Asked about others who the Giordanos said had contacted them about
discrimination claims, Ms. Gardiner said, ''If we could go through each of those
people, I could tell you why they had a grudge.''

She added that about 40 people -- ''including people of color,'' she said -- had
come forward to express interest in testifying on behalf of the Nardones at
trial. Since the suit was filed, the couple has sold the club and moved out of
the area.

''It's a surprising settlement,'' said Charles A. Sullivan, a professor at Seton
Hall University's Law School whose expertise includes discrimination claims. He
said that such settlements usually involved allegations of ''massive
humiliation'' by plaintiffs.

Ms. Shepard, a third-year journalism student at New Jersey City University, said
that the incident affects her to this day. ''It was something that changed me
forever,'' she said ''I think about this and carry this with me every day of my
life.''

Likewise for the Giordanos, who said that they are still shocked by the guest
list incident. Said Mr. Giordano's wife, Annemarie, of the club, ''My jaw is
still over there.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE
(87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (76%); LAWYERS (71%); ADMISSIONS
& CONFESSIONS (65%); GUILTY PLEAS (65%) Organizations, Societies and Clubs;
Discrimination; Suits and Litigation; Hispanic-Americans; Blacks

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (82%) Le Terrace Swim Club (Nutley,
NJ); American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Richard Lezin Jones

CITY: NEWARK, NJ, USA (77%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Nutley (NJ)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             763 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Tell The Truth

BYLINE: By PAUL KRUGMAN.

E-mail: krugman@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 742 words


Some news organizations, including The New York Times, are currently engaged in
self-criticism over the run-up to the Iraq war. They are asking, as they should,
why poorly documented claims of a dire threat received prominent, uncritical
coverage, while contrary evidence was either ignored or played down.

But it's not just Iraq, and it's not just The Times. Many journalists seem to be
having regrets about the broader context in which Iraq coverage was embedded: a
climate in which the press wasn't willing to report negative information about
George Bush.

People who get their news by skimming the front page, or by watching TV, must be
feeling confused by the sudden change in Mr. Bush's character. For more than two
years after 9/11, he was a straight shooter, all moral clarity and
righteousness.

But now those people hear about a president who won't tell a straight story
about why he took us to war in Iraq or how that war is going, who can't admit to
and learn from mistakes, and who won't hold himself or anyone else accountable.
What happened?

The answer, of course, is that the straight shooter never existed. He was a
fictitious character that the press, for various reasons, presented as reality.

The truth is that the character flaws that currently have even conservative
pundits fuming have been visible all along. Mr. Bush's problems with the truth
have long been apparent to anyone willing to check his budget arithmetic. His
inability to admit mistakes has also been obvious for a long time. I first wrote
about Mr. Bush's ''infallibility complex'' more than two years ago, and I wasn't
being original.

So why did the press credit Mr. Bush with virtues that reporters knew he didn't
possess? One answer is misplaced patriotism. After 9/11 much of the press seemed
to reach a collective decision that it was necessary, in the interests of
national unity, to suppress criticism of the commander in chief.

Another answer is the tyranny of evenhandedness. Moderate and liberal
journalists, both reporters and commentators, often bend over backward to say
nice things about conservatives. Not long ago, many commentators who are now
caustic Bush critics seemed desperate to differentiate themselves from
''irrational Bush haters'' who were neither haters nor irrational -- and whose
critiques look pretty mild in the light of recent revelations.

And some journalists just couldn't bring themselves to believe that the
president of the United States was being dishonest about such grave matters.

Finally, let's not overlook the role of intimidation. After 9/11, if you were
thinking of saying anything negative about the president, you had to be prepared
for an avalanche of hate mail. You had to expect right-wing pundits and
publications to do all they could to ruin your reputation, and you had to worry
about being denied access to the sort of insider information that is the basis
of many journalistic careers.

The Bush administration, knowing all this, played the press like a fiddle. But
has that era come to an end?

A new Pew survey finds 55 percent of journalists in the national media believing
that the press has not been critical enough of Mr. Bush, compared with only 8
percent who believe that it has been too critical. More important, journalists
seem to be acting on that belief.

Amazing things have been happening lately. The usual suspects have tried to
silence reporting about prison abuses by accusing critics of undermining the
troops -- but the reports keep coming. The attorney general has called yet
another terror alert -- but the press raised questions about why. (At a White
House morning briefing, Terry Moran of ABC News actually said what many thought
during other conveniently timed alerts: ''There is a disturbing possibility that
you are manipulating the American public in order to get a message out.'')

It may not last. In July 2002, according to Dana Milbank of The Washington Post
-- who has tried, at great risk to his career, to offer a realistic picture of
the Bush presidency -- ''the White House press corps showed its teeth'' for the
first time since 9/11. It didn't last: the administration beat the drums of war,
and most of the press relapsed into docility.

But this time may be different. And if it is, Mr. Bush -- who has always
depended on that docility -- may be in even more trouble than the latest polls
suggest.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS REPORTING (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (89%); JOURNALISM
(89%); WRITERS (89%); CONSERVATISM (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (79%); HIJACKING (79%); LIBERAL MEDIA (78%); US PRESIDENTS (75%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); TERRORISM (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); LIBERALISM (73%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World
Trade Center (NYC); News and News Media; United States International Relations;
Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); PAUL KRUGMAN (58%) Paul Krugman; George W (Pres)
Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC); Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             764 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Speech That's No Joke

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 727 words


It has always been easy to make fun of Al Gore. But if there's any truth to the
thunderous criticism he's turned loose on the Bush administration this week,
it's time to dispense with the jokes and listen seriously to what the man is
saying.

If Mr. Gore is right, the nation is faced with a crisis of leadership that is
perilously close to an emergency.

If he's wrong, then all the folks who have made the easy jokes at his expense
can consider themselves vindicated.

The war in Iraq, said Mr. Gore, in an interview on Wednesday, ''is the worst
strategic fiasco in the history of the United States. It is an unfolding
catastrophe without any comparison.''

In an echo of the growing chorus of criticism here and around the world, he said
the war has not only damaged ''our strategic interests'' and isolated the U.S.
from its allies, it has also made the country more -- not less -- vulnerable to
terror.

In a widely covered speech earlier in the day, Mr. Gore said that Iraq had not
become, as President Bush has asserted, '' 'the central front in the war on
terror.' '' But he said it has become, unfortunately, ''the central recruiting
office for terrorists.''

The speech was extraordinary -- blunt, colorful and delivered with the kind of
passion you seldom see in politics anymore. The former vice president described
Mr. Bush as incompetent and untrustworthy, and said his policies had endangered
the nation.

The president, said Mr. Gore, had ''planted the seeds of war, and harvested a
whirlwind.''

In the view of Mr. Gore (and many others), the essential problem has been the
triumph in the Bush crowd of ideology over reality. The true believers knew
everything better than everybody else, and the arrogance born of that certainty
led, step by tragic step, to the war with no exit doors that we are locked in
today.

That arrogance gave rise to the Bush doctrine of pre-emptive war, the contempt
for international agreements like the Geneva Conventions, the dismissal of
concerns by some of the highest-ranking military professionals about the way a
war in Iraq should be fought and the willingness of top administration figures
to blow smoke in the eyes of ordinary Americans who were traumatized by Sept. 11
and worried about the possibility of further terrorist attacks.

''The same preference for ideology over reality has turned trillion-dollar
surpluses into multitrillion-dollar deficits,'' said Mr. Gore. ''And that same
approach has led to the locking up of American citizens without recourse to
lawyers or access to courts or even a right of their families to know they're
being held in secret.''

These and other matters are transforming the United States into a country that
is more warlike, more brutal, less free, less just, less admirable and much less
appealing than the nation that existed when Mr. Bush stepped into the presidency
in January 2001.

Those who disagree with Mr. Gore should challenge him on his facts. Those who
agree must look for ways to defend the honor and perhaps the very identity of
the United States as we've known it.

The least serious part of Mr. Gore's speech was the part that got the most
attention, his call for top officials of the Bush administration to resign. As
an attention-getter, it worked.

But this was a speech in which the former vice president said: ''What makes the
United States special in the history of nations is our commitment to the rule of
law and our carefully constructed system of checks and balances. Our natural
distrust of concentrated power and our devotion to openness and democracy are
what have led us as a people to consistently choose good over evil in our
collective aspirations, more than the people of any other nation.''

This is a time to remember the principles that made this a great nation, and to
reaffirm them. I don't know what will happen in the election in November. What I
know is that the nation is facing a crisis now. The Bush administration needs to
step back from the abyss its ideology has dragged us to.

It may be that the president never understood what made the U.S. great. In that
case, he'd be among those who could benefit most from a reading of Mr. Gore's
speech. If he followed that up with a look at the Bill of Rights (it would only
take a few minutes), he'd have a better understanding of what this country, at
its best, is about.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); WAR
ON TERROR (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); LAW OF WAR (75%); WAR CRIMES (75%);
INTERVIEWS (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); ELECTIONS (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); POLITICS
(71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%); LAWYERS (61%); GENOCIDE
(60%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (60%) Geneva Conventions; Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Election Issues  ;
Presidential Election of 2004

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: AL GORE (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Bob Herbert; Al Gore; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             765 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Points The Way

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 739 words


I doff my hat, briefly, to President Bush.

Sudanese peasants will be naming their sons ''George Bush'' because he scored a
humanitarian victory this week that could be a momentous event around the globe
-- although almost nobody noticed. It was Bush administration diplomacy that led
to an accord to end a 20-year civil war between Sudan's north and south after
two million deaths.

If the peace holds, hundreds of thousands of lives will be saved, millions of
refugees will return home, and a region of Africa may be revived.

But there's a larger lesson here as well: messy African wars are not insoluble,
and Western pressure can help save the day. So it's all the more shameful that
the world is failing to exert pressure on Sudan to halt genocide in its Darfur
region. Darfur is unaffected by the new peace accords.

I'm still haunted by what I saw when I visited the region in March: a desert
speckled with fresh graves of humans and the corpses of donkeys, the empty eyes
of children who saw their fathers killed, the guilt of parents fumbling to
explain how they had survived while their children did not.

The refugees tell of sudden attacks by the camel-riding Janjaweed Arab militia,
which is financed by the Sudanese government, then a panic of shooting and fire.
Girls and women are routinely branded after they are raped, to increase the
humiliation.

One million Darfur people are displaced within Sudan, and 200,000 have fled to
Chad. Many of those in Sudan are stuck in settlements like concentration camps.

I've obtained a report by a U.N. interagency team documenting conditions at a
concentration camp in the town of Kailek: Eighty percent of the children are
malnourished, there are no toilets, and girls are taken away each night by the
guards to be raped. As inmates starve, food aid is diverted by guards to feed
their camels.

The standard threshold for an ''emergency'' is one death per 10,000 people per
day, but people in Kailek are dying at a staggering 41 per 10,000 per day -- and
for children under 5, the rate is 147 per 10,000 per day. ''Children suffering
from malnutrition, diarrhea, dehydration and other symptoms of the conditions
under which they are being held live in filth, directly exposed to the sun,''
the report says.

''The team members, all of whom are experienced experts in humanitarian affairs,
were visibly shaken,'' the report declares. It describes ''a strategy of
systematic and deliberate starvation being enforced by the GoS [government of
Sudan] and its security forces on the ground.'' Read the 11-page report at
www.nytimes.com/kristofresponds, Posting 426.

Demographers at the U.S. Agency for International Development estimate that at
best, ''only'' 100,000 people will die in Darfur this year of malnutrition and
disease. If things go badly, half a million will die.

This is not a natural famine, but a deliberate effort to eliminate three African
tribes in Darfur so Arabs can take their land. The Genocide Convention defines
such behavior as genocide, and it obliges nations to act to stop it. That is why
nobody in the West wants to talk about Darfur -- because of a fear that focusing
on the horror will lead to a deployment in Sudan.

But it's not a question of sending troops, but of applying pressure -- the same
kind that succeeded in getting Sudan to the north-south peace agreement. If Mr.
Bush would step up to the cameras and denounce this genocide, if he would send
Colin Powell to the Chad-Sudan border, if he would telephone Sudan's president
again to demand humanitarian access to the concentration camps, he might save
hundreds of thousands of lives.

Yet while Mr. Bush has done far too little, he has at least issued a written
statement, sent aides to speak forcefully at the U.N. and raised the matter with
Sudan's leaders. That's more than the Europeans or the U.N. has done. Where are
Tony Blair and Jacques Chirac? Where are African leaders, like Nelson Mandela?
Why isn't John Kerry speaking out forcefully? And why are ordinary Americans
silent?

Islamic leaders abroad have been particularly shameful in standing with the
Sudanese government oppressors rather than with the Muslim victims in Darfur. Do
they care about dead Muslims only when the killers are Israelis or Americans?

As for America, we have repeatedly failed to stand up to genocide, whether of
Armenians, Jews, Cambodians or Rwandans. Now we're letting it happen again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); CHILDREN (89%); STARVATION (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
MALNUTRITION (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (87%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FARM LABOR
(78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (66%); FOOD CHARITIES (66%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(50%) United States International Relations; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (94%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             766 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Account of '03 Ambush Changes Way a Soldier Died

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE CASUALTIES;
Pg. 8

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: SALEM, Ore., May 28


A soldier in the same ambush in which Pfc. Jessica Lynch was captured was not
killed in action but was captured by Iraqi fighters and then executed, officials
said Thursday.

The family of the soldier, Sgt. Donald Walters, 33, of Salem, had pressed
officials for an investigation of his death, and learned the new account from
the Oregon National Guard, which released the details to the public on Thursday,
more than a year after the March 23, 2003, ambush.

The killing is being investigated as a war crime, and suspects have been
identified. Their names have not been released because the investigation is
continuing, said Kay Fristad, a Guard spokeswoman.

In March, the Army posthumously awarded Sergeant Walters the Silver Star for
gallantry with marked distinction. He was also awarded the Bronze Star and the
Purple Heart. This week, he was awarded a P.O.W. medal.

The Pentagon investigated Sergeant Walters's death after his mother, Arlene,
filed Freedom of Information requests, believing that the Army had not given her
son credit for actions first attributed to Private Lynch, like fighting until
his ammunition had run out.

Sergeant Walters ''was held separately from his fellow soldiers and killed while
in custody,'' the National Guard said.

''He was executed -- shot twice in the back,'' Maj. Arnold Strong, a Guard
spokesman, said in a telephone interview on Thursday. ''An Iraqi ambulance
driver witnessed six Fedayeen rebels standing outside a building guarding him
while he was still alive. That same witness evacuated his dead body to a
hospital.''

The suspects, Major Strong said, are presumed to be members of the fedayeen
paramilitary force that captured Sergeant Walters. Private Lynch and others were
taken captive by different Iraqi forces. Private Lynch was rescued from an Iraqi
hospital on April 1, 2003, and seven others captured in the ambush were freed 12
days later.

Defense investigators confirmed the account by matching Sergeant Walters's DNA
to blood splatter on the wall where he was executed, Major Strong said. He died
from two gunshot wounds to the back, fired from more than 20 feet away, Major
Strong said in summarizing the investigation findings.

Sergeant Walters's fate drew attention because the details of his actions
remarkably resemble an account that circulated in the news media, based on
anonymous sources, describing how Private Lynch had fought until her ammunition
ran out.

After her rescue, Private Lynch, of Palestine, W.Va., said she did not fire a
shot. Her injuries resulted from a Humvee crash during the firefight in the
Iraqi town of Nasiriya, just days into the war.

''What upset me was they admitted it wasn't Jessica Lynch, but they never
bothered to find out who that soldier was,'' Ms. Walters told reporters late
Thursday.

Like Private Lynch, Sergeant Walters had blond hair. His family and others have
said that early reports depicting a blond soldier bravely fighting off Iraqis
may have been mistakenly attributed to Private Lynch, possibly because of an
erroneous translation of Iraqi radio transmissions.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The government now says Sgt. Donald Walters was executed. (Photo
by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); SHOOTINGS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (88%); TERRORISM (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); WITNESSES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); GENOCIDE (74%);
INTERVIEWS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); BACK DISORDERS & INJURIES (70%);
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (69%); AMBULANCE & RESCUE SERVICES (69%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(69%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (67%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Rescues; Hostages; Terrorism

PERSON: Donald (Sgt) Walters; Jessica (Pfc) Lynch; Arlene Walters

CITY: SALEM, OR, USA (90%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (93%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             769 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

It Was the Porn That Made Them Do It

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1636 words


THE day was April 2, 2003, the town was Najaf, the mood was giddy, and, yes, the
citizens did greet the American liberators from the 101st Airborne Division with
cheers. One Iraqi was asked what he hoped the Americans would bring, and Jim
Dwyer reported the answer on the front page of The New York Times: ''
'Democracy,' the man said, his voice rising to lift each word to greater
prominence. 'Whiskey. And sexy!' ''

Well, two out of three ain't bad.

This joyous memory came rushing back after the grim revelation of yet another
kink in the torture regime at Abu Ghraib. As if sexual humiliation and violent
abuse weren't punishment enough, the guards also made prisoners violate Islamic
practice by force-feeding them booze.

How do we square the tales of American cruelty with the promise of democracy we
thought we were bringing to Iraq? One obvious way might be to acknowledge with
some humility that our often proud history has always had a fault line, running
from slavery to Wounded Knee to My Lai. (Read accounts of Andersonville, the
Confederate-run Civil War prison at which some 13,000 died, for literal echoes
of some of Abu Ghraib's inhumanity.) But there's an easier way out in 2004:
blame Janet Jackson for what's gone wrong in Iraq, or if not her, then Jenna
Jameson.

It sounds laughable, but it's not a joke. Some of our self-appointed moral
leaders are defending the morally indefensible by annexing Abu Ghraib as another
front in America's election-year culture war. Charles Colson, the Watergate
felon turned celebrity preacher, told a group of pastors convened by the Family
Research Council that the prison guards had been corrupted by ''a steady diet of
MTV and pornography.'' The Concerned Women for America site posted a screed by
Robert Knight, of the Culture and Family Institute, calling the Abu Ghraib
scandal the '' 'Perfect Storm' of American cultural depravity,'' in which porn,
especially gay porn, gave soldiers ''the idea to engage in sadomasochistic
activity and to videotape it in voyeuristic fashion.'' (His chosen prophylactics
to avert future Abu Ghraibs include abolishing sex education, outlawing same-sex
marriage and banishing Howard Stern.) The vice president of the Heritage
Foundation, Rebecca Hagelin, found a link between the prison scandal and how
''our country permits Hollywood to put almost anything in a movie and still call
it PG-13.''

Some of these same characters also felt that the media shouldn't show the Abu
Ghraib pictures too much or at all -- as if the pictures were the problem rather
than what they reveal. They are of an ideological piece with Jerry Falwell, who,
a mere two days after 9/11, tried to shift the blame for al Qaeda's attack to
the ''pagans'' and abortionists and gays and lesbians who have ''tried to
secularize America.''

This time the point of these scolds' political strategy -- and it is a political
strategy, despite some of its adherents' quasireligiosity -- is clear enough. It
is not merely to demonize gays and the usual rogue's gallery of secularist
bogeymen for any American ill but to clear the Bush administration of any
culpability for Abu Ghraib, the disaster that may have destroyed its mission in
Iraq. If porn or MTV or Howard Stern can be said to have induced a ''few bad
apples'' in one prison to misbehave, then everyone else in the chain of command,
from the commander-in-chief down, is off the hook. If the culture war can be
cross-wired with the actual war, then the buck will stop not at the Pentagon or
the White House but at the Paris Hilton video, or ''Mean Girls,'' or maybe
''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy.''

The hypocrisy of those pushing this line knows few bounds. They choose to ignore
the reality that the most popular images of sadomasochism in American pop
culture this year have been those in ''The Passion of the Christ,'' an R-rated
''religious'' movie that many Americans took their children to see, at times
with clerical blessings. Mel Gibson's relentlessly violent, distinctly American
take on Jesus' martyrdom is a more exact fit for what's been acted out in Abu
Ghraib than the flouncings of any cheesy porn-video dominatrix.

The other hypocrisy of the blame-the-culture crowd is that ''normal Americans''
-- a phrase favored by Mr. Knight -- don't partake of the ''secular''
entertainment that is doing all this damage. In other words, the porn that led
to prison abuse is all ghettoized in the blue states. The facts say otherwise.
Phil Harvey, the president of the North Carolina-based Adam & Eve, one of the
country's largest suppliers of mail-order adult products, said in an interview
last week that his business has ''for years'' been roughly the same per capita
throughout the continental United States, with those Deep South bastions of the
Bible Belt, Alabama and Mississippi, buying only 10 percent fewer sex toys and
porn videos than everyone else. Even residents of the Cincinnati metropolitan
area -- home to Citizens for Community Values and famous for antismut battles
over Larry Flynt and Robert Mapplethorpe -- turned out to be slightly
larger-than-average users of porn Web sites, according to a 2001 Nielsen
Internet survey.

Americans, regardless of location or political affiliation, have always consumed
a culture of sex and violence. David Milch's explicit HBO recollection of the
cruelty and carnality that accompanied our ''winning'' of the west,
''Deadwood,'' is hardly fiction. As Luc Sante and Susan Sontag have pointed out,
the photographs from Abu Ghraib themselves have a nearly exact historical
antecedent in those touristy snapshots of shameless Americans posing underneath
the victims of lynchings for decades after the Civil War. The horrific photos
were sent around as postcards in the same insouciant spirit that moved Abu
Ghraib guards to e-mail their torture pictures or turn them into screensavers --
even though the reigning mass-culture pin-ups of the time were Mary Pickford and
Shirley Temple rather than Janet Jackson or Britney Spears.

To blame every American transgression on the culture, whether the transgression
is as grievous as Abu Ghraib or the shootings at Columbine or as trivial as
lubricious teenage fashions, is to absolve Americans of any responsibility for
anything. It used to be that liberals pinned all American sins on the
military-industrial complex; now it's conservatives who pin them all on the
Viacom-Time Warner complex. It used to be liberals that found criminals victims
of ''root causes''; now it's conservatives who find criminals victims of X-rated
causes. Since it's conservatives who are now in power, we've reached the absurd
state where we have an attorney general who arrived in Washington placing a
higher priority on stamping out porn than terrorism; we have a Federal
Communications Commission that is ready to sacrifice a bedrock American value
(the First Amendment) to the cause of spanking Bono for using a four-letter word
on TV. As Congress threatens to police cable TV as well, we face the prospect
that the history in ''Deadwood'' may yet be airbrushed by the government until
it resembles ''Little Women.''

All of this is at odds with one of President Bush's most persistent campaign
themes. He has repeatedly vowed to introduce ''a culture of responsibility in
America'' in which ''each of us understands we are responsible for the decisions
we make in life.'' Up to a point. Now he talks about how the Abu Ghraib pictures
are not ''the America I know.'' (Maybe he should get out more.) If he really
practiced ''a culture of responsibility'' he would take responsibility for his
own government's actions rather than plead ignorance and express dismay. He
might, for instance, explain how his own White House counsel, Alberto Gonzales,
came to write a January 2002 memo that labeled the Geneva Conventions ''quaint''
and ''obsolete'' for dealing with prisoners in the war on terrorism (of which
Iraq, we're told, is a part). The dissemination of that memo's legal wisdom
through the Defense Department and the military command over the past 26 months
may tell us more about what led to Abu Ghraib than anything else we've heard so
far from the administration, let alone any Heritage Foundation press release
that finds the genesis of torture in the sexual innuendos of prime-time
television.

In his speech last Monday night, the president, reeling in the polls and seeking
a life raft, seemed to be well on his way to adopting the cultural defense being
pushed by his political allies. He called Abu Ghraib a symbol of ''death and
torture'' under Saddam Hussein and then said that the same prison also ''became
a symbol of disgraceful conduct by a few American troops.'' The idea, it seemed,
was to concede American fallibility, if not exactly error. But by reducing the
charge to ''disgraceful conduct,'' he was performing a verbal sleight-of-hand
that acquitted those troops of torture and found them guilty instead of the
lesser crime of pornographic horseplay. (He was also trying to confine
culpability to a ''few'' troops.) Perhaps he hopes that we will believe that
what happened at Abu Ghraib is the work of just a handful of porn-addled freaks,
and that by razing the prison we can shut the whole incident down the way Rudy
Giuliani banished the sex emporiums of Times Square.

But it's hard to imagine that any of this will fool that man in Najaf who had
hoped we'd replace the terror of Saddam with that elixir he rightly called
democracy. Whatever else America may represent -- whiskey and sexy included --
it stands most of all for the rule of law. We won't bring democracy to Iraq
until those of high rank and low alike submit to an all-American prosecution for
crimes that clearly extend well beyond the perimeters of pornographic pictures
that, in the end, are merely the evidence.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A historical antecedent of the photos from Abu Ghraib: The 1930
lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith in Marion, Ind. (Photo courtesy
''Without Sanctuary''/Twin Palms Publishers)(pg. 16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PORNOGRAPHY (89%);
SCANDALS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%);
US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (76%); CELEBRITIES (76%); RELIGION (75%); CORRECTIONS
WORKERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); POWS & MIAS (74%); CONSERVATISM (74%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); TORTURE (74%); OBSCENITY (74%);
FELONIES (74%); CIVIL WAR (72%); SEX EDUCATION (69%); GAYS & LESBIANS (69%);
POLITICS (68%); SLAVERY (68%); MOVIE RATINGS (67%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (66%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (65%); FILM (65%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (64%); MARRIAGE (62%);
SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (60%) Prisoners of War; Conservatism (US Politics);
United States Armament and Defense; Pornography and Obscenity; Television;
United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Mtv Networks

PERSON: FRANK RICH (56%) Frank Rich; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: INDIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             770 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq Self-Rule Becomes a Test of Nerves As Leaders Face Threats and Violence

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE HAUSER; Warzer Jaff contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE
RECONSTRUCTION; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1633 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 29


At a recent local government meeting in the Rashid neighborhood of south
Baghdad, the first item on the agenda was a moment of silence for council
members in other districts who had been assassinated.

Then the Rashid Council turned to teachers' salaries and access to a garden.
Moments later, during a break, the whistle and crash of a mortar shell pierced
the cigarette smoke and din of conversation. People rushed out in panic. ''It's
a mortar!'' someone yelled.

The council is one of hundreds set up to promote democracy by giving Iraqis
practice in the give and take of local government. But democracy is proving an
increasingly dangerous business these days. Several councils, including this
one, have been the targets of attacks, and their members labeled American
collaborators. Councils now meet under military protection.

Weeks away from the June 30 ceremonial transfer of sovereignty to an Iraqi
government, Americans and Iraqis are starting to question whether the democratic
reforms the United States is trying to install here will carry over.

The weeks of fighting in Falluja and the south, in which many Iraqi civilians
have died, and the Abu Ghraib prison scandal, have made the democracy program an
even harder sell.

''Trying to make this thing work is a true badge of courage,'' said Albert E.
Haines, the Baghdad team leader for RTI International, the American company
leading the local government program in Iraq under contract with the Agency for
International Development.

In addition, the democracy program is being sown in an uncertain climate. Iraqis
are still trying to bridge ethnic and religious fault lines in their society as
they work to form an interim government that will start on June 30. And in the
days leading up to the transfer, American officials have warned that the
violence will only get worse.

''When you talk about democracy now it may seem to be an inappropriate time, but
that will all come later,'' said a member of the Iraqi Governing Council,
Mahmoud Othman. ''But there are steps toward removing the uncertainty so it
could go either way. There is a race with the escalation of violence, because
there are people who will try to put obstacles and make chaos.''

The program has set up hundreds of local councils, held civic dialogues and
presented guidance on topics like the virtues of keeping budget transactions
public. National conferences have been held on politics, the rights of the
disabled and other subjects. The program has built a staff of about 2,500 Iraqis
working as discussion leaders.

At the Rashid Council, members have had to be concerned about their safety as
well as community services. The names of at least nine members were found on a
leaflet written by the Sheik Ahmed Yassin Brigades, a little-known group in Iraq
named for a leader of the militant group Hamas who was killed last month by
Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip.

''We decided to liquidate the following spies,'' the leaflet said, before going
on to list them, for ''cooperation with the American occupiers.''

Sami Sharif, the council leader, attributed the violence to groups that want
political power on their own terms. ''There are a lot of Islamic groups that
lost the chance to participate on the city councils at the beginning,'' he said.
''Now when they see the role of these councils, they do not like the idea they
have no one on them.''

In Sadr City, one of Baghdad's poorest and most volatile neighborhoods, the
office of the democracy project's local council is ringed by soldiers and
sandbags. Troops hunker down in armored vehicles in the courtyard. The hallways
are cluttered with Army cots and trash from military rations. Dozens of soldiers
are sprawled out on worn armchairs, their weapons within reach.

''To some, this building is a symbol of the American oppression,'' said Sgt.
First Class Keith Crabtree, an American who is now based in the building. ''But
we try to view it as a symbol of the changes we are trying to bring to this
area. It is not working as well as I would like it to work.''

At the end of April, the leader of the Sadr City Council, Jasim Swady, was
forced into a car at gunpoint. His body was found the next day hanging from a
light pole, said Iraqis there.

Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, the American deputy director for operations in Iraq,
said Mr. Swady had been found with a sign on his chest that read ''Mahdi Army
business.'' Iraqis said it read ''American spy.''

After that, the council suspended all its meetings and the doors were closed on
the conference room. Now its chairs are empty, and the round table is coated
with dust.

Like many other projects in Iraq these days, the democracy program needs
stronger security. ''There are more than we care to admit of security guards on
the payroll,'' said Chuck Costello, the man in charge of the democracy project
in Iraq. ''An unfortunate necessity.''

During an interview, Mr. Costello's right arm was in a sling because he had
broken his collarbone diving for cover during a mortar attack. He does not
travel outside Baghdad, and he leaves the fortified compound of the Coalition
Provisional Authority and other related offices only to go to a local hotel or
the offices of RTI International.

As he discussed ''methodology'' and ''democratic tools,'' his voice twice
trailed off, drowned out by the clatter of low-flying combat helicopters.

A successful democracy, he said, ''especially in this society, involves
overcoming fear.''

''Sometimes in democratic transitions, people have to put their lives on the
line and fight for it,'' he said.

In Iraq, this is one of those times.

After four American contractors were killed in Falluja and the American military
started an offensive there, councils in 4 of 15 Baghdad areas canceled meetings
or suspended work indefinitely. Town halls and meetings were attacked by
suspected militant groups.

The program nearly came to a ''grinding halt,'' Mr. Haines said. In Baghdad, 10
of the 14 international staff members were evacuated or did not return from
vacations. He said the program had begun relying more on its Iraqi staff.

The 127 neighborhood and district councils in the Baghdad area are not operating
at their full capacity. ''We find it difficult for these councils to find a
secure environment to operate,'' said Imad Jonaby, an Iraqi specialist with the
RTI program. ''Either their places become a target for militant groups, or some
of them get threats on their lives.''

Defenders of the program say it is a sign of success that Iraqis can be vocal
about their criticisms of the military occupation, the Falluja offensive and the
prison abuse, and then still use the councils to discuss reforms. ''We believe
in using the good things the Americans bring and ignoring the bad things,'' said
Muhammad Assadi, 32, a lawyer and a member of the Rashid Council.

But other Iraqis interviewed in Baghdad expressed deep cynicism about the
American intentions. ''We suspected it was all lies when the Americans said they
were here for democratic ideals,'' said Bassim Muhammad, a 30-year-old man in a
barber shop in Karada, the central commercial district. ''When the Americans
handled things in Falluja the way they did, it was a lie proven over a year.''

American actions intended to sow the seeds for a transition to a democratic
society have been criticized, even by supporters of the occupation. Abdel-Basit
Turki resigned as Iraq's human rights minister over the use of excessive force
by the American military in Falluja, Iraqi newspapers quoted him as saying.

The Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, which is represented on
the Iraqi Governing Council, sponsored a recent demonstration in Baghdad that
criticized the decision to reintroduce Baath Party officials into some
positions. A banner showing the Statue of Liberty crying tears of blood drove
home the point.

If this was democracy, protesters asked, why were such decisions not made in
consultation with Iraqi political parties?

''We want rights, but not through the Baathists,'' said Hussein Hashem, 52, who
has a deformed hand that he said was broken during torture. ''Whoever makes
these decisions should be someone with interests in defending those rights.''

Even if the security situation improved, Iraq's lack of both a democratic
tradition and free elections would still pose a challenge for the democracy
program to gain traction.

At a town hall meeting in Baghdad recently, Iraqis registered to take part in
the formation of an electoral commission that would prepare for and carry out
national elections no later than January 2005.

A statement quoted some of them as saying that they were relieved that their
choices for government were no longer being dictated to them, but that in many
ways the country was not ready. ''We must persist in this process,'' said Sheik
Dhia al-Shakarji, a member of the town hall panel. ''People will find fault with
any government, democratic or not. We need a culture of ethics in Iraq.''

But some Iraqis worry that the line between the country's brutal past, which the
occupation authorities want to eradicate, and its future, which they want to
have a role in steering, has been corrupted.

''They said there is no difference between Saddam and United States troops
because they used the same ways of torture,'' said a summary of 66 of the
democracy program's civic dialogue meetings after the Abu Ghraib prison
photographs had been published.

''The people said they couldn't deal now with allied forces, especially after
they saw the dark side of the soldiers. The facilitators told people that
changes would not happen in one day, but step by step. People said that they are
happy with the idea of democracy but they didn't see it in reality. They just
saw the chaos.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Troops protect a council office in Sadr City, one of Baghdad's
poorest and most volatile neighborhoods. Last month, the leader of the council
was killed. Here, an Iraqi examines an American soldier's sniper rifle. (Photo
by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); TERRORISM (74%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); DISABLED PERSONS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT
(72%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HAMAS (61%); TEACHER
COMPENSATION (57%) Terrorism; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (54%) Rti International

PERSON: Christine Hauser

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             771 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Elusive in 1994 Attack on Argentine Jews

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, May 28


Just weeks from the 10th anniversary of a deadly terrorist attack on a Jewish
community center here, a resolution of the case seems more difficult than ever.

The trial of those charged with providing the car used in the bombing is in
danger of collapsing, and groups representing Argentine Jews and relatives of
the 85 people who died in the attack are sparring withone another.

To this day, the attack on the headquarters of the community association, the
Argentine Jewish Mutual Association, known by its Spanish acronym AMIA, remains
the deadliest anti-Semitic incident since World War II. In addition to the dead,
nearly 300 people were wounded.

As a result of a long, botched investigation, the Argentine government has
blamed Iran for organizing the bombing. The government has had no success trying
to extradite the officials it accuses, so it has concentrated on what is known
as ''the local connection.''

Nearly a score of police officers and car thieves said to have supplied the
vehicle used to blow up the center went on trial in September 2001, with three
judges presiding but no jury. The trial is continuing, and some of those
involved in the case contend that it is now the longest in Argentine history. A
verdict is not possible before July 18, the anniversary of the bombing.

But the legal ground began shifting a few months ago when the magistrate leading
the investigation, Juan Jose Galeano, was ousted because he approved a $400,000
payment by state intelligence in the late 1990's to an important witness in the
case. Simultaneous with the transfer of funds, the witness made the statements
that incriminated officers of the Buenos Aires provincial police in the theft
and sale of the vehicle used to blow up the Jewish center.

''This situation of paying a witness has weakened the accusation on our part and
produced a rethinking of the case from another perspective,'' Abraham Kaul, the
president of AMIA, said Wednesday in an interview. ''The line the judges have
taken thus far is that this could be grounds to have the prosecution declared
null.''

Some Jewish groups here have always been skeptical of the version of events that
places police officers at the center of the case. They welcome any new and more
comprehensive investigation, saying that the government at the time, under
President Carlos Saul Menem, deliberately ignored many promising leads that
might have implicated the state intelligence apparatus or groups that supported
the president.

''It's not the same to investigate 10 years after the fact as a week later, but
there are still a lot of good clues,'' said Pablo Jacoby, a lawyer who
represents Memoria Activa, one of two main groups that speaks for survivors of
the attack and relatives of the victims. ''My problem has always been that
everything that connected the police was investigated and everything related to
state intelligence was not. That's not a hypothesis -- it's a prejudice.''

With the removal of Judge Galeano, who is facing a formal inquiry that could
lead to his impeachment, the investigative phase of the case has been
transferred to another judge, Rodolfo Canicoba Corral. But additional delays are
expected because he is snowed under with many other important cases and has
little support staff to investigate for him.

''Forget about Canicoba Corral,'' said a foreign official who has been following
the case. ''All of this is new to him, and he's got a bunch of other things on
his docket.''

Last month, the two principal prosecutors, who had worked on the case almost
since its inception, were also removed. They, too, were said to have known of
the irregular payment, originally described as the sale of book rights by the
witness, Carlos Telleldin. While Mr. Jacoby, the lawyer for Memoria Activa,
minimized the importance of the move, some other Jewish groups were so upset
that their lawyers stopped attending the trial.

The prosecutors' dismissal ''signifies a beheading of the core of the
accusation,'' said Jorge Kirszenbaum, acting president of a group, known by the
acronym DAIA, the Delegation of Argentine Israelite Associations, that is the
political arm of the organized Jewish community here. ''The proceedings now
under way point more to an investigation of the investigation than to an
investigation of the terrorist acts that were committed.''

The removal of the judge and prosecutors stemmed from President Nestor
Kirchner's decision soon after he took office a year ago to open the records of
the state intelligence agency and the federal police to judicial investigators.
He also ordered agents of the intelligence body to testify in open court, and it
was their testimony that accused the judge of involvement in the payment and the
prosecutors of knowledge of it.

Mr. Kirchner's efforts to open up the case led the American Jewish Committee to
honor him by inviting him to address its annual meeting in Washington early this
month. But in an action that infuriated other Jewish groups here, Mr.
Kirszenbaum and another DAIA leader, publicly criticized the idea of a tribute.

''We hold Nestor Kirchner in high regard, but believe that it is not time yet
for such recognition,'' Mr. Kirszenbaum said this week, still defending his
position. ''We don't even have a verdict in the trial or a complete
investigation with respect to who was responsible for the attack.''

But other Jewish groups note that Mr. Kirszenbaum and his group opposed the
president's decision to require intelligence agents to reveal ''state secrets''
in court and accuse his group of having been too cozy with the Menem government.
By saying in his Washington speech that ''we are ashamed it has been 10 years''
and pledging to ''find the historical truth,'' Mr. Kirchner, they argue, has
signaled that his attitude differs sharply from that of his predecessors.

''Kirchner has been the president who has shown the most commitment to
clarifying the attack and made the most progress,'' Sergio Widder, the South
American representative of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish human rights
organization, said in an interview here. ''That doesn't mean we should give him
a blank check, but we have to recognize what he has done.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rescue workers searched the debris of a Jewish center in Buenos
Aires that was bombed by terrorists in July 1994. The attack, which killed 85
people, remains the deadliest anti-Semitic incident since World War II. (Photo
by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (92%); EXTRADITION (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ANNIVERSARIES (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); WITNESSES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); WORLD WAR II (77%);
JUDGES (77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); VEHICLE THEFT (77%);
MISCONDUCT (75%); LAWYERS (74%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); ETHICS (70%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); INTERVIEWS (66%) Bombs and
Explosives; Jews; Anti-Semitism; Extradition; Ethics; Police Brutality and
Misconduct; Robberies and Thefts; Intelligence Services; Terrorism

PERSON: Larry Rohter

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (94%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: Argentina; Buenos Aires (Argentina); Iran; Argentina

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             777 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: Serbs Pledge War Crimes Arrests

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 102 words


The president of the Serb Republic, Dragan Cavic, under Western pressure over
poor cooperation with the United Nations war crimes court, vowed to step up
efforts to detain suspects and promised results within a month. The Serb
Republic has not apprehended a single person suspected of war crimes during the
1990's breakup of Yugoslavia, including the wartime leader Radovan Karadzic.
Bosnia is eager to shed the legacy of that conflict and integrate into Europe.
It hopes to join NATO's Partnership for Peace program for nonmembers next month,
but NATO officials have said that war crimes arrests must come first.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); POLITICS (86%); GENOCIDE
(85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%);
PARTNERSHIP FOR PEACE (57%) United Nations

PERSON: Dragan (Pres) Cavic; Radovan Karadzic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); EUROPE (94%);
MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             779 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1504 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

New Mission Orders in Iraq To Aid New Government
Senior American commanders in Baghdad say they are writing new orders to shift
the focus of the military's mission from offensive combat operations to
protecting a new Iraqi government and parts of the economy while building up
Iraq's own security forces. The shift may be viewed by some Iraqis as a further
step back from disarming Iraq's insurgents.   A1

Iraqi Interim Government
Adnan Pachachi, the former Iraqi foreign minister, emerged as the leading
candidate to become the new Iraqi president, as American officials signaled that
they would announce a completed interim government today. A senior Bush
administration official said Mr. Pachachi had become a likely choice for Iraqi
president but cautioned that it was still possible that the appointment could
fall through.   A8

At least five American soldiers died in Iraq over a 24-hour period that began
Sunday, two of them fighting insurgents in the holy city of Kufa during the
unraveling of a cease-fire agreement with a rebel Shiite cleric, military
officials said. A car bomb exploded near the fortified American headquarters in
Baghdad, killing at least four Iraqi civilians, military officials and witnesses
said.   A9

Questions Follow in Khobar
The way the hostage drama in Khobar ended Sunday, with three militants escaping
and 22 people dead, left more questions than answers in the heart of Saudi
Arabia's oil industry. Many Saudis and foreign workers wondered aloud whether
the gunmen and the police had struck a deal, speculating about how an escape
from a walled compound surrounded by the police was possible.   A6

14 Killed in Attack in Pakistan
At least 14 people were killed and 38 wounded when a powerful bomb exploded in a
Shiite mosque in Karachi, police officials said. The attack set off a wave of
violent protest, and angry demonstrators clashed with riot police officers
across the city. At least two people were killed in the rioting, local news
media reported.   A7

Liberian Ex-Ruler Can Be Tried
Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian president accused of crimes against
humanity in connection with a rebel insurrection in neighboring Sierra Leone,
can be prosecuted by an international war crimes tribunal, a United
Nations-backed court in Sierra Leone ruled.   A6

Bombing Trials Postponed
Confusion over a recent change in Turkey's Constitution forced the government to
postpone the high profile trials of 69 men charged in connection with four
suicide bombings last year in Istanbul that have been linked to Al Qaeda.   A7

Madrid Bombing Warrant
A high court judge has issued an international arrest warrant for Daoud Ouhnane,
an Algerian whose fingerprints were found on a plastic bag containing traces of
explosives and detonators of the type used in the March 11 train bombings in
Madrid.   A4

NATIONAL   A10-16

Medicare Drug Discounts Begin but Sign-Ups Lag
Elderly people can start using Medicare drug discount cards today in an
experiment that has gotten off to a slow start, but promises to have big
implications for politics and health policy. The program is the first major test
of the new Medicare law before the November elections.   A1

Honoring Fallen Soldiers
As men and women of Powell, Wyo., set wreaths at the base of the Crown Hill
Cemetery war monument, the parents of Second Lt. Therrel Shane Childers did not
move. Although their son was among the first to die in combat in the war in
Iraq, his death and those of his comrades are so recent that formal observances,
fraternal orders and support groups have had no time to coalesce.   A10

President Bush laid a wreath at Tomb of the Unknowns and then delivered a
Memorial Day address in which he acknowledged the ''great costs'' of the war in
Iraq and tied it to the broader effort to combat terrorism.   A12

Kerry on Republican Turf
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts acknowledged that a foray into Virginia, a
traditionally Republican state, was unusual for him as the presumed Democratic
presidential nominee, but said he would be visiting ''lots of states'' as his
campaign tries to expand the electoral battleground.   A15

Mr. Kerry's campaign has been a font of slogans and catch phrases, but few have
caught on. Lately he has been wrapping up his speeches with lines borrowed from
Langston Hughes: ''Let America be America again.''   A15

Studying Cancer Survivors
There are nearly 10 million cancer survivors in this country, up from 3 million
in 1971 and 6 million in 1986. As the number increases federal officials for the
first time are hoping to figure out exactly who these cancer survivors are, how
they should be treated, what their psychological states are, and what are their
medical and social needs.   A1

Judge's Trials in Las Vegas
Gerald W. Hardcastle is a community pillar in Las Vegas, a family court judge
who is the final arbiter for children who are neglected or abused. But he says
the city has placed untenable pressures on the lives of families, including his
own.   A1

Nuclear Waste Poses Dilemma
A dispute over whether millions of gallons of radioactive waste can be safely
left in aging steel tanks has become an issue in the military authorization bill
for the fiscal year that begins on Oct. 1.   A13

EDUCATION

Yale Alumni Raise $110 Million
Yale University will celebrate the largest class gift in its history this week
when it credits the Class of '54 with a contribution of more than $110 million.
A10

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Church Mourns 3 Deaths In Van Accident in Canada
Three members of the Gospel Assembly Church in the Bronx were killed when their
van crashed, overturned, and caught fire as it approached a bridge near Niagara
Falls on the Canadian side of the border, the authorities said.   B1

Religion and Tap Water
Some rabbis now say that New York City tap water, for a century a gold standard
for cleanliness, is not kosher. These rabbis have recently discovered that there
are tiny bugs, called copepods, in the unfiltered water that streams into the
city from upstate. These bugs are harmless. But they are crustaceans. And
crustaceans are not allowed.   B1

Wyoming's Antiterror Money
Wyoming, whose population is about half a million, the smallest in the country,
will receive more than $38 a person in antiterrorist financing, more than any
other state and seven times the per-person amount that will flow to New York.
B1

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Locals Think Global in Belize
In Belize there is increased effort to protect coastal spawning sites for the
cubera snapper. But what makes this protection effort unique is it did not start
in New York or Geneva, but in small villages like Placencia and Monkey River
Village by local fishermen who were seeing dwindling catches of some fish and
realized that tourism, particularly scuba diving and fly-fishing, could be a new
source of income.   F1

Health & Fitness   F6

FASHION   B7

ARTS   E1-12

New Entries for Music Award
The governing board of the Pulitzer Prizes in journalism and the arts will
announce a broadening of the category for the award in music that would open the
door to musical theater scores, film scores and works containing large elements
of improvisation.   E1

Stanley Kubrick Retrospective
Is it any surprise that Stanley Kubrick, the famously obsessive filmmaker who
created ''Dr. Strangelove'' and ''2001: A Space Odyssey,'' was also a
world-class pack rat? Three years after he died in 1999, the Deutsches
Filmmuseum in Frankfurt got permission from Kubrick's widow, Christiane, to sort
through his effects with a view to putting on the first major retrospective of
his work.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Gas Prices a Growing Worry
As fuel prices shot up to record highs over the last six months, many Americans
seemed to be coping with little difficulty, helped by a resurgent economy and
low interest rates. But the big numbers at the gasoline pump may finally be
taking a toll on consumers and businesses.   A1

While the arrival of $2-a-gallon gasoline has rattled many Americans, Europeans,
for a variety of reasons, have reacted with relative equanimity to the jump in
oil prices.   C1

Qwest and MCI Reach Deal
Qwest Communications and MCI Inc. have reached an agreement over network leasing
rates, officials and industry executives said.   C1

Fiat Said to Choose Successor
Fiat, the ailing giant of the Italian auto industry, is likely to name Sergio
Marchionne as chief executive after a series of dramatic weekend maneuvers
provoked by the death of its chairman, Umberto Agnelli, according to an
executive close to the company.   C1

Business Digest   C1

SPORTSTUESDAY   D1-8

Lakers Advance to N.B.A. Finals
The Los Angeles Lakers defeated the Minnesota Timberwolves, 96-90, in game 6 of
the Western Conference finals to advance to their fourth National Basketball
Association final in five years.   D1

OBITUARIES   A17

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Lands in need of care; cleansing the Olympic team; a small outbreak
of democracy.

Columns: Paul Krugman, David Brooks.

Crossword   E2
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   C7


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
RIOTS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(79%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); MEDICARE (78%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); POLICE FORCES (75%); WAR
CRIMES (73%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
AL-QAEDA (71%); EVIDENCE (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); DISARMAMENT
(71%); TESTIMONY (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); ARRESTS (71%); EYEWITNESSES
(71%); ARREST WARRANTS (69%); HOSTAGE TAKING (67%); FINGERPRINTING (66%);
LITIGATION (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); JUDGES (60%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); MADRID, SPAIN (92%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);
KARACHI,PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); SPAIN (92%);
TURKEY (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); LIBERIA (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             780 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suffering and Silence

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Bush Points the Way,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, May 29):

It is discouraging to see the United Nations as well as world leaders so silent
about the genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan.

The Arab League remains impotent to address the issue, just as it is in
addressing the problems that Palestinians and Iraqis face.

Moreover, the fact that other government leaders have kept silent about the
region shows how desensitized the world has become to African conflicts, and
individual deaths and suffering just become figures on the news page.

Bloodshed will end only when everyone sees one another as an equal human.

If people keep looking at security in terms of their national interests, then
they will be much more inclined to ignore another group's problems just because
it is in some remote jungle or desert.

YAZEN JOUDEH
New Orleans, May 29, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (88%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (58%) United Nations

PERSON: Yazen Joudeh; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             787 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ladies' Nights, With Cheaper Drinks for Women, Called Illegal

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 422 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, June 2


Cheaper drinks for women at New Jersey bars could soon be a thing of the past.
Or maybe not, if Gov. James E. McGreevey has his way.

The director of the State Division on Civil Rights ruled on Tuesday that Ladies'
Night at a Cherry Hill bar and restaurant was unlawful. ''The decision makes it
pretty clear that this bodes trouble for bars that have ladies' night and
similar programs in New Jersey,'' said J. Frank Vespa-Papaleo, the agency's
director.

Mr. McGreevey, however, called the ruling ''bureaucratic nonsense.''

''It is an overreaction that reflects a complete lack of common sense and good
judgment,'' he said.

The governor does not have the authority to directly rescind the ruling. But Mr.
McGreevey met with Attorney General Peter C. Harvey on Wednesday and told him
the civil rights division had better things to do with its time, according to
Micah Rasmussen, a spokesman for the governor.

A spokesman for Mr. Harvey did not immediately return calls seeking comment
Wednesday.

Though it dealt specifically with the weekly event at the Coastline bar and
restaurant in Cherry Hill, the ruling carries the force of a court decision and
applies statewide. Mr. Vespa-Papaleo said the division would write formal rules
covering the issue after a public hearing yet to be scheduled.

The ruling covers an area of the law where courts in other states have issued
divergent opinions.

Judges in Pennsylvania and Iowa have said that similar events are illegal. But
courts in Illinois and Washington State have said that ladies' nights are
permissible because they do not discriminate against men, but rather encourage
women to attend.

The complaint that led to Tuesday's ruling was filed six years ago by David R.
Gillespie, a customer who claimed it was unfair for women to get into the
Coastline free while men paid $5 and for women to get discounted drinks while
men paid full price.

Mr. Vespa-Papaleo rejected the Coastline's argument that ladies' night was a
legitimate commercial promotion. The commercial intent does not override the
''important social policy objective of eradicating discrimination,'' he ruled.

Deborah Jacobs, executive director of the New Jersey chapter of the American
Civil Liberties Union, conceded that the issue might strike some as silly. But
''where there are opportunities to create equality, we should do so,'' she said.

The restaurant's lawyer, Colleen Ready, did not immediately respond to a
telephone message left Wednesday. .

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DRINKING PLACES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); WOMEN (90%); GOVERNORS
(90%); RESTAURANTS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(77%); LITIGATION (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); EXECUTIVES (72%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (70%); LEGISLATION
(69%) Bars; Women; Prices (Fares, Fees and Rates); Discrimination; Alcoholic
Beverages; Law and Legislation

PERSON: J Frank Vespa-Papaleo; James E (Gov) Mcgreevey; Peter C (Atty Gen)
Harvey

CITY: CHERRY HILL, NJ, USA (92%); TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (95%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%);
PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: New Jersey; Cherry Hill (NJ)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             791 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

RONALD REAGAN DIES AT 93; FOSTERED COLD-WAR MIGHT AND CURBS ON GOVERNMENT

BYLINE: By MARILYN BERGER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 10820 words


Ronald Wilson Reagan, a former film star who became America's 40th president,
the oldest to enter the White House but imbued with a youthful optimism rooted
in the traditional virtues of a bygone era, died yesterday at his home in Los
Angeles. He was 93.

To a nation hungry for a hero, a nation battered by Vietnam, damaged by
Watergate and humiliated by the taking of hostages in Iran, Ronald Reagan held
out the promise of a return to greatness, the promise that America would ''stand
tall'' again.

Mr. Reagan lived longer than any United States president, spending his final
years in seclusion as he coped with the mental debilitation of Alzheimer's
disease.

In 1994, he touched the hearts of Americans when, in a handwritten letter, he
let it be known he was suffering from the illness. ''I now begin the journey
that will lead me into the sunset of my life,'' Mr. Reagan wrote. ''I know that
for America there will always be a bright dawn ahead.''

He died with his wife, Nancy, and his three children by his side.

President Bush, who was in Paris for meetings with allies on the eve of the 60th
anniversary of D-Day, said, ''A great American life has come to an end.'' [Page
18.]

Mr. Bush said that under Mr. Reagan, ''America laid to rest an era of division
and self-doubt, and because of his leadership the world laid to rest an era of
fear and tyranny.''

When he first entered the White House, Mr. Reagan was a vigorous 69-year-old
Republican who promised a new ''morning in America.''

He managed to project the optimism of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the faith in
small-town America of Dwight D. Eisenhower and the vigor of John F. Kennedy. In
his first term he restored much of America's faith in itself and in the
presidency, and he rode into his second term on the crest of a wave of
popularity.

But late in 1986, halfway through his second term, Mr. Reagan and his
administration were plunged into turmoil by an effort to deal too rashly with
the same kind of hostage crisis that he had accused President Jimmy Carter of
handling too gingerly in Iran.

Contrary to official policy, Mr. Reagan's subordinates sold arms to Iran as
ransom for hostages in Lebanon and diverted profits from the sales to the rebels
fighting the Marxist Sandinistas then governing Nicaragua. A joint Congressional
investigating committee reported that the affair had been ''characterized by
pervasive dishonesty and secrecy'' and that Mr. Reagan bore ultimate
responsibility for the wrongdoing of a ''cabal of zealots.''

The deception and disdain for the law invited comparisons to Watergate,
undermined Mr. Reagan's credibility and severely weakened his powers of
persuasion with Congress. Scrutiny of his appointees increased; Supreme Court
nominees were rejected or withdrawn; and more of his aides were accused of
ethics violations than in any other administration up until that point.

But until the Iran-contra affair, Mr. Reagan enjoyed tremendous popularity. He
used that popularity and a consummate political skill to push many of his major
programs through Congress. And despite the affair, he crowned his two terms with
a nuclear arms agreement with the Soviet Union that reduced the nuclear arsenals
of both countries for the first time, setting the stage for a new relationship
with the Soviets under the leadership of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

It was Mr. Reagan's good fortune that during his time in office the Soviet Union
was undergoing profound change, eventually to collapse, setting off a spirited
debate over Mr. Reagan's role in ending the cold war. His supporters argued that
his tough policies were the coup de grace and his detractors attributed the end
to the accumulated influence of 45 years of the American policy of containment.
But wherever the credit was due, the thaw came on his watch.

Mr. Reagan stood in 1987 at the Berlin Wall, the material symbol of the divide
between East and West, and threw down a challenge to Mr. Gorbachev that will
long be remembered. ''Tear down this wall,'' he said. ''Ttear down this wall.''

Michael R. Beschloss, the presidential historian, said he believed that the cold
war had ended more quickly under Mr. Reagan than it would have had his opponent,
Mr. Carter, been re-elected in 1980.

''With Reagan,'' Mr. Beschloss said, ''the Soviets could no longer con
themselves into thinking they would prevail in the cold war because the American
people had lost their will and strength and lost their taste for confronting
Soviet aggression. They were sufficiently convinced that Reagan meant
business.''

The Soviet economy, he said, was beginning to flag and Mr. Gorbachev was
selected and ''charged with improving the economy and making the best deal he
could with the West.''

Mr. Reagan, meanwhile, was able to climb the rocky road back from the
Iran-contra scandal so successfully that he handed over the office to another
Republican, George Bush, who had been his loyal vice president for eight years.

Mr. Reagan's public life came to an end in 1994, with the announcement of his
Alzheimer's. For some time afterward, he continued to go to his office in Los
Angeles and, occasionally, to play golf. But as the disease took its toll, he
receded into the background while his official biographer, Edmund Morris,
completed the story of his life.

Nancy Reagan, meanwhile, spurred by her husband's suffering, became an
increasingly strong advocate for embryonic stem-cell research, putting her at
odds with her fellow Republicans in the White House. Many scientists believe
that such research could lead to treatments for Alzheimer's and other diseases.
But President Bush has limited federal spending on it, because the research
involves the destruction of human embryos.

Last month, in making a plea for more research, Mrs. Reagan said: ''Ronnie's
long journey has finally taken him to a distant place where I can no longer
reach him. Because of this, I'm determined to do whatever I can to save other
families from this pain.''

'America Is Back'

 If the rise and fall and rise again of Ronald Reagan reads like the script of a
made-for-television movie, the ''Great Communicator'' was indeed a
made-for-television president. Seventy-seven years old at the end of his
presidency, he never lost his boyish charm or his ability to look Americans in
the eye and make many feel good about themselves. ''America is back,'' he told
them, and his confidence made them confident.

Critics and supporters alike found it paradoxical that Mr. Reagan, who
campaigned against government for most of his political life, was the man who
restored popular faith in the presidency and the American government. The 40th
president was a combination of ideologue and pragmatist who could compromise and
still appear to be a man of unbending principle.

His resilience and good humor after he was struck by an assailant's bullet in
1981 reinforced the public's affection for him. Gliding gracefully across the
national stage with his boy-next-door good looks and his lopsided grin, he
managed to escape blame for political disasters for which any other president
would have been excoriated. If the federal deficit almost tripled in his
presidency, if 241 marines he sent to Beirut were killed in a terrorist bombing,
if he seemed to equate Nazi storm troopers with the victims of the Holocaust, he
was always able to rekindle public support. He became known early on as the
Teflon president.

His Hollywood background, long considered a liability, became his greatest asset
in the political arena, and he was a master at using it to captivate the
American people.

His extraordinary ability to communicate served him well until the Iran-contra
affair. That is when his reluctance to deal with governmental processes, his
habit of delegating authority and his failure to concern himself with facts,
figures and details first became known to people outside his official family.
Then a different image emerged: that of a passive president who reigned but did
not rule.

From the first moment of a political career that spanned more than two decades,
Mr. Reagan was a crusader, trying to correct what he saw as the governmental
excesses that began with the New Deal. He preached the gospel of self-reliance.
''Government is not the solution,'' he said over and over. ''Government is the
problem.''

Against Mr. Carter's politics of sacrifice and retrenchment, Mr. Reagan offered
an America of inexhaustible resources and boundless opportunity. And indeed,
under his presidency came an end to the sharp inflation of the Carter years,
along with a sustained economic boom that brought prosperity to regions hit hard
by recession. But huge deficits, brought on partly by tax cuts and increases in
military spending, made a mockery of his campaign pledge to balance the budget
by the end of his first term.

Mr. Reagan did not change course. The America of his deepest convictions was a
nation favored by God that would triumph over its adversaries abroad and its
troubles at home if only it had the will to be strong and the sense to let free
enterprise solve its problems.

A 'Huck Finn Idyll'

 Those beliefs were a heritage of his prairie small-town beginnings. He was born
at home in an apartment above a store in Tampico, a village in northwestern
Illinois, on Feb. 6, 1911. His father, John Edward Reagan, who was working as a
clerk in the H. C. Pitney General Store, called his newborn son ''a little bit
of a fat Dutchman,'' and the nickname Dutch stayed with him.

Ronald Reagan was later to describe his father as a hearty Irish Roman Catholic
who was restless, ambitious and an alcoholic. His mother, Nelle Wilson Reagan,
was a gentle Scotch-Irish Protestant who passed on to her children her religious
faith and her interest in amateur theater.

The family was poor, but Mr. Reagan wrote in his first autobiography, ''Where's
the Rest of Me?'' (Duell, Sloan, Pearce, 1965), that he had never been troubled
by any sense of need. He liked to remember his boyhood as ''a rare Huck Finn
idyll,'' and he developed a sunny nature and an irrepressible optimism.

He and his older brother, Neil, moved with their parents from one small Illinois
town to the next. After living briefly in Chicago, they eventually settled in
Dixon, where his father managed a shoe store for H. C. Pitney and Ronald
finished grammar school and high school.

Despite extreme nearsightedness (later corrected with contact lenses), he played
football at Northside High School. In his junior year he also won his first role
in a play, ''You and I,'' by Philip Barry. He was not an especially attentive
student but managed to get fairly good grades with the help of a nearly
photographic memory.

His name first appeared on the front page of a newspaper on Aug. 3, 1928, when
he was cited for his 25th rescue as a lifeguard at Lowell Park in Dixon. In
seven summers on the job he worked seven days a week, and the $15 a week, later
raised to $20, helped pay for his college tuition.

He had an unsophisticated, unpretentious manner that stamped him as a product of
his youth in the heartland. Throughout his long public career in the movies, on
television and in politics, he never lost the shy tilt of the head and the
puckish grin so favored by Hollywood.

He left Dixon to attend Eureka College, a small Christian school near Peoria. By
his own account, he was concerned mainly with maintaining his eligibility for
football and with acting in school productions.

With the nation mired in the Depression, the 21-year-old graduate had few
prospects. It was 1932, and with little notion of what he wanted to do, he
returned to Dixon. He grew to admire President Roosevelt, who used his masterly
command of radio to steady a nation in despair, and a former teacher urged Mr.
Reagan to try his hand at radio, where he might capitalize on his interest in
sports and acting. After some big stations turned him down he landed a job at
WOC in Davenport, Iowa, broadcasting University of Iowa football games.

When the football season ended, Mr. Reagan was out of work again. But two months
later, WOC hired him as a staff announcer at $100 a month. He learned how to
read a script, rehearsing commercials until they sounded spontaneous. It was a
talent he would use to great effect later in life.

Soon he was transferred to WOC's sister station, WHO in Des Moines, the major
Midwestern outlet for the National Broadcasting Company. He conducted interviews
and covered football, swimming and track, but he became best known for his
play-by-play of major league baseball games.

His commentary became an exercise of imagination; he never saw any of the games
he described so vividly. Instead, he recreated them from telegraphic reports
from Chicago. In his 1965 autobiography, Mr. Reagan described what happened the
day the wire went dead: ''I had a ball on the way to the plate and there was no
way to call it back. At the same time, I was convinced that a ball game tied up
in the ninth inning was no time to tell my audience we had lost contact with the
game.'' He proceeded to give meticulous descriptions of what may be the longest
series of foul balls in baseball history, even describing in detail the
redheaded boy who scrambled for a souvenir ball. It was a story he loved to
tell.

Birth of the Gipper

 In 1937, on a spring training trip with the Chicago Cubs, Mr. Reagan took an
airplane to Catalina Island, off the coast of Southern California. The flight
was so turbulent that he refused to fly again for almost 30 years. But he took
advantage of the trip to California to look up a friend from WHO, who by then
had been in several movies. She arranged a meeting with an agent, the agent
arranged a screen test, and by the time Mr. Reagan returned to Des Moines, a
telegram was waiting. Warner Brothers was offering a seven-year contract
beginning at $200 a week.

His first role was made to order for him. He played a radio news reporter in
''Love Is on the Air,'' the first of many ''good guy'' parts. From the B
pictures that Hollywood churned out in those years he moved up to bit parts in A
movies. In three years he landed the role he coveted above all, as George Gipp,
Notre Dame's legendary Gipper, in ''Knute Rockne -- All American.'' The film,
with its heroic deathbed scene, provided Mr. Reagan with a line he came to use
to inspire political supporters: ''Win one for the Gipper.''

He had parts in major movies with Bette Davis, Humphrey Bogart, Errol Flynn,
Wallace Beery, Lionel Barrymore and a chimp named Bonzo. Then, in 1941, he
starred in ''King's Row,'' which Mr. Reagan always called his finest picture.

He played the role of a small-town playboy whose legs are amputated by a
sadistic doctor. Awaking from surgery, he cries out in anguish, ''Where's the
rest of me?'' That line became the title of the campaign autobiography he wrote
with Richard G. Hubler before his race for governor of California.

Flights of Imagination

 He made 50 movies, a number of them about World War II. ''The Hasty Heart,'' in
1950, took him overseas for the first and only time until he went into politics.
In the war, poor eyesight had kept him from the front, and he spent his years in
the Army making training films. But in his autobiography he wrote of wanting
nothing more after the war than a good rest and time with his wife, the actress
Jane Wyman; in fact, they had both been in Hollywood throughout the war.

His flights of imagination remained equally vivid when he went to the White
House. In 1983 he told Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel that as part of
his war duties he had been assigned to film the Nazi death camps. One of his
favorite stories, one that he told over and over again to different audiences,
concerned a pilot in World War II who told his crew to bail out of their
crippled B-17 bomber. When the tail gunner said he could not move because he was
badly wounded, the pilot replied, ''Never mind son, we'll ride it down
together.'' When he told the story to a meeting of the Congressional Medal of
Honor Society he added that the pilot was awarded the Medal of Honor
posthumously. In fact, no medal was ever awarded for such an incident and the
story came, almost word for word, from the script of a movie starring Dana
Andrews called ''Wing and a Prayer.''

''For Ronald Reagan, the world of legend and myth is a real world,'' said
Patrick J. Buchanan, a longtime political ally who was Mr. Reagan's director of
White House communications. ''He visits it regularly, and he's a happy man
there.''

Stormy Times for a Union Leader

 Mr. Reagan had married Miss Wyman in 1940. They had a daughter, Maureen, and
adopted a son, Michael. Miss Wyman divorced him in 1948, after Mr. Reagan had
become active in the Screen Actors Guild. Miss Wyman told the court that
although she did not share his interest in the guild, Mr. Reagan insisted that
she attend meetings. Finally, she said, ''there was nothing in common between
us, nothing to sustain our marriage.''

He was stunned by the divorce and often said his life did not become whole again
until 1952, when he married Nancy Davis. An actress who was the daughter of a
prominent Chicago surgeon, she became his political partner and adviser as well
as his wife. They had two children, Patricia and Ronald.

Mr. Reagan never became a major star, but he continued to make movies and threw
himself into the work of the guild. He was elected its president and re-elected
five times, through some of the stormiest years in the history of the film
industry. Mr. Reagan led his union's intercession in a jurisdictional struggle
between two movie unions, one dominated by gangsters, the other accused of being
led by Communists.

When he was called before the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1947 to
testify about Communist influence in the movie industry, Mr. Reagan refused to
name names before the committee. But the historian Garry Wills said the Federal
Bureau of Investigation file on Mr. Reagan that was later released disclosed
that he had named people in secret.

In those years Mr. Reagan was a Democrat and, as he later put it in his
autobiography, ''a near-hopeless hemophiliac liberal.'' In 1950 he actively
supported Helen Gahagan Douglas, the liberal Democrat who was defeated by
Richard M. Nixon in a California senatorial campaign that became a portent of an
era of Red-baiting.

But behind the scenes, as president of the guild, he worked closely with the
Motion Picture Industry Council to weed out Communist influence in Hollywood.

In 1952 the Music Corporation of America offered Mr. Reagan the role of host on
one of its first major productions, General Electric Theater. It was on that
broadcast that he became familiar to the first television generation, a
familiarity that was to serve him well later.

For G.E., Country, and Goldwater

 During his years on General Electric Theater, Mr. Reagan became the company
spokesman, visiting G.E. plants around the country to give speeches and bolster
employee morale. Hundreds of times a year he delivered a speech warning of a
growing tide of government control and wasteful government programs. He was
apparently so convincing that he convinced himself.

In 1962 he changed his party registration to Republican from Democratic, and two
years later, with a polished version of the General Electric speech, Mr. Reagan
burst onto the national political scene in a fund-raising appearance for Barry
Goldwater, the Republican presidential candidate. Here is how Lou Cannon
described the event in his biography ''Reagan'' (Putnam, 1982):

''On Oct. 27, 1964, a washed-up 53-year-old movie actor named Ronald Reagan made
a speech on national television on behalf of a Republican presidential candidate
who had no chance to be elected. . . . Most of Reagan's address was standard,
antigovernment boilerplate larded with emotional denunciations of Communism and
a celebration of individual freedom. His statistics were sweeping and in some
cases dubious. His best lines were cribbed from Franklin Roosevelt, and he
quoted from nearly everybody else as well.''

Mr. Cannon said the oratorical effort turned out to be the biggest moment in the
Goldwater campaign, raising a million dollars.

Within a few months a group of wealthy Californians -- Holmes Tuttle, A. C.
Rubel and Henry Salvatori -- formed a committee, Friends of Ronald Reagan, to
initiate his 1966 candidacy for governor.

After Mr. Reagan defeated the incumbent, Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, by almost a
million votes, his friends underwrote the most expensive inaugural celebration
in California history. When Mrs. Reagan did not like the Victorian mansion
provided for the governor, the friends bought the Reagans a house in Sacramento,
just as they would buy the couple a house in the Bel-Air section of Los Angeles
after they left the White House. The same California millionaires bought
designer dresses for Nancy Reagan when she was first lady, until the practice
was criticized as a breach of ethics.

Moving Beyond Sacramento

 In Sacramento, Mr. Reagan found a Legislature controlled by Democrats who were
unwilling to adopt his proposals to freeze hiring and cut the number of state
employees. Time after time, the ideologue gave way to the pragmatist.

Mr. Reagan signed a succession of tax increases to erase the state's deficit.
Mr. Reagan, who was later to oppose legalized abortion, signed a bill that
essentially permitted abortion on demand. In his two terms, the budget more than
doubled and the number of state employees grew by 34,000.

Mr. Reagan, who had been re-elected in 1970, decided not to seek a third term.
In early 1975, nearing his 64th birthday, he left Sacramento to write a
syndicated column, broadcast a daily radio commentary and prepare to run for the
presidency.

In 1968 he briefly ran in the presidential primaries as the Republican to the
right of Mr. Nixon. Eight years later he nearly wrested the nomination from the
incumbent president, Gerald R. Ford.

In the early months of the 1980 campaign, Mr. Reagan made television appearances
and sought to stay above the battle, acting as if the nomination was his. But
George Bush won the Iowa caucuses in January. Abruptly Mr. Reagan changed his
tactics, campaigning long and hard in New Hampshire, at one point working 21
consecutive days. By demonstrating vigor, Mr. Reagan defused concerns about his
age (he turned 69 during the primary campaign) and won New Hampshire, drawing
more than half the votes.

On July 16, 1980, in Detroit, the Republican National Convention jubilantly
awarded Mr. Reagan the nomination for president. His choice of Mr. Bush as his
running mate was a blow to his conservative followers, but it reassured
moderates who had viewed Mr. Reagan as a dangerous ideologue.

In his acceptance speech, Mr. Reagan called on Americans to ''recapture our
destiny,'' attacking what he called the Democratic legacy: ''a disintegrating
economy, a weakened defense and an energy policy based on the sharing of
scarcity.''

The 1980 Campaign

 Most opinion polls showed a close race to the end. The nation was in the grip
of crises foreign and domestic. For all its military strength, it was powerless
to liberate 52 Americans held hostage by Iran since November 1979. At home,
consumer prices had risen 12.4 percent in one year, and in October 1980 a
million and a half more people were out of work than in January.

Mr. Reagan criticized the Carter administration for its policies abroad -- the
Panama Canal treaties, the second strategic arms limitation agreement, the
response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan -- and warned that a continuing
Communist threat required a stronger military.

He also said Mr. Carter had created an economic disaster that threatened the
ethical and financial foundations of American family life.

Mr. Reagan promised that if elected he would cut federal tax rates 30 percent
over three years, reduce government spending and hiring, eliminate gift and
estate taxes and balance the budget by 1984. He said the government should turn
welfare and other social programs back to the states. He urged a constitutional
amendment to prohibit abortion and opposed government financing of abortions for
poor women. He called for a return of God to the classroom and prayer in the
schools. He spoke against limitations on buying and owning firearms.

A week before the election Mr. Reagan and Mr. Carter faced each other in a
90-minute televised debate in Cleveland. Mr. Reagan asked a question that later
became a campaign refrain, not only for him but for a host of future candidates:
''Are you better off than you were four years ago?''

And when Mr. Carter went on the attack, Mr. Reagan replied in a faintly
exasperated tone with another oft-quoted line: ''There you go again.''

Two days before the election, Iran announced tough terms for the release of the
American hostages, and national attention was once again focused on the year-old
crisis that had frustrated Mr. Carter. On Nov. 4, Mr. Reagan's victory was so
overwhelming that Mr. Carter made the earliest concession statement of any major
Presidential candidate since 1904.

A White House Change of Style

 Washington had not seen a president like Ronald Reagan for a long time. He
showed no lust for power. He seemed to have no need to prove that he could work
harder, or longer, on less sleep than anybody. Where his predecessor was
criticized for involving himself in every detail, Mr. Reagan was a 9-to-5
president, a chairman of the board.

He delegated authority to his staff. Associates said he left details to
subordinates and tended to rely on 3-by-5 index cards that they gave him for
information he needed at meetings. He paced himself, got a good night's sleep
and took afternoon naps when he could.

Mr. Reagan kept light office hours and went to the presidential retreat at Camp
David, Md., or his ranch in Santa Barbara, Calif., as often as he could. All
told, he spent nearly a year of his presidency in California, said Mr. Cannon,
who kept an eye on his schedule.

With the arrival of the Reagans, the capital became suffused with a new elegance
and glamour absent in the Carter years. Washington was soon dubbed Hollywood on
the Potomac as Mr. Reagan's wealthy friends converged on Washington. Some helped
Mrs. Reagan raise $822,641 to renovate the White House family quarters.

In forming his administration, Mr. Reagan went against accepted political wisdom
when he selected a Republican moderate, James A. Baker III, as his chief of
staff. Mr. Baker had been the campaign manager for Mr. Bush in the Republican
primaries and had been on the Reagan team for only six months.

But others had been with Mr. Reagan since the early days in California. Edwin
Meese III, Mr. Reagan's campaign chief of staff, was given cabinet rank as
counselor to the president; Michael K. Deaver was named assistant to the
president and deputy chief of the White House staff. A longtime family friend
and a favorite of Mrs. Reagan, Mr. Deaver held a position that made him the
final arbiter of whom the president saw and what papers reached the Oval Office.

Mr. Reagan's cabinet appointments, however, were a reflection of the Republican
establishment. Among his choices were Alexander M. Haig Jr., a retired Army
general, for secretary of state; Caspar W. Weinberger, secretary of defense;
Malcolm Baldrige, secretary of commerce; Raymond J. Donovan, secretary of labor,
and Richard S. Schweiker, secretary of health and human services.

Mr. Reagan sought to perpetuate his philosophy through his appointments to the
federal judiciary. By the time he left office he had appointed nearly half the
sitting judges, judges who will be issuing decisions well into the 21st century.

He appointed three justices to the Supreme Court. He had no difficulty with his
appointments of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor as the first woman on the High Court
in 1981 and Justice Antonin Scalia in 1986, though his elevation of William H.
Rehnquist to chief justice that year provoked some opposition in Congress.

But a year later, after the Republicans lost control of the Senate, he lost his
first fight over a Supreme Court appointment when he nominated Judge Robert H.
Bork. His next appointment, Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, withdrew his name after
it was disclosed that he had smoked marijuana when he was a law professor. Mr.
Reagan succeeded in his third attempt; Judge Anthony M. Kennedy was confirmed in
February 1988.

Mounting Ethics Troubles

 Before the end of Mr. Reagan's first term, more than a dozen officials in his
administration faced charges of improper financial dealings, some minor, some
major. There was cause to investigate some of Mr. Reagan's closest friends and
advisers, including Lyn Nofziger, Mr. Deaver and Mr. Meese.

When top Justice Department officials resigned in March 1988, criticizing Mr.
Meese's ethics and his handling of the Iran-contra investigation, there were
widespread calls for the attorney general's resignation. The Senate Democratic
leader, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, called Mr. Meese ''the crown jewel of
the sleaze factor in Reagan administration history.'' Mr. Meese resigned in
August 1988.

Mr. Deaver remained an adviser even after he left the White House in 1985. He
was convicted in 1987 of lying under oath to a federal grand jury and to a
Congressional subcommittee about using his influence with the president to
enhance his lobbying activities after leaving the White House. In September
1988, Mr. Deaver was given a suspended three-year prison sentence, placed on
probation and fined $100,000.

'I Forgot to Duck'

 On the afternoon of March 30, 1981, the president, in office only two months,
was leaving a Washington hotel where he had addressed a union convention. As Mr.
Reagan turned to hear a reporter's question, John W. Hinckley Jr., a 25-year-old
college dropout with an arrest record for carrying handguns, emerged from a
crowd of onlookers and shot the him and three other people with a .22-caliber
pistol. James S. Brady, the president's press secretary, was left with permanent
brain damage; a bullet penetrated Mr. Reagan's left lung.

''Honey, I forgot to duck,'' he was reported to have told Mrs. Reagan when she
arrived at the hospital. He was about to be taken into surgery to arrest a
life-threatening loss of blood; he was in severe pain, but his sense of humor
was reported to be intact.

A jury found Mr. Hinckley not guilty by reason of insanity, and he was sent to a
Washington hospital for treatment.

Mr. Reagan recovered his vitality with remarkable speed. Less than a month after
the shooting, he addressed a joint meeting of Congress to urge passage of his
economic program.

He made an equally quick recovery from surgery four years later. On July 12,
1985, he entered Bethesda Naval Medical Center for what was expected to be a
routine removal of a noncancerous polyp in his colon. But doctors found a
previously unsuspected growth in the upper tract of his large intestine. The
next day, in nearly three hours of surgery, doctors removed a malignant polyp
but found no evidence that the cancer had spread. Looking fit, he returned to
the White House a week later.

The president bounced back from three other operations -- two in 1985 and one in
1987 -- to remove cancerous skin lesions from his nose. His recovery from
prostate surgery in 1987 was not as speedy. During his recuperation, which
coincided with the unfolding of the Iran-contra affair, Mr. Reagan made few
public appearances.

Reaganomics I: Big Changes

 Two weeks after he took office, on Feb. 5, 1981, Mr. Reagan delivered a speech
from the Oval Office. ''I regret to say that we're in the worst economic mess
since the Great Depression,'' he declared. With inflation raging, growth
flagging and interest rates soaring, he said, ''it's time to try something
different, and that's what we're going to do.''

What he proposed came to be called the Reagan Revolution. Almost overnight it
transformed the national debate over domestic policy. From the beginning of the
New Deal, the question had been what federal programs to expand. Under Mr.
Reagan the question became what programs to cut.

''Feeding more dollars to government is like feeding a stray pup,'' he told the
National Association of Manufacturers. ''It just follows you home and sits on
your doorstep asking for more.''

Mr. Beschloss, the historian, said: ''Because Mr. Reagan was a wonderful
communicator, he was able to make the case for less government and for moving
power away from Washington. The idea took stronger hold than it would have
without him. He became the embodiment of the conservative movement and hurried
it along.''

Reaganomics, as his economic program became known, was based on the theory that
a cut in taxes would stimulate economic growth, generating higher revenues and
making the deficit disappear. In the 1980 Republican primaries Mr. Bush called
this supply-side plan ''voodoo economics.'' And Mr. Reagan's own director of the
budget, David A. Stockman, suggested that the president was simply proposing a
repackaging of economics intended to favor the rich, whose gains would
ultimately trickle down through the rest of the economy.

Despite widespread criticism of the idea, Mr. Reagan was able to sell the
program to Congress, both a tax cut and a $28 billion increase in the military
budget.

Reaganomics II: Deficits

 The administration had to fight harder to cut federal spending programs created
to help the needy, but it had some notable successes. CETA, the Comprehensive
Employment and Training Act, under which more than 300,000 of the poor were
employed in 1980 and 1981, was eliminated. Eligibility standards were tightened
for food stamps and Aid to Families with Dependent Children. Medicaid rolls were
reduced, and limits were put on Medicare payments.

In the first years of the Reagan administration, when unemployment was rising,
insurance for workers who lost their jobs because of foreign competition was
scaled back. Middle-income college students became ineligible for
government-backed loans and more than a million people lost their food stamps.
In 1981, the Department of Agriculture proposed that ketchup be considered a
vegetable in calculating the nutritional values of school lunches. The
suggestion caused such an uproar that the rule was never instituted.

When Social Security disability benefits were cut off for 500,000 people, the
federal courts restored payments to 200,000, but the cuts furthered the
perception that the administration was heartless.

Despite the many budget cuts, the deficit kept growing. After he left
government, Mr. Stockman wrote a book, ''The Triumph of Politics'' (Harper &
Row), in which he described how, on behalf of Mr. Reagan's programs, he had
exaggerated the administration's success in reducing spending and minimized the
projected deficit. He said he invented the ''rosy scenario,'' making optimistic
assumptions about future growth, inflation and interest rates.

''If the Securities and Exchange Commission had jurisdiction over the White
House,'' Mr. Stockman wrote, ''we might have all had time for a course in
remedial economics at Allenwood penitentiary.''

Within six years the deficit more than doubled, from $79 billion in Mr. Reagan's
first year in office to $173 billion. In the 1987 fiscal year it dropped back to
$150.4 billion but edged up again in 1988.

Still, Mr. Reagan repeatedly refused to consider tax increases. ''I don't want
to hear any more talk about taxes,'' Mr. Stockman quoted him as saying. ''The
problem is deficit spending.''

He repeatedly called for a constitutional amendment to require that the budget
be balanced, and for the authority to veto individual items in budgets passed by
Congress.

But by the middle of 1982, with a recession continuing and deficit projections
soaring, Mr. Reagan grudgingly agreed to a $98.6 billion increase in excise and
other taxes. But he refused to call them taxes, insisting on the term ''revenue
enhancers.''

Reaganomics III: Boom and Crash

 After the 1981-82 recession, Mr. Reagan presided over the longest economic
expansion in history, one that saw the creation of 16 million jobs. By his
seventh year in office the stock market was reaching an all-time high. Inflation
had dropped and the prime interest rate was down, partly a result of the
collapse of oil prices and partly from the policies of the Federal Reserve.

But Mr. Reagan got the credit, just as he had gotten the blame for the recession
and the deficit. Economists noted that foreign capital pouring into the country
had shielded the United States from the consequences of the deficit, but warned
that it would be only a matter of time before that buffer disappeared.

Mr. Reagan also got much of the credit for the 1986 overhaul of the federal tax
code, hammered together by a bipartisan coalition in Congress. The changes,
among the most sweeping ever, reduced the rates for most taxpayers and curbed or
eliminated many exemptions that enabled people to shelter income from taxation.

''Had Reagan not moved up front, it would have gone nowhere,'' said the
economist Alan Greenspan, whom Mr. Reagan later named to head the Federal
Reserve. ''He was the first president to succeed in doing it.''

On Oct. 16, 1987, The Wall Street Journal reported that the economy was one of
the two bright spots in a Reagan administration that was increasingly paralyzed
by its Iran-contra troubles. Then, on Oct. 19, the stock market suffered the
most severe single-day decline up to that point in its history, dropping 508
points.

The market meltdown highlighted the administration's failure to deal with the
budget and trade deficits and the failure of supply-side economics to encourage
investment and productivity. Economists' warnings that the administration was
mortgaging the country's future were finally heeded, and the president and
Congress agreed to a deficit-reduction package.

Reaganomics IV: Balance Sheet

 Unemployment declined, but more people were living below the poverty line, and
homelessness became a national concern. When Mr. Reagan was asked about the
problem in 1984, he replied that some needy people might be ''homeless by
choice.''

Economists vary widely in their assessments of Mr. Reagan's record.

''We know for a fact that Reagan has and will have a more profound effect on the
American economy than any president in the post-World War II period,'' Mr.
Greenspan said in an interview before his appointment to the Federal Reserve.
''The problem is that it is not exactly clear whether the very strong pluses or
strong minuses will prevail.''

On the plus side, Mr. Greenspan said, Mr. Reagan ''instituted an extraordinary
change in tax policy.'' And he said Mr. Reagan had been responsible ''for a
fairly pronounced slowing'' in the growth of social benefit programs. On the
minus side, Mr. Greenspan cited the ''extraordinary budget deficits which have
occurred as a consequence of his original tax proposals.''

Prof. James Tobin, a Nobel Prize-winning economist at Yale University, said the
Reagan legacy was ''a crippled federal government.''

''He tried to squeeze ambitious growth of defense spending into a budget he was
simultaneously depriving of tax revenues,'' Professor Tobin said. ''Legislators
of both parties, most of whom knew better, deserve a share of the blame for
their supine surrender to the president's program.''

Domestic Policy: Changing Rules

 When Mr. Reagan accepted the Republican nomination for re-election in summer
1984 in Dallas, he told the delegates that Americans confronted a choice: a
government of pessimism and fear or a government of hope, confidence and growth.
Walter F. Mondale, his Democratic opponent, he said, did not represent
mainstream America.

On Nov. 8, Mr. Reagan scored one of the biggest victories in American political
history, winning 525 electoral votes to Mr. Mondale's 13. At the beginning of
his second term, he said the nation ''was poised for greatness.'' Then, with a
line that sounded like an echo from his first national political speech in 1964,
he said, ''We must never again abuse the trust of working men and women by
spending their earnings on a futile chase after the spiraling demands of a
bloated federal establishment.''

The effort to reduce the size of that establishment was a constant of the Reagan
presidency. His campaign pledge to reduce government policing of business was
most effectively redeemed in the broadcasting and energy industries. Banking was
another major area of deregulation, the disastrous consequences of which were to
become clear after Mr. Reagan left office in the savings and loan scandals that
could cost the nation hundreds of billions of dollars.

The Federal Trade Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission and the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration were curbed by budget cuts and by the appointment of conservative
administrators who were often accused of opposing the missions of the agencies
they headed.

To put an end to what he called the ''adversary relationship'' between
government and business, Mr. Reagan's Justice Department reined in its antitrust
division. In a move that environmentalists said was intended to aid timber, oil
and mining companies, the Interior Department removed thousands of acres of
public lands from the protected category.

Although there were efforts to reduce farm price supports, federal spending on
this program rose, reaching an all-time high in 1986. Still, a worldwide surplus
of grain caused prices to plummet, and there were more farm foreclosures in the
Reagan years than at any time since the Depression.

The Reagan administration also sought to shift government activities to the
private sector, a move that would automatically result in a cut in government
spending. In 1986, for example, the administration persuaded Congress to
authorize the sale of Conrail, the federal corporation that ran much of the rail
freight system.

Mr. Reagan's opposition to governmental interference in the private sector made
him a strong advocate of free trade with foreign countries. But he pressured
Japanese manufacturers to accept a voluntary quota on automobile exports and
gave some trade protection to steel, textiles and motorcycles. In the first year
of Mr. Reagan's second term, the United States, once the biggest creditor
nation, became the biggest debtor nation in the world despite some efforts on
his part to alter the trade balance.

Civil Rights Retrenchment

 The Reagan administration also challenged the longstanding view that the
government should aggressively protect civil rights. The budget for the Civil
Rights Commission, the agency that monitors federal civil rights activities, was
cut. The civil rights division in the Justice Department led an attack on
court-ordered measures to correct discrimination, based on the administration's
opposition to quotas as discriminatory against whites. But the courts repeatedly
upheld affirmative action in the workplace, saying it helped overcome past
discrimination against minorities.

The administration's actions provoked bitter criticism from civil rights
advocates. Jack Greenberg, who served for many years as counsel for the NAACP
Legal Defense and Educational Fund, said Mr. Reagan had ''showed a clear
hostility to civil rights aspirations.''

Foreign Policy: New Doctrines

 No sooner had Mr. Reagan taken the oath of office at noon on Jan. 20, 1981,
than the 52 American hostages who had been held in Iran since Nov. 4, 1979, were
released in accordance with an agreement that President Carter had completed
only hours before. The timing of the release led to questions about whether Mr.
Reagan or his staff had struck a private deal with the Iranians.

Although Mr. Reagan said little about Iran in his inaugural address, the battle
against terrorism became the cornerstone of his foreign policy, and he sounded a
warning.

''Our reluctance for conflict should not be misjudged as a failure of will,'' he
said. ''When action is required to preserve our national security, we will
act.''

Halfway into his first year in office, Mr. Reagan made good on his promise of
swift retaliation against terrorists and the countries he accused of supporting
them. On Aug. 19, 1981, American planes shot down two Libyan jets over the Gulf
of Sidra in a dispute with the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who
claimed that the gulf was Libyan territory.

Five years later, in April 1986, Mr. Reagan ordered the bombing of Tripoli to
punish Colonel Qaddafi for his supposed role in a terrorist attack on a
discotheque in West Germany that killed an American soldier. Some reports said
the target of the retaliatory raid was Colonel Qaddafi himself.

In 1985 Mr. Reagan sent F-14 fighters to intercept an Egyptian plane carrying
four Palestinian terrorists and forced it to land in Sicily. The hijackers, who
had seized the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro and killed an American
passenger, were taken into custody by Italian officials.

The ''Reagan Doctrine'' was the name given to the administration's policy of
supporting forces fighting Soviet-backed governments in Afghanistan, Nicaragua
and Angola. Although support of the mujahedeen in Afghanistan was to have
lasting repercussions in the fight against terrorism, Mr. Reagan believed Soviet
withdrawal from that country was a vindication of his policies.

In keeping with this doctrine, the administration persistently supported the
contras fighting to overthrow the Sandinista government of Nicaragua. (The
Sandinistas were ultimately ousted in national elections in 1990.) In El
Salvador, the Reagan administration supported the government against a Marxist
insurgency.

In October 1983, Mr. Reagan sent American forces to Grenada in a mission to
rescue American students in medical school on that Caribbean island and to evict
a Grenadian government that he called ''a brutal group of leftist thugs.''

Frustration and Statesmanship

 Until the Iran-contra scandal, Mr. Reagan's most searing setback in foreign
affairs came in fall 1983. Over the objections of some top advisers, he had
dispatched marines to Beirut to be part of a multinational force to bring a
semblance of calm to Lebanon. On Oct. 23 a terrorist driving a truck laden with
explosives crashed into the Marine compound, killing 241 Americans. Four months
later, the president withdrew the Marine contingent.

In 1987, after the Iran-contra scandal became public knowledge, there was more
misfortune when Mr. Reagan ordered American warships to the Persian Gulf to
protect Kuwaiti tankers under attack by Iran. In an unusual arrangement, the
president also permitted Kuwaiti tankers to fly the American flag, a decision
intended to prevent Soviet domination of the gulf and to permit tankers to move
without interference.

Calamity befell the plan when 37 American sailors were killed by a missile fired
from an Iraqi plane at the American frigate Stark. A year later, the Navy
warship Vincennes shot down an Iranian commercial airliner over the gulf after
mistaking it for an attacking F-14 fighter jet. All 290 people aboard the plane
were killed.

In 1984, on a 10-day trip to Europe, Mr. Reagan toured the beaches of Normandy
in a celebration of the 40th anniversary of D-Day. At Pointe de Hoc, against the
sweep of the cliffs and beaches that have become indelibly associated with the
victory over fascism, Mr. Reagan delivered one of the most memorable speeches of
his Presidency. The scenes were captured in a film that was used to introduce
Mr. Reagan at that summer's Republican National Convention. His travels were
meant to send an important message to the voters back home: that the domestic
reformer had come of age as a statesman.

A year later, a trip to Europe produced a major embarrassment for Mr. Reagan. On
the eve of a visit to West Germany, in which he was scheduled to stop at a
cemetery in Bitburg, it became known that Nazi storm troopers were among those
buried there. The president rejected advice to cancel the stop, and there was an
uproar when he tried to justify it by saying that the German soldiers buried
there were victims of Nazism, ''just as surely as the victims in the
concentration camps.''

Mr. Reagan was not a strategic thinker, his own aides said; he thought in terms
of anecdotes, not analysis. His knowledge of international developments was
considered thin, and those who met with him said his participation in
discussions was usually limited to what his staff had provided him on the 3-by-5
cards.

In his biography of Mr. Reagan, Mr. Cannon noted the president's tendency to
misspeak: ''He did not know enough. And he did not know how much he didn't know.
Because of Reagan's knowledge gaps, his presidential news conferences became
adventures into the uncharted regions of his mind.''

Iran-Contra Affair: Zeal and Denial

 By late 1986, the president had become obsessed by the hostages held in Lebanon
by allies of Iran; aides said he mentioned them at almost every staff meeting.
Two national security advisers, Robert C. McFarlane and Vice Adm. John M.
Poindexter, and a National Security Council staff assistant, Lt. Col. Oliver L.
North of the Marines, were emboldened by his concern to undertake some extremely
unorthodox measures to try to free the hostages.

Publicly, Mr. Reagan had condemned Iran as an outlaw state ''run by the
strangest collection of misfits, Looney Tunes and squalid criminals since the
advent of the Third Reich.'' Yet Mr. Reagan's own security council staff
conceived and put into operation a secret plan to supply weapons to Iran as
ransom for the American hostages. Under this scheme, profits from the sales were
earmarked for the contras, whom Mr. Reagan had called ''the moral equivalent of
our founding fathers.''

When the secret operation was first reported, Mr. Reagan denied that it existed.
On Nov. 13, 1986, he said, ''In spite of the wildly speculative and false
stories about arms for hostages, we did not, repeat, did not trade arms or
anything else for hostages.'' But almost four months later, he ruefully referred
to that remark in a speech to the nation. ''My heart and my best intentions
still tell me that is true,'' he said, ''but the facts and the evidence tell me
it is not.''

The facts and evidence were presented in the report of a commission led by
former Senator John G. Tower, and later in the majority report of a
Congressional investigating committee, showing that Mr. Reagan had approved
shipments of weapons to Iran months before he issued his first public denial.
The findings of the Tower commission, in early 1987, left open the question of
whether Mr. Reagan, then 76 and just recovering from prostate surgery, had the
vigor to recover and the ability to reverse a lifelong habit of detachment.

After Mr. Reagan's Alzheimer's became known, questions were raised as to whether
he had already started to have memory lapses when he was president, especially
in the Iran-contra affair. He had often said he would step down if he felt his
capabilities had been reduced and had expressed concern that his mother's
Alzheimer's might have been passed on to him. Doctors did not rule out that a
subdural hematoma resulting from a fall from a horse in 1989, after he left the
White House, might have also affected his memory.

The 1987 report of the Tower commission noted: ''The president did pretty well .
. . for the better part of five years. And then all of a sudden the style and
the consequences failed him.'' The report said Mr. Reagan's staff not only
failed to make up for his deficiencies but also took advantage of his
inattention. Mr. Reagan liked to say that in his years in the White House he
lived over the store. But the Tower commission said in effect that nobody was
minding the store.

'This Happened on My Watch'

 On March 4, 1987, a week after the Tower report was issued, Mr. Reagan appeared
on television, looking healthy and alert, to deliver what was seen at the time
as the most important speech of his presidency. To demonstrate that he was back
in charge, he outlined actions to correct the flaws in the way his White House
had operated. As chief of staff he appointed former Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.
of Tennessee, who was more conciliatory and more collegial than the man he
replaced, Donald T. Regan.

Accepting the sharp criticism of the Tower commission report, Mr. Reagan said
that what had started as a strategic opening to Iran had ''deteriorated in its
implementation into trading arms for hostages.'' He said, ''This runs contrary
to my own beliefs, to administration policy and to the original strategy we had
in mind.'' He accepted ''full responsibility'' for the Iran-contra affair: ''As
the Navy would say, this happened on my watch.''

Yet even after Mr. Poindexter and Mr. North were indicted on charges of
conspiracy, theft and fraud in the affair in 1988, Mr. Reagan declared that he
still believed that Mr. North was a hero and that his former aides were not
guilty. He said, ''I just have to believe that they're going to be found
innocent, because I don't think they were guilty of any wrongdoing or any
crime.''

On May 4, 1989, Mr. North, who had left the Marines, was found guilty of three
felonies, including destroying and falsifying official documents, and acquitted
of nine other charges. On July 15 he was fined $150,000, placed on probation for
two years and ordered to perform 1,200 hours of community service. On Sept. 16,
1991, a federal judge dismissed all charges against Mr. North. Prosecutors said
they would not be able to show that the trial had not been affected by televised
Congressional testimony that Mr. North had given under immunity.

For the same reason a divided federal appeals court on Nov. 15, 1990, threw out
five felony convictions of Mr. Poindexter. In June, 1990, Mr. Poindexter had
become the first person in the Iran-contra affair to receive a jail term, and
the highest White House official since Watergate sentenced to a prison term for
illegal acts committed in office.

Mr. Reagan was not brought to court, but he faced the judgment of history. The
historian C. Vann Woodward said in an interview that he knew of ''nothing
comparable with this magnitude of irresponsibility and incompetence.''

Mr. Woodward observed: ''This is not simply the self-serving of a politician who
was using illegal methods. This involved the country's policy and its foreign
relations and reputation.''

Long Struggle, on Arms Control

 Mr. Reagan had sought a place in history as a president who dealt forcefully
with terrorists and took vigorous action to rescue Americans taken hostage
anywhere in the world. Perhaps even more than the president, it was said, Nancy
Reagan was concerned that the Iran-contra scandal would damage her husband's
place in history. She pressed for an arms agreement with the Soviet Union,
hoping it would establish his reputation as statesman and peacemaker and undo
some of the damage.

But distrust of the Soviet Union had been a hallmark of Mr. Reagan's political
career. He had labeled it the ''evil empire'' and his suspicions were confirmed
in September 1983 when a Soviet fighter jet shot down a South Korean airliner,
killing 269 people and plunging Soviet-American relations into a new and bitter
round of recrimination.

Chances for an arms agreement seemed slim. In his first term, Mr. Reagan was
less concerned with arms control than with an arms buildup to counter Soviet
military power. In 1979, as a candidate, he had opposed ratification of the
strategic arms limitation agreement, saying it strongly favored the Soviets.
(Although that agreement never came to a vote in the Senate, his administration
continued to observe its terms until late 1986, when the United States exceeded
the limits.)

In 1981 Mr. Reagan said SALT had not brought any arms reductions, and, proposing
a new beginning, called for ''Strategic Arms Reduction Talks,'' with the
felicitous acronym Start.

He had promised in his 1980 campaign, that his top strategic priority would be
to close ''the window of vulnerability'' through which he believed the Soviet
Union could launch a successful nuclear first strike. As president, he
essentially speeded the strategic modernization program sought by Mr. Carter. He
began procurement of the B-1 bomber. In accordance with a decision of the Carter
administration, some medium-range missiles were deployed in Europe. The
administration strengthened the Navy and pushed for modernization of bombers and
missiles, helicopters and tanks.

Some analysts believe that buildup, along with military exercises and
reconnaissance that were seen from the Soviet perspective as provocative, may
have strengthened Soviet hawks and actually delayed efforts by Mr. Gorbachev to
bring reform to the Soviet Union.

'Star Wars' and a Breakthrough

 On March 23, 1983, Mr. Reagan announced plans for a system of exotic,
space-based defenses that would make nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete.
Former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger said the program, the Strategic
Defense Initiative, which came to be called ''Star Wars,'' was nothing but ''a
collection of technical experiments and distant hopes.'' But the president, Mr.
Schlesinger said, treated it ''as if it were already a reality.''

Nevertheless, minutes of Politburo meetings that have come to light, show that
Mr. Gorbachev was, in the words of a Russian scholar, ''obsessed'' by the
proposal, which he feared would lead to a new and more dangerous round in the
arms race. Some Russian scholars say it was this fear, even more than the cost,
that concerned the Soviet leader, because his scientists had assured him they
could meet the threat at 10 percent of what it would cost the United States. But
hardliners in the Reagan administration believed that heightened military
spending would cause the collapse of the Soviet Union.

Indeed, Mr. Gorbachev had come to recognize that he would have to find new
sources of revenue as his country's economy declined, and a cut in the arms
budget was a prime candidate.

Just when it began to look as if Mr. Reagan would be the first president in two
decades to fail to get any arms agreement with the Soviets, it was announced
that he and Mr. Gorbachev would meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, on Oct. 11 and 12,
1986.

There, Mr. Reagan proposed the elimination of all ballistic missiles by 1996.
Mr. Gorbachev, not to be outdone, proposed the elimination of all strategic
nuclear weapons, a proposal that, to the consternation of his aides, Mr. Reagan
accepted. Mr. Reagan had found in Mr. Gorbachev a Communist he could deal with,
and the tenor of the United States-Soviet relationship in his second term
differed markedly from his first years in office.

In February 1987, two days after the Tower commission issued its report on the
Iran-contra affair, Mr. Gorbachev announced the Soviet Union's willingness to
sign ''without delay'' an agreement to eliminate Soviet and American
medium-range missiles in Europe within five years.

For Mr. Reagan, the Soviet proposal provided an opportunity for a foreign policy
breakthrough when he appeared immobilized by the Iran-contra scandal. The
intermediate-range nuclear force, or I.N.F., treaty was signed the next
December.

''The importance of this treaty transcends numbers,'' Mr. Reagan said at the
signing ceremony in the White House. ''We have listened to the wisdom in an old
Russian maxim Davorey no provorey -- Trust, but verify.''

Mr. Reagan's attitude toward the Soviet Union had evolved. With Mr. Gorbachev
promising glasnost and perestroika, the restructuring of his country's political
and economic system, Mr. Reagan reconsidered the ''evil empire'' and relegated
it to another era.

''My personal impression of Mr. Gorbachev is that he is a serious man seeking
serious reform,'' the president said in 1988. ''We look to this trend to
continue. We must do all that we can to assist it.''

But along the way he urged the new Soviet leader to move further, faster. On
June 12, 1987, at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, Mr. Reagan, in one of his most
noted speeches, delivered a challenge to Mr. Gorbachev: ''If you seek peace, if
you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek
liberalization, come here to this gate, Mr. Gorbachev. Open this gate, Mr.
Gorbachev.''

Like a modern-day Joshua at the battle of Jericho, Mr. Reagan lived to see the
Berlin Wall come tumbling down. ''I never dreamed that in less than three years
the wall would come down and a 6,000-pound section of it would be sent to me for
my presidential library,'' Mr. Reagan wrote in his autobiography, ''An American
Life,'' (Simon & Schuster, 1990).

Time and the Man

 The former House speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts,
said of Mr. Reagan: ''Most of the time he was an actor reading lines who didn't
understand his own programs. I hate to say it about such an agreeable man, but
it was sinful that Ronald Reagan ever became president.''

Mr. O'Neill, who served in much of Mr. Reagan's tenure, said he had ''known
every president since Harry Truman and there's no question in my mind that
Ronald Reagan was the worst.'' But, he added, ''he would have made a hell of a
king.''

But, in the view of Kenneth Lynn, professor of history at the Johns Hopkins
University, Mr. Reagan ''will remain as one of the most important presidents of
the 20th century.''

Professor Lynn said in an interview: ''He fulfilled a restorative function we
desperately needed. His belief that we can come out of our travail with a
renewed strength, his ebullience, his optimism and his lack of guilt in his
personal life and in America in general were a breath of fresh air. To have
someone speak in terms of possibility, of limitlessness rather than of limits,
was an elixir, a real upper. He was the most important President since Franklin
Delano Roosevelt in these symbolic respects.''

Paul Johnson, the historian and journalist, gives Mr. Reagan credit for more
than symbolic accomplishment. ''Reagan's rearmament program, accompanied as it
was by a resurgence in the U.S. economy, had a demoralizing effect on the Soviet
elite,'' Mr. Johnson wrote in Foreign Affairs.

''Thus,'' he continued, ''the concept of perestroika was born, not merely of
internal shame and exasperation at empty shops and shabby conditions, but of an
external recognition that their chief ideological competitor, under Reagan's
leadership, was far more formidable and durable than they had supposed.''

But to many other historians and political scientists, Mr. Reagan's
accomplishments will not secure his place among great American presidents.

Thomas Cronin, the McHugh Professor of American Institutions at Colorado
College, said Americans evaluated the greatness of a president on ''criteria
that are over and above popularity and re-election.''

Mr. Cronin credited Mr. Reagan with enhancing national security with the I.N.F.
treaty but asked: ''Did he expand opportunities for all Americans regardless of
race, gender or income bracket? It's my view Reagan has not enlarged the equity
factor nor the educational opportunities for most Americans.''

And the Reagan presidency was lacking in moral leadership, he said, an essential
quality for greatness. ''He was too late, too little and too lame when it came
to human rights abuses at home and abroad,'' Professor Cronin said. ''He was not
willing to be a leader.''

In addition to his wife, Mr. Reagan is survived by their children, Patti Davis
and Ron Jr., and Michael, a son from his marriage to Miss Wyman. Maureen Reagan,
his daughter from that marriage, died in 2001. He is also survived by a
granddaughter, Rita.

Moments after the inauguration of George Bush as the nation's 41st resident, Mr.
Reagan returned to California, to writing his autobiography, to riding his
horses and chopping wood on his ranch and to the new house in Bel-Air. There
were some political appearances and a visit to Japan that occasioned an uproar
when it became known that he was being paid $2 million by a Japanese
communications group for his appearances there.

Not a man given to introspection, he nevertheless wrote his autobiography with
the help of a former journalist, Robert Lindsey, a narrative of his life and his
presidency as he remembered it.

There followed a round of television interviews in which he promoted the sale of
his book. Barbara Walters asked him how he thought history would remember him.

''Well,'' Mr. Reagan replied, ''I hope it'll remember me on the basis that when
I took office, I felt very strongly that our government had grown too officious
and imposing too much on the private sector in our society, and that I wanted to
see if the American people couldn't get back that pride, and that patriotism,
that confidence, that they had in our system. And I think they have.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Ronald Wilson Reagan

CORRECTION-DATE: July 1, 2004



CORRECTION: The obituary of Ronald Reagan in late editions on Sunday and a
condensed version on Monday misstated the scope of his brief run for the
Republican nomination in 1968. Although Mr. Reagan tested his popularity that
year, he did not enter primaries. The obituaries also misstated the origin of
the campaign slogan ''It's morning in America.'' It was used in television ads
for his 1984 re-election bid, not for the 1980 campaign.

 The obituary on Sunday also misstated the affiliation of a scholar who
commented on the way Americans evaluate a president's greatness. The scholar,
Thomas Cronin, is president of Whitman College, in Washington State; he is no
longer a professor at Colorado College.


The obituary of Ronald Reagan on June 6 misstated the ranking of the economic
expansion that occurred after the 1981-82 recession. The expansion, from 1982 to
1990, was not the longest in American history; it was the third-longest -- after
expansions in 1991-2001 and 1961-1969.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Ronald Reagan, a former governor, lived longer than any
president. (Photo by Associated Press, 1990)(pg. 1)
THE OATH -- Ronald Reagan was sworn in by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, in
1981. Nancy Reagan held the Bible as Senator Mark O. Hatfield and Jimmy Carter
looked on. (Photo by United Press International)
ON THE RADIO -- (above) Ronald Reagan was known for his baseball play-by-plays
while at WHO in Des Moines in the 1930's. (Photo by WHO Broadcasting)
AS A LIFEGUARD -- (left) He worked seven days a week for seven summers, and the
job helped pay his college tuition.
IN HIGH SCHOOL -- (above) Ronald Reagan participated in football, track and
drama. (Photo by United Press International)
THE EARLY YEARS -- (left) John E. Reagan, with sons Neil and Ronald, and wife
Nelle, circa 1913 in Tampico, Ill. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. 44)
ATTEMPT ON HIS LIFE -- Ronald Reagan looked up and was pushed into his limousine
after being shot March 30, 1981, inWashington. (Photo by Associated Press)
CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY -- (above) Mr. Reagan, before the House Un-American
Activities Committee in 1947. He refused to name names in public, but did so
later in secret, an F.B.I. file revealed.
A FAVORITE MOVIE (left) Ann Sheridan and the actor, starring in 1941 in ''King's
Row,'' which he always called his finest picture. (Photo by Culver Pictures)
IN THE MOVIES -- (above) A studio picture of Mr. Reagan in 1940. (Photo by
Warner Brothers)
AN INSPIRING ROLE -- (left) The actor as Notre Dame's George Gipp, inspiring a
line he came to use: ''Win one for the Gipper.'' (Photo by United Press
International)(pg. 45)
A TIME OF SCANDAL -- Mr. Reagan, after the Tower Commission report on the
Iran-contra affair, in 1987. The dealings involved Oliver L. North, top left,
and John M. Poindexter, aides to Mr. Reagan, and William J. Casey, C.I.A.
director, among others. (Photographs by Associated Press, except lower left,
United Press International)
A SECOND MARRIAGE -- (above) Nancy Davis and Ronald Reagan tied the knot in
1952. With them are William Holden and his wife, Brenda Marshall. (Photo by
United Press International)
ENTERING POLITICS -- (right) Mr. Reagan, after winning the Republican nomination
for Governor of California, in 1966. He later won the race. (Photo by The New
York Times)
THE NATIONAL SCENE -- (above) Barry Goldwater and Mr. Reagan, at a Republican
rally in Washington in 1967. (Photo by The New York Times)
WARDING OFF VIOLENCE -- (right) In May 1970, he explained his request for a
shutdown of California's higher education system after threats of antiwar
violence. (Photo by United Press International)(pg. 46)
A NEW ERA -- Mikhail S. Gorbachev with President Reagan in 1987. Mr. Reagan
negotiated an arms agreement with the Soviet Union. (Photo by Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times)
A NEW JUSTICE -- The president with Antonin Scalia, left, whom he appointed to
fill the Supreme Court post ofWilliam H. Rehnquist, right, who was elevated to
the position of chief justice, in 1986. (Photo by Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)
IN MEETINGS -- Mr. Reagan with his running mate, George Bush, in 1980 and with
the British prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, in 1983. (Photo by Associated
Press)
(Photo by Ashley Ashwood/Camera Press)
A WARM WELCOME -- (above) The Reagans in Japan in 1989
they urged that nation to open its markets. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)
 HONORING CASUALTIES -- (left) The president and Nancy Reagan at a memorial
service in November 1983 for the marines killed that fall in Beirut and Grenada.
(Photo by Associated Press)(pg. 47)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES
(90%); POLITICS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); POLITICAL SCANDALS
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SUPREME COURTS (74%);
WORLD WAR II (71%); ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%);
ANNIVERSARIES (65%); BASEBALL (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (62%); WAR & CONFLICT (60%)
United States Politics and Government; Deaths (Obituaries); Iran-Contra Affair;
Presidents and Presidency (US); Motion Pictures; United States Politics and
Government; Biographical Information; United States Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%)

RONALD REAGAN (98%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%); JOHN F KENNEDY (79%); JIMMY CARTER
(78%); ANTONIN SCALIA (55%) Marilyn Berger; Ronald Wilson Reagan; Nancy Reagan;
Ron Reagan; Michael Reagan; Patti Davis; Jimmy Carter

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (70%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); LEBANON (92%);
JAPAN (79%); NICARAGUA (79%); FRANCE (70%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             797 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: Ex-President Sentenced To 15 Years

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 111 words


A court in Kigali sentenced Pasteur Bizimungu, the country's first post-genocide
president, to 15 years in prison for embezzling public funds, threatening
national security and fomenting ethnic divisions as the country sought to
recover from the violence of 1994. Mr. Bizimungu, a Hutu moderate, became
president when Tutsi rebels ended the bloodbath and set up a government. He
resigned in 2000 after disputes with the Tutsi-dominated governing party, the
Rwanda Patriotic Front, and became a vocal critic of the government. He then set
up a political party, which the government immediately banned, accusing Mr.
Bizimungu and his associates of preaching ethnic hatred


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); EMBEZZLEMENT (90%);
PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (88%); POLITICS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (87%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (85%) Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe;
Politics and Government; Embezzlement; Security and Warning Systems; Sentences
(Criminal); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Suspensions,
Dismissals and Resignations

PERSON: Pasteur Bizimungu

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (93%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Rwanda; Kigali (Rwanda)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             799 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Tie to Rwanda Crash Seen in U.N. Tape

BYLINE: The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 240 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 7


An independent investigation has concluded that an airplane black box shipped
from Africa a decade ago and discovered this year in a locked United Nations
file cabinet was not linked to the crash in 1994 that killed the presidents of
Rwanda and Burundi and set off the massacre of hundreds of thousands of
Rwandans.

Embarrassed officials at the United Nations admitted in March to having
uncovered a cockpit voice recorder after the French newspaper Le Monde said one
had been sent to New York after the crash and suggested that it was the one
missing from the plane of President Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda.

The United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services said Monday that
extensive examination of the device and its 30-minute tape had concluded that
the recorder was neither from the crash nor contained any relevant information
about it.

The report said the examinations were conducted by the National Transportation
Safety Board in the United States under the supervision of the International
Civil Aviation Organization and by a private firm specializing in cockpit
recordings.

President Habyarimana and his Burundian counterpart, Cyprien Ntaryamira, both
Hutu, died on April 6, 1994, when their Falcon 50 aircraft was shot down as it
approached the airport in Kigali, Rwanda's capital.

Their deaths set off a 100-day wave of killings of an estimated 800,000 minority
Tutsi and moderate Hutu by extremist Hutu.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); FLIGHT RECORDERS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); AIRPORTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); AVIONICS (76%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); AIRLINES (70%); CIVIL AVIATION (67%); AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION (67%) Airlines and Airplanes; Accidents and Safety; Hutu Tribe;
Tutsi Tribe; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD (56%);
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION (56%) United Nations

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BURUNDI (93%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Rwanda; Burundi

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             800 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Roots of Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 621 words


In response to the outrages at Abu Ghraib, the Bush administration has
repeatedly assured Americans that the president and his top officials did not
say or do anything that could possibly be seen as approving the abuse or
outright torture of prisoners. But disturbing disclosures keep coming. This week
it's a legal argument by government lawyers who said the president was not bound
by laws or treaties prohibiting torture.

Each new revelation makes it more clear that the inhumanity at Abu Ghraib grew
out of a morally dubious culture of legal expediency and a disregard for normal
behavior fostered at the top of this administration. It is part of the price the
nation must pay for President Bush's decision to take the extraordinary mandate
to fight terrorism that he was granted by a grieving nation after 9/11 and apply
it without justification to Iraq.

Since the Abu Ghraib scandal broke into public view, the administration has
contended that a few sadistic guards acted on their own to commit the crimes
we've all seen in pictures and videos. At times, the White House has denied that
any senior official was aware of the situation, as it did with Red Cross reports
documenting a pattern of prisoner abuse in Iraq. In response to a rising pile of
documents proving otherwise, the administration has mounted a ''Wizard of Oz''
defense, urging Americans not to pay attention to inconvenient evidence.

This week, The Wall Street Journal broke the story of a classified legal brief
prepared for Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld in March 2003 after Guantanamo
Bay interrogators complained that they were not getting enough information from
terror suspects. The brief cynically suggested that because the president is
protecting national security, any ban on torture, even an American law, could
not be applied to ''interrogation undertaken pursuant to his commander-in-chief
authority.'' Neil A. Lewis and Eric Schmitt reported yesterday in The Times that
the document had grown out of a January 2002 Justice Department memo explaining
why the Geneva Conventions and American laws against torture did not apply to
suspected terrorists.

In the wake of that memo, the White House general counsel advised Mr. Bush that
Al Qaeda and the Taliban should be considered outside the Geneva Conventions.
But yesterday, Attorney General John Ashcroft assured the Senate Judiciary
Committee that Mr. Bush had not ordered torture. These explanations might be
more comforting if the administration's definition of what's legal was not so
slippery, and if the Pentagon, the Justice Department and the White House were
willing to release documents to back up their explanation. Mr. Rumsfeld is still
withholding from the Senate his orders on interrogation techniques, among other
things.

The Pentagon has said that Mr. Rumsfeld's famous declaration that the Geneva
Conventions did not apply in Afghanistan was not a sanction of illegal
interrogations, and that everyone knew different rules applied in Iraq. But Mr.
Rumsfeld, his top deputies and the highest-ranking generals could not explain to
the Senate what the rules were, or even who was in charge of the prisons in
Iraq. We do not know how high up in the chain of command the specific sanction
for abusing prisoners was given, and we may never know, because the Army is
investigating itself and the Pentagon is stonewalling the Senate Armed Services
Committee. It may yet be necessary for Congress to form an investigative panel
with subpoena powers to find the answers.

What we have seen, topped by that legalistic treatise on torture, shows clearly
that Mr. Bush set the tone for this dreadful situation by pasting a false ''war
on terrorism'' label on the invasion of Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); APPROVALS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
SCANDALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); LEGISLATION (76%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); TALIBAN (74%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); AL-QAEDA
(69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (69%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (69%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (68%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (66%); GENOCIDE
(61%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Geneva Conventions; Terrorism; Editorials; Treaties; Law and Legislation;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (54%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (54%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; United States; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             802 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Documents Build a Case for Working Outside the Laws on Interrogating Prisoners

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE MEMORANDUMS;
Pg. 8

LENGTH: 834 words



JANUARY 2002 -- A series of memorandums from the Justice Department, many of
them written by John C. Yoo, a University of California law professor who was
serving in the department, provided arguments to keep United States officials
from being charged with war crimes for the way prisoners were detained and
interrogated. The memorandums, principally one written on Jan. 9, provided legal
arguments to support administration officials' assertions that the Geneva
Conventions did not apply to detainees from the war in Afghanistan.

JAN. 25 -- Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, in a memorandum to
President Bush, said that the Justice Department's advice in the Jan. 9
memorandum was sound and that Mr. Bush should declare the Taliban and Al Qaeda
outside the coverage of the Geneva Conventions. That would keep American
officials from being exposed to the federal War Crimes Act, a 1996 law that
carries the death penalty.

JAN. 26 -- In a memorandum to the White House, Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell said the advantages of applying the Geneva Conventions far outweighed
their rejection. He said that declaring the conventions inapplicable would
''reverse over a century of U.S. policy and practice in supporting the Geneva
Conventions and undermine the protections of the laws of war for our troops.''
He also said it would ''undermine public support among critical allies.''

FEB. 2 -- A memorandum from William H. Taft IV, the State Department's legal
adviser, to Mr. Gonzales warned that the broad rejection of the Geneva
Conventions posed several problems. ''A decision that the conventions do not
apply to the conflict in Afghanistan in which our armed forces are engaged
deprives our troops there of any claim to the protection of the conventions in
the event they are captured.'' An attachment to this memorandum, written by a
State Department lawyer, showed that most of the administration's senior lawyers
agreed that the Geneva Conventions were inapplicable. The attachment noted that
C.I.A. lawyers asked for an explicit understanding that the administration's
public pledge to abide by the spirit of the conventions did not apply to its
operatives.

AUGUST -- A memorandum from the Office of Legal Counsel in the Justice
Department provided a rationale for using torture to extract information from
Qaeda operatives. It provided complex definitions of torture that seemed devised
to allow interrogators to evade being charged with that offense.

MARCH 2003 -- A memorandum prepared by a Defense Department legal task force
drew on the January and August memorandums to declare that President Bush was
not bound by either an international treaty prohibiting torture or by a federal
anti-torture law because he had the authority as commander in chief to approve
any technique needed to protect the nation's security. The memorandum also said
that executive branch officials, including those in the military, could be
immune from domestic and international prohibitions against torture for a
variety of reasons, including a belief by interrogators that they were acting on
orders from superiors ''except where the conduct goes so far as to be patently
unlawful.'

APRIL -- A memorandum from Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld to Gen. James
T. Hill outlined 24 permitted interrogation techniques, 4 of which were
considered stressful enough to require Mr. Rumsfeld's explicit approval. Defense
Department officials say it did not refer to the legal analysis of the month
before.

DEC. 24 -- A letter to the International Committee of the Red Cross over the
signature of Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski was prepared by military lawyers. The
letter, a response to the Red Cross's concern about conditions at Abu Ghraib,
contended that isolating some inmates at the prison for interrogation because of
their significant intelligence value was a ''military necessity,'' and said
prisoners held as security risks could legally be treated differently from
prisoners of war or ordinary criminals.

OTHER MEMORANDUMS -- Some have been described in reports in The Times and
elsewhere, but their exact contents have not been disclosed. These include a
memorandum that provided advice to interrogators to shield them from liability
from the Convention Against Torture, an international treaty and the
Anti-Torture Act, a federal law. This memorandum provided what has been
described as a script in which officials were advised that they could avoid
responsibility if they were able to plausibly contend that the prisoner was in
the custody of another government and that the United States officials were just
getting the information from the other country's interrogation. The memorandum
advised that for this to work, the United States officials must be able to
contend that the prisoner was always in the other country's custody and had not
been transferred there. International law prohibits the ''rendition'' of
prisoners to countries if the possibility of mistreatment can be anticipated.
NEIL A. LEWIS

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Chronology

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW OF WAR
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW SCHOOLS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TALIBAN (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); AL-QAEDA
(74%); APPROVALS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); FOREIGN POLICY (72%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(65%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Geneva Conventions; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (92%); UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group); Justice
Department; State Department; Taliban

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%) George W (Pres) Bush; John
(Prof) Yoo; Colin L (Sec) Powell; Alberto R Gonzales; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld;
Neil A Lewis

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan  ; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             805 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

An American in The Hague?

BYLINE: By Jonathan D. Tepperman.

Jonathan D. Tepperman is senior editor at Foreign Affairs magazine.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; After Abu Ghraib; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 745 words


The Bush administration has yet to accept much responsibility for the torture at
Abu Ghraib prison. True, the president has apologized for the abuse on Arab
television, and several top military officials in Iraq -- including the general
in charge of the prison and her boss -- have been quietly suspended or will soon
be transferred. But so far, legal responsibility has fallen exclusively on the
seven court-martialed soldiers who were directly involved. Administration
officials have argued that they themselves are not liable, since the incidents
were the work of a few bad actors.

This may or may not be true. Even if no smoking gun is ever found to directly
link American officials to the crimes, however, they could still find themselves
in serious jeopardy under international law. Under the doctrine of command
responsibility, officials can be held accountable for war crimes committed by
their subordinates even if they did not order them -- so long as they had
control over the perpetrators, had reason to know about the crimes, and did not
stop them or punish the criminals.

This doctrine is the product of an American initiative. Devised by Allied judges
and prosecutors at the Nuremberg tribunals, it was a means to impute
responsibility for wartime atrocities to Nazi leaders, who often communicated
indirectly and avoided leaving a paper trail.

More recently, the principle has been fine-tuned by two other American
creations: the international tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda, which were
established in the last decade by the United Nations Security Council at the
United States' behest. These tribunals have held that political and military
leaders can be found liable for war crimes committed by those under their
''effective control'' if they do nothing to prevent them.

If this is now the standard in international law -- which the United States and
the United Nations are applying to rogue leaders like the former Yugoslavian
president, Slobodan Milosevic -- what does it mean for Washington? The rulings
of the Nuremberg and Hague tribunals don't directly bind the United States at
home. But given that these institutions were created with the support and
approval of the United States, their judgments will be difficult for American
officials to disown.

American courts have already accepted the doctrine of command responsibility. In
July 2002, for example, a federal court in Miami found two retired Salvadoran
generals liable for torture -- even though neither man had committed or ordered
the crimes in question. The jury held that they were nonetheless guilty, since
as El Salvador's minister of defense and head of its national guard at the time
of the torture, they knew (or should have known) about it and could have stopped
it.

For their part, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and other Pentagon
officials recently told Congress that they didn't know and couldn't have known
about a few instances of sexual abuse in Iraq. But this claim is contradicted by
the officer formerly in charge of Abu Ghraib, who has said that her superiors
were warned about the abuses months before they were exposed. And the Red Cross
documented widespread abuses in Iraq last year and raised them with the White
House in January.

Moreover, the abuses seem to have been more than isolated actions. Instead, they
now appear to be part of an explicit policy of coercive interrogations conducted
around the globe and supported by Justice Department and White House lawyers,
who argued in 2002 and 2003 that the Geneva Conventions and other domestic and
international bans on torture did not apply in these cases.

Of course, despite all the incriminating evidence, there is little possibility
that any foreign or domestic judge will ever haul top members of the current
administration into court. The question of guilt or innocence will most likely
remain a political one.

Nonetheless, legal principles can affect politics. If voters begin to believe
that George W. Bush or Donald Rumsfeld is legally responsible for the torture,
it could affect the president's chances in November. Yet if American officials
are not held legally accountable, the damage abroad could be even more severe.
Part of the terrible legacy of Abu Ghraib may be that the United States will
find it difficult to prosecute foreign war criminals if it refuses to accept for
itself the legal standards it accuses them of breaking.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); JURY TRIALS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(76%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); APPROVALS (72%);
JUDGES (71%); GENOCIDE (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

PERSON: Jonathan D Tepperman; George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); EL SALVADOR (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%);
RWANDA (79%); GERMANY (57%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             807 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Attackers Hit Oil Pipelines, Police and a U.S. Convoy

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG; James Glanz contributed reporting from Baghdad for this
article, and Iraqi employees of The New York Times contributed from Falluja and
Najaf.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: INSURGENCY; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 10


Insurgents attacked on several fronts on Wednesday, firing mortars at an Iraqi
militia brigade west of here, setting ablaze two important oil pipelines in the
north and ambushing an American military convoy in the capital.

In Najaf, in the south, fighters loyal to the rebel Shiite cleric Moktada
al-Sadr were repelled when they tried to seize a police station late Wednesday
night despite a declared cease-fire, the second such attack in two days.

The American military also said gunmen killed two bodyguards of a local
politician in Baghdad on Tuesday and seriously wounded the politician.

In Geneva, a spokeswoman for the International Committee of the Red Cross said
the organization had resumed visits to Abu Ghraib prison, Reuters reported.

The spokeswoman, Antonella Notari, said that the initial visit took place
between May 30 and June 3 and that the group was given full access. Well before
the abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib became public, the American military had
tried to severely restrict Red Cross visits.

The group issued a report last year criticizing the treatment of prisoners in
Abu Ghraib and said some procedures were ''tantamount to torture.''

The attack on the militia unit took place near the volatile town of Falluja,
about 30 miles west of here. Insurgents lobbed mortars at a camp housing members
of the Falluja Brigade, which was set up by United States marines in late April
to try to pacify the virulently anti-American city. The attack wounded a militia
member, said Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, a spokesman for the occupation forces.

The 2,000-member brigade is composed partly of guerillas who were fighting the
marines and is led by Gen. Muhammad Latif, a former Baath Party member who fell
out of favor with Saddam Hussein.

The attack highlighted the complex fractures among insurgent groups in the
Falluja area, which has essentially become a safe haven for anti-American forces
since the marines relinquished control.

The marines used concrete barriers to block off two roads leading to the city
from Baghdad. Tanks, Humvees and other armored vehicles were seen parked or
driving around farm pastures off the main highway outside the city.

A wooden sign on the highway said in Arabic, ''No entry into the city.''

In central Najaf, 120 miles south of Baghdad, members of the militia aligned
with Mr. Sadr, the Mahdi Army, attacked a police station late Wednesday night,
but were fought off by police. [In the early hours of Thursday, officers were
seen pursuing the insurgents through the neighborhood, with gunfire from AK-47's
echoing through the streets.]

On Monday evening the insurgents had attempted a similar attack on a different
police station in Najaf but failed to seize it, said Adnan Zurfi, the
American-installed governor. He added that he had ordered more policemen to the
area and had given permission to fire on any attackers.

Ahmad Shaibani, an aide to Mr. Sadr, took issue with an order signed earlier
this week by L. Paul Bremer III, the American administrator in Iraq, which would
appear to bar Mr. Sadr from running for office in planned elections. Mr.
Bremer's order prohibits members or leaders of illegal militias from being
candidates.

Mr. Bremer ''has no right to determine the nature of the elections and whether
militias have the right to participate or not,'' Mr. Shaibani said.

Sabah Mahdi, a manager in a hotel in the city, said ''the whole process is
disappointing'' because ''Mahdi Army fighters are still here, and their weapons
are still here despite the latest agreement.''

In northern Iraq in the early morning, insurgents attacked a pipeline connecting
the oil fields of Kirkuk to the large refinery and power plant in Bayji, said
Asam Jihad, a spokesman for the Oil Ministry. Insurgents also set ablaze an
export pipeline leading from Kirkuk to a Turkish port. The fire was still raging
Wednesday afternoon, and video film showed thick clouds of black smoke filling
the sky.

The attacks on the pipelines came after an assault on fuel and transmission
lines last weekend that forced the shutdown of a large power plant south of
Baghdad.

In northeastern Baghdad, gunmen raked an American military convoy with gunfire,
setting one truck on fire, Agence France-Presse reported. There was no immediate
news of casualties.

A deputy defense minister in Poland said an enemy mortar that hit a munitions
dump on Tuesday killed six Eastern European soldiers under Polish command who
were defusing mines.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: American tanks and other armored vehicles patrolled yesterday
around Falluja, where violence between Iraqi factions continued.
 American security officers yesterday in Al Khadra, in northwestern Baghdad,
where a United States military convoy was fired on. (Photographs by Agence
France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (91%); CRUDE OIL PIPELINES (90%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORISM (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); ARMIES (78%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); GENOCIDE
(74%); TORTURE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); CITY LIFE (66%); CITIES (66%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (63%); POLICE FORCES (56%) Terrorism; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline; Pipelines

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(57%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%); UNITED STATES
MARINE CORPS (54%) Red Cross

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (73%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Edward Wong; Moktada Al-
Sadr

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (97%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Falluja (Iraq); Baghdad (Iraq); Najaf (Iraq);
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             810 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2004 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

BUSH DOESN'T SEE NATO SENDING IN TROOPS FOR IRAQ

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON and DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: SUMMIT POLITICS;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: SAVANNAH, Ga., June 10


President Bush said Thursday that after two days of consultations with the
leaders of France and other nations, he did not expect NATO to provide troops to
bolster or replace American forces in Iraq. But he continued to press for a more
limited NATO role in training Iraqis to take on the burden of security in their
own country, if the new Iraqi government requested the help.

At a news conference at the conclusion of a summit meeting of the Group of 8,
the major industrial nations and Russia, Mr. Bush sounded more cautious about
NATO's future role in Iraq than he did Wednesday morning, when he met with Prime
Minister Tony Blair of Britain.

President Jacques Chirac of France, speaking at his own news conference on
Thursday, reiterated his opposition to any broad NATO intervention, and left
uncertain whether he would support a NATO role in training Iraqi forces. Making
clear that his split with Mr. Bush over Iraq is not completely in the past, he
described the occupation of Iraq as ''costly in every regard,'' and warned
against the risks of NATO ''meddling'' there.

Despite the continuing tensions, Mr. Bush appeared relaxed and at times almost
ebullient as he took questions for 40 minutes, ranging from reflections on
Ronald Reagan's presidency to the failure so far to find banned weapons in Iraq.

When the subject turned to the treatment of prisoners, Mr. Bush said he could
not remember whether he had seen secret Pentagon and Justice Department legal
opinions that concluded he had broad authority to determine what techniques
could be used to interrogate unlawful combatants seized in Afghanistan. But he
insisted several times that his only orders were that interrogators must
''conform to U.S. law'' and act ''consistent with international treaty
obligations.''

His answer is not likely to put to rest the question of whether the White House
condoned harsh treatment of prisoners or coercive interrogation techniques
because administration legal memorandums appeared to re-interpret both American
law and international treaties concerning torture. One administration memo
concluded that ''in wartime it is for the president alone to decide what methods
to use to be prevail against the enemy,'' including interrogation techniques.

While the administration has insisted that these advisory opinions never
resulted in orders to change the way prisoners were treated, critics have argued
that they showed an effort to loosen restrictions on interrogations, and that
techniques created at the American military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, were
eventually used in Iraq.

Iraq dominated the summit meeting, held on nearby Sea Island, and Mr. Bush faced
repeated questions about what role NATO, the United States and Iraqi forces
would play in seeking to quell violence in Iraq. After resistance on the issue
from Mr. Chirac -- who declared two days in a row that it was not NATO's mission
to intervene in Iraq -- the two leaders sought common ground by agreeing that
help from NATO on training would come only if the new interim Iraqi government
requested it.

''I don't expect more troops from NATO to be offered up,'' Mr. Bush said.
''That's an unrealistic expectation. Nobody is suggesting that. What we are
suggesting is for NATO perhaps to help train. Now that will come at the request
of the Iraqi government.''

Asked whether there would be an American face on the security of Iraq for some
time, he shot back, ''There will be an Iraqi face on the security of Iraq.''
Americans troops would begin leaving, he said, ''when the job is done.''

The president confirmed a report on Thursday in The New York Times that the
government is investigating statements by two men who said they were
participants in a plan hatched by Libyan officials to assassinate the ruler of
Saudi Arabia.

''What I can tell you is, is that we're going to make sure we fully understand
the veracity of the plot line, and so we're looking into it,'' he said. Asked
about the effect of a plot on efforts by the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, to convince Washington that he has renounced terrorism, he said,
''We will make sure he honors his commitment.''

At the news conference, Mr. Bush veered from some short, brusque answers --
especially to questions about the abuse of detainees -- to playful bantering
with reporters. At one point, he apologized that he had to answer questions from
the White House press corps first. ''See, I have to live with these people,'' he
explained to the other reporters. ''I don't have to live with you.''

He was asked about one of the newest decorative touches at the White House:
Saddam Hussein's pistol, which is now mounted in his private study and which was
a gift from members of the Delta Force team that captured the former Iraqi
leader in December. In reply to a question about whether he would give the
pistol to Iraq's new interim president, Sheik Ghazi Ajil al-Yawar, he indicated
he would hold onto it.

''Our people were thrilled to have captured him,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And in his
lap were several weapons, one of them was a pistol, and they brought it to me.
It's now the property of the U.S. government.''

Mr. Bush held his news conference after a day largely given over to discussions
on how to help the world's poorest nations, especially those in Africa. He and
his counterparts from Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and Japan -- the
Canadian prime minister, Paul Martin, left early -- had lunch with the leaders
of six African countries.

The Group of 8 leaders endorsed a plan to encourage international cooperation in
research to develop a vaccine for AIDS. They pledged to do more to combat
famines, and to support the establishment of larger peacekeeping forces for use
in Africa. They also committed themselves to extending the life of the main
international program for reducing the debts of the poorest countries. But they
failed to agree on a plan promoted by Britain to cancel all the debt of those
poor countries.

The leaders also remained deadlocked over how much of Iraq's debt to forgive.
French officials said Mr. Chirac had made clear his position that given its oil
reserves, Iraq should be able to pay off much of its debt, a stance opposed by
the United States, which is pressing for all or most Iraqi debt to be forgiven.

Three of the Group of 8 leaders -- Mr. Blair, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi
of Italy and Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany -- were scheduled to attend
the funeral services for former President Ronald Reagan on Friday.
At the end of a meeting that the administration had sought to portray as
bringing a close to any bitterness over Iraq, Mr. Bush said he had told Mr.
Chirac that their countries ''will continue to consult closely'' on the issue of
NATO's involvement.

A senior administration official told reporters later that the two governments
had agreed to continue talking before the annual NATO meeting at the end of the
month in Turkey. The official said it was ''fair to characterize the positions
as moving carefully in the same direction,'' adding, ''What we did not hear is a
firm red line of no's.''

But Mr. Chirac, before leaving Thursday night, suggested that there remained a
clear divide between the United States and France. While Mr. Bush pushed for any
role for NATO that might be achievable, Mr. Chirac appeared intent on limiting
that role as much as possible and ruling out the deployment of NATO troops.

''Any meddling by NATO in this region seems to us to carry great risks,
including risks of clashes between the Christian West and the Muslim East,'' Mr.
Chirac said. ''We have indicated clearly that we cannot accept a mission of that
type for NATO.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 12, 2004



CORRECTION: A front-page article yesterday about comments by President Bush on
the level of troops in Iraq rendered a word incorrectly in a quotation from an
administration memo that addressed the abuse of prisoners in Iraq. It said that
''in wartime it is for the president alone to decide what methods to use to best
prevail against the enemy,'' including interrogation techniques -- not ''to be
prevail.''



GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush and President Jacques Chirac of France conferred
yesterday on the final day of the Group of 8 summit meeting on Sea Island, Ga.
(Photo by Associated Press)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CORRECTIONS (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (85%); ASSASSINATION (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); TRENDS (77%);
PRISONS (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
(74%); ECONOMIC NEWS (74%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (73%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (70%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (69%); TORTURE (69%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (68%);
LEGISLATION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (65%);
TERRORISM (60%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Economic Conditions and Trends; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva Conventions;
Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations;
Third World and Developing Countries; Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline; Firearms

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); GROUP OF EIGHT (G8)
(91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Group of Eight; Justice Department; North Atlantic
Treaty Organization

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (59%); TONY
BLAIR (56%) George W (Pres) Bush; Jacques (Pres) Chirac; Saddam Hussein; David E
Sanger; Richard W Stevenson

CITY: SAVANNAH, GA, USA (59%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (96%); FRANCE (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); LIBYA (79%); AFRICA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); CUBA (65%)

REGION: Iraq; France; Iraq; Afghanistan; United States; Libya; Saudi Arabia;
Africa; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             813 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 66 words


A front-page article yesterday about comments by President Bush on the level of
troops in Iraq rendered a word incorrectly in a quotation from an administration
memo that addressed the abuse of prisoners in Iraq. It said that ''in wartime it
is for the president alone to decide what methods to use to best prevail against
the enemy,'' including interrogation techniques -- not ''to be prevail.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); WAR CRIMES (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); TERRORISM (59%) Correction
Stories; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (88%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             814 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 61 words


Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about plans by American
religious leaders to broadcast a 30-second advertisement on Arabic television
networks next week condemning the prison abuse in Abu Ghraib gave an outdated
title for one speaker, the Rev. Donald Shriver. He is a former president of the
Union Theological Seminary in New York, not the current one.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); PRISONS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (87%); TERRORISM (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) Correction Stories; Political Advertising; Arabs;
Television; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Union Theological Seminary

PERSON: Donald (Rev) Shriver

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             818 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Legal Memos About Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 173 words



To the Editor:

As an interrogator in World War II with 10 months' combat experience, I would
like to comment on the treatment of prisoners in Iraq.

The abuse in Iraq is beyond the pale; the participants should be punished
severely. I cannot comment on what the president may or may not be allowed
legally to instruct interrogators as to torture. But I can comment on torture,
both mental and physical, to some extent from personal experience.

When your life and the lives of your fellow soldiers and countrymen are
dependent on your obtaining information that you believe a prisoner possesses,
getting name, rank and serial number is not enough. Some form of pressure,
mental and/or physical or both, is needed and should be applied.

This will displease the majority of people, but they will be the first to
complain that the intelligence services ''did not connect the dots'' and ask for
an investigation when some disaster happens. Let us hope that we can locate
terrorist attempts before they happen.

HENRY GRIESMAN
New York, June 9, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); GENOCIDE (74%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(69%); TERRORISM (65%) World War II (1939-45); United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Henry Griesman

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             819 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Legal Memos About Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 127 words



To the Editor:

The notion that torture is justified or effective in eliciting information is
misguided and dangerous. Individuals so brutalized will say whatever they think
their interrogators want to hear.

Many of the interrogation methods used in Iraq and Guantanamo, including
beatings, sleep deprivation and forced nakedness, constitute torture and can
have devastating physical and psychological health consequences. These methods
are familiar to the descriptions of brutality I hear from the torture victims I
care for from around the world.

Any condoning of torture by the United States risks increasing what is already a
worldwide public health epidemic.

ALLEN S. KELLER, M.D.
Director, Bellevue-N.Y.U.
Program for Survivors of Torture
New York, June 9, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); TERRORISM (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Torture; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Allen S (Dr) Keller

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             820 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Legal Memos About Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 106 words



To the Editor:

Visiting Germany in 1963, my friends and I were eating at a restaurant in Munich
when a group of Germans approached to ask if we were Americans. When we
acknowledged that we were, they insisted on paying for our dinners because, they
said, they had been German war prisoners in American custody and, unlike the
Soviet captors, the American soldiers had treated them so well that they wanted
to express their gratitude in this gesture.

It was a moving moment; the men and their wives stood around four young
Americans, all weeping. And at that moment, we were proud to be American.

BARBARA A. CLEARY
Dayton, Ohio, June 10, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%);
RESTAURANTS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); POWS & MIAS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%);
WORLD WAR II (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
TERRORISM (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Terrorism; World War II (1939-45)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Barbara A Cleary

CITY: DAYTON, OH, USA (50%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%); GERMANY (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Germany; Munich (Germany)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             821 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Legal Memos About Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 139 words



To the Editor:

The legal memorandums that Attorney General John Ashcroft won't release were
obviously intended to obfuscate law that is clear and unambiguous (news article,
June 9).

Under international law and United States law, torture and cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment are crimes. There are no exceptions, not in
wartime, not for national security.

Torture victims suffer a lifetime of debilitating physical and psychological
symptoms. Perpetrators and the citizens of the country that employs such people
bear a lifetime of shame.

It is time for a full investigation, removal from office and prosecutions of
everyone who ordered, justified or knew about but did not do everything in his
power to prevent the barbarities inflicted on prisoners in United States
custody.

ELLEN L. LUTZ
Cambridge, Mass., June 9, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (71%); TERRORISM (69%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); DISMISSALS (68%) Torture; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Ellen L Lutz

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             822 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Legal Memos About Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 78 words



To the Editor:

Re ''The Roots of Abu Ghraib'' (editorial, June 9):

Can the American Bar Association ignore the fact that some of the country's top
lawyers wrote a memorandum advising our leaders that the torture of prisoners
was not illegal?

The military is investigating itself to discover how the Abu Ghraib abuses
happened.

Shouldn't the legal profession now do the same regarding the secret March 2003
memo that legitimized torture?

DENIS PELLI
New York, June 10, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LAWYERS
(87%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(85%); LEGAL SERVICES (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM (59%)
Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Legal Profession;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (91%) American Bar Assn

PERSON: Denis Pelli

COUNTRY: IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             825 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture Incarnate, and Propped on a Pedestal

BYLINE: By SARAH BOXER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review; The World; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 283 words


ICONS live their own lives. Of all the photographs of American soldiers
tormenting Iraqi prisoners in the Abu Ghraib prison, one alone has become the
icon of the abuse.

The image appears in mock advertisements in New York, in paintings in San
Francisco, on murals in Tehran and on mannequins in Baghdad. It shows no dogs,
no dead, no leash, no face, no nakedness, no pileup, no thumbs-up. It is the
picture of a hooded prisoner standing on a box, electrodes attached to his
outstretched arms.

Why this image above all the rest? It is far from the most violent, but easily
the most graphic. You need less than a second's glance to know exactly what it
is. The triangle of the hood silhouettes sharply against the hot pink or
chartreuse background of a fake iPod ad. Andy Warhol himself could not have done
better. It holds its own on murals meant to be read from far away. It plays well
against the Statue of Liberty. It suggests Christ on the cross. And, best yet,
the hooded figure in the photograph is on a pedestal. It is already an icon.

As a symbolic shape, the hood is almost as strong as a cross. The difference is
that the hood has generally been the sign of the persecutor, not of the victim.
It is the uniform of the executioner, the sheet of the Klansman, the mask of
Death. Until now. In these images, you can see the hood's meaning begin to
change and take root.

Maybe it's because the hood resembles a veil. Look at the photograph of two
people in Tehran walking by murals based on the Abu Ghraib photographs: the
hooded figure on the box -- echoing the robed and veiled Muslim woman passing in
front of it -- becomes every Muslim. The photo is an ad for martyrdom, made in
America.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Whether deployed at a London protest, below, or on a mural in
Tehran, the image of the hooded Abu Ghraib prisoner has become a potent
anti-American icon.
In a Manhattan subway station, above, the image takes on a ghastly Pop Art cast
in Baghdad, it creates a crude echo of the Statue of Liberty. (Photo by
Alessandro Abbonizio/Agence France-Presse)
(Photo by Behrouz Mehri/Agence France-Presse)
(Photo by Gizmodo.com)
 (Photo by Ali Jasim/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (79%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); DOGS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); GENOCIDE (68%); RELIGION (67%); TERRORISM (65%) Torture;
Photography; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Sarah Boxer

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (77%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             826 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abuse Panel Interviews 6

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 98 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


A committee appointed by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to investigate
prisoner abuse interviewed more than a half dozen witnesses on Monday, including
the Pentagon's top civilian intelligence official, according to an official
familiar with the inquiry.

The panel did not disclose names of those interviewed Monday, but an official
said members met with Stephen A. Cambone, the Pentagon's intelligence chief;
Maj. Gen. Donald Ryder, the Army's provost marshal general; Maj. Gen. Geoffrey
Miller, who commands American-run prisons in Iraq; and three others.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); ARMIES (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); PRISONS
(85%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%) Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Intelligence Services

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Stephen A (Under Sec) Cambone; Geoffrey (Maj
Gen) Miller

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             827 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 Britons Charged With Abuse Will Face Trial in Military Court

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: PRISONER
MISTREATMENT; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 14


Four British soldiers are to be tried in military court on charges of seriously
abusing civilian Iraqi prisoners by assaulting them and forcing them to engage
in sexual acts, according to a statement issued Monday by Lord Goldsmith, the
attorney general.

The four soldiers are members of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers, and the
charges resulted from a tip in May 2003 by a photo-shop clerk who said she was
sickened when she developed a set of photos from one of the soldiers after he
returned from duty in Iraq. Lord Goldsmith's statement referred to the
''photographic evidence developed in this country'' that had then been turned
over to the police.

The clerk, Kelly Tilford of Staffordshire, said publicly that the photos showed
male prisoners forced to engage in sexual acts. One prisoner was photographed
stripped to the waist and suspended in the air from a forklift.

''I felt sick when I looked at the pictures,'' Ms. Tilford said. ''They were
grim. I just felt awful.''

Lord Goldsmith told the House of Lords in the statement that ''the charges
against the four include assault, indecent assault, which apparently involves
making victims engage in sexual activity between themselves, and a military
charge of prejudicing good order and military discipline.''

The statement said the abuse occurred ''while the civilians were being
temporarily detained, but not in a prison or detention facility.''

Lord Goldsmith set no date for the trial, but the statement said any trial would
be held in public. It would be the first British court-martial arising from
allegations of prisoner abuse after similar charges were filed in the American
sector in Iraq, principally at Abu Ghraib prison, west of Baghdad, where
extensive misconduct by American soldiers has been documented through testimony
and photographs turned over to United States military investigators.

Lord Goldsmith said at least four other cases were expected to be referred to
the Army Prosecuting Authority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); SEX
OFFENSES (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (78%); ARMIES
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MISCONDUCT
(74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (69%); GENOCIDE (64%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (64%)
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Photography

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Goldsmith (Lord); Patrick E Tyler

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%); LONDON, ENGLAND (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             828 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 16, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dare We Call It Genocide?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE CHAD-SUDAN BORDER


The Bush administration says it is exploring whether to describe the mass murder
and rape in the Darfur region of Sudan as ''genocide.'' I suggest that President
Bush invite to the White House a real expert, Magboula Muhammad Khattar, a
24-year-old widow huddled under a tree here.

The world has acquiesced shamefully in the Darfur genocide, perhaps because
320,000 deaths this year (a best-case projection from the U.S. Agency for
International Development) seems like one more boring statistic. So listen to
Ms. Khattar's story, multiply it by hundreds of thousands, and let's see if we
still want to look the other way.

Just a few months ago, Ms. Khattar had a great life. Her sweet personality and
lovely appearance earned a hefty bride price of 40 cattle when she was married
four years ago to Ali Daoud, a prosperous farmer. The family owned 300 cattle
and 50 camels, making them among the wealthiest in their village, Ab-Layha in
western Sudan. Ms. Khattar promptly bore two children, the youngest born late
last year.

About the same time, though, the Sudanese government resolved to crush a
rebellion in Darfur, a region the size of France in western Sudan. Sudan armed
and paid a militia of Arab raiders, the Janjaweed, and authorized them to
slaughter and drive out members of the Zaghawa, Masalit and Fur tribes.

On March 12, Ms. Khattar was performing her predawn Muslim prayers about 4 a.m.
when a Sudanese government Antonov aircraft started dropping bombs on Ab-Layha,
which is made up of Zaghawa tribespeople. Moments later, more than 1,000
Janjaweed attackers rode into the village on horses and camels, backed by
Sudanese government troops in trucks.

''The Janjaweed shouted: 'We will not allow blacks here. We will not let Zaghawa
here. This land is only for Arabs,' '' Ms. Khattar recalled.

Ms. Khattar grabbed her children, and, as shots and flames raged around her,
raced for a nearby forest. But her father and mother tried to protect their
animals -- they were yelling, ''Don't take our livestock.'' They were both shot
dead.

The attack was part of a deliberate strategy to ensure that the village would be
forever uninhabitable, that the Zaghawa could never live there again. The
Janjaweed poisoned wells by stuffing them with the corpses of people and
donkeys. They also blew up a dam that supplied water to the farms, destroyed
seven hand pumps in the village and burned all the homes and even the village
school, the clinic and the mosque.

In separate interviews, I talked to more than a dozen other survivors from
Ab-Layha, and they all confirm Ms. Khattar's story. By most accounts, about 100
people were massacred that day in Ab-Layha, and a particular effort was made to
exterminate all men and boys, even the very young. Women and girls were
sometimes allowed to flee, but the prettiest were kidnapped.

Most of those raped don't want to talk about it. But Zahra Abdel Karim, a
30-year-old woman, told me how in the same attack on Ab-Layha, the Janjaweed
shot to death her husband, Adam, and 7-year-old son, Rahshid, as well as three
of her brothers. Then they grabbed her 4-year-old son, Rasheed, from her arms
and cut his throat.

The Janjaweed took her and her two sisters away on horses and gang-raped them,
she said. The troops shot one sister, Kuttuma, and cut the throat of the other,
Fatima, and they discussed how to mutilate her. (Sexual humiliation has been
part of the Sudanese strategy to drive out the African tribespeople. The
Janjaweed routinely add to the stigma by branding or scarring the women they
rape.)

''One Janjaweed said: 'You belong to me. You are a slave to the Arabs, and this
is the sign of a slave,' '' she recalled. He slashed her leg with a sword before
letting her hobble away, stark naked. Other villagers confirmed that they had
found her naked and bleeding, and she showed me the scar on her leg.

By comparison, Ms. Khattar was one of the lucky ones. She lost her parents, her
home and all her belongings, but her husband and children were alive, and she
had not been raped. Unfortunately, her luck would soon run out.

I'll tell you more of her story on Saturday, because if she and her people
aren't victims of genocide, then the word has no meaning.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); CHILDREN (89%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); MAMMALS (88%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); FAMILY (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); POLITICS (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (69%); ANIMALS (68%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (56%) Sex
Crimes; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: US AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Nicholas D Kristof; Magboula Muhammad Khattar

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             829 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 16, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq Seeks Custody of Hussein; Bush Has Security Concerns

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER and EDWARD WONG; Elisabeth Bumiller reported from
Washington for this article and Edward Wong from Baghdad.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE DICTATOR; Pg.
1

LENGTH: 1372 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


President Bush said Tuesday that the United States would hand over Saddam
Hussein to the new Iraqi government only when it was clear that the Iraqis had
the ability to securely keep him in custody.

His comments came after Iraq's new interim prime minister, Iyad Allawi, speaking
in Baghdad, called for the Americans to hand over all detainees, including Mr.
Hussein, by June 30, when Iraq is to gain limited sovereignty from the United
States.

Custody of Mr. Hussein was one of several issues on which the Americans and the
new Iraqi government remain divided as the transfer of authority draws nearer.

For example, the new government's president, Sheik Ghazi Ajil al-Yawar, demanded
that the Americans cede Mr. Hussein's marble-tiled Republican Palace, a
prominent symbol of power, which the American-led civilian administration had
used as a headquarters and which the United States was considering as a likely
annex to its vast new embassy.

At a sweltering news conference with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan in
the Rose Garden of the White House, President Bush addressed the question of
control over Mr. Hussein. ''We want to make sure that he doesn't come back to
power,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And so, therefore, it's a legitimate question to ask
of the interim government -- how are you going to make sure that he stays in
jail?''

Mr. Bush did not say when custody would be transferred.

''We're working to make sure there's appropriate security,'' Mr. Bush said.

The White House had intended the news conference to promote progress in
Afghanistan, and Vice President Dick Cheney and other top administration
officials attended. But it was dominated by questions about Iraq.

''I mean, one thing, obviously, is that we don't want, and I know the Iraqi
interim government doesn't want, is there to be lax security and for Saddam
Hussein to somehow not stand trial for the horrendous murders and torture that
he inflicted upon the Iraqi people,'' Mr. Bush said.

Mr. Hussein, who was captured by United States forces in December 2003, is now
being held as a prisoner of war at an undisclosed American detention facility in
Iraq.

It is unclear who would guard him under the new government or where he might be
held. A senior Bush administration official said late Tuesday that one option
under serious discussion was for the American military to give legal
jurisdiction to the new Iraqi government but to retain physical custody of Mr.
Hussein until the Iraqis have a secure place to hold him.

A tribunal headed by Salem Chalabi -- a nephew of Ahmad Chalabi, head of the
Iraqi National Congress -- has been established to bring Mr. Hussein and members
of his government to trial. War crimes and genocide are among the charges that
will be considered, Salem Chalabi has said.

The Geneva Conventions require a country to release prisoners of war at the end
of a war or occupation, unless criminal charges are brought against the
prisoners. The Bush administration has insisted repeatedly that the occupation
is ending on June 30, when the American-led Coalition Provisional Authority is
dissolved.

But Dan Senor, a spokesman for the authority in Iraq, said Tuesday that Mr.
Hussein could remain a prisoner of war for some time. ''We also do not have to
hand him over until there's a cessation of active hostilities,'' he said.
''Hostilities, unfortunately, continue.''

The American military has said it intends to continue to hold 4,000 to 5,000
detainees after June 30. A lawyer for the occupation authority said those
released could be charged and tried by one of three Iraqi court systems.

At the news conference, Mr. Bush also said it would be up to the new government
of Iraq to determine how to handle Moktada al-Sadr, a fiery Shiite cleric who
has led an insurgency against the American-led occupation and who Mr. Bush has
called a ''thug.'' Mr. Sadr is forming a political party that will probably take
part in Iraqi elections next year.

His actions are in direct defiance of L. Paul Bremer III, the top American
civilian administrator in Iraq, who issued an order last week barring people
with illegal militias -- like that of Mr. Sadr -- from taking part in elections
in the near future.

''The interim Iraqi government will deal with al-Sadr in the way they see fit,''
Mr. Bush said. ''They're sovereign.''

In Baghdad, President Yawar said he approved of the plan by Mr. Sadr to start a
political party. ''I think this is a very smart move of him,'' he said. ''I've
kept on saying consistently that if I were in his shoes, I would try and go into
the political arena instead of raising arms.''

Another dividing point was whether Iraqi law applied to foreign contractors. Dr.
Allawi wants it to; Mr. Senor, the occupation authority spokesman, said such
workers would answer to Iraqi laws if they are charged with criminal acts. But
an order signed by Mr. Bremer gives foreign contractors immunity from legal
prosecution over any incident involving their work, Mr. Senor said.

The debate over the Republican Palace is particularly intense, given the strong
symbolism involved.

''We asked that the Republican Palace be vacated at the first possible
opportunity in order for us to use it as Iraqis, as a Republican Palace or a
museum,'' President Yawar said. ''Whatever we do with it is a matter for Iraqi
sovereignty. It is a symbol of Iraqi sovereignty.''

The Rose Garden news conference started as planned, with Mr. Bush and Mr. Karzai
giving lengthy statements about Afghanistan, including a pledge that the nation
would hold its first democratic elections in September. Mr. Karzai said 3.8
million voters had been registered -- more than a third of the electorate, but a
number far short of United Nations goals. Mr. Karzai acknowledged that he was
cooperating with those mujahedeen leaders who support him as a presidential
candidate, a move that has upset many Afghans. But Mr. Karzai said that the
mujahedeen, who fought the Soviet occupation and have dominated Afghan politics
for a decade, would not join his government.

''No deals have been made, no coalitions have been made and no coalition will be
made,'' said Mr. Karzai. The Afghan president, known for his colorful dress,
wore a lavish emerald-green silk cape. He removed it at the podium after 20
minutes under the Washington sun. Mr. Karzai was on his fourth trip to
Washington as leader of Afghanistan. He sought political support, NATO troops
and an American understanding of his relationship with the warlords. His trip
was designed to bolster his standing in Afghanistan and help stabilize the
nation before the voting in September.

For his part, Mr. Bush appeared in an ebullient mood as he stood by Mr. Karzai's
side, ready to promote what he considers a good-news story of his
administration, at least in relation to Iraq.

''Coalition forces, including many brave Afghans, have brought America,
Afghanistan and the free world its first victory in the war on terror,'' Mr.
Bush said. ''Afghanistan is no longer a terrorist factory sending thousands of
killers into the world.''

Joining the president in the Rose Garden was an unusual display of his high
command. Along with Vice President Cheney were Defense Secretary Donald H.
Rumsfeld; Secretary of State Colin L. Powell; Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser; Karen P. Hughes, an adviser to the president; and Laura Bush.

The United States in recent months has increased its forces in Afghanistan to
20,000 troops, and Mr. Bush outlined what he called America's ''iron-clad''
commitment to the country.Mr. Bush did not mention assistance for one of
Afghanistan's biggest problems, the illegal cultivation of opium poppies. The
trade has brought in $2.3 billion last year.

                             --------------------


Deadly Attack in Afghanistan

 (By The New York Times), KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, June 15 -- A senior government
official was gunned down outside his home in this southern city on Tuesday
evening by two men on a motorbike, the deputy provincial governor said.

The official, Hamid Agha, the local director of the Ministry of Refugees and
Rehabilitation, died a few hours later. Three workers at his house were wounded,
said the deputy governor, Muhammad Anas. He blamed members of the Taliban.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan after
a news conference at the Rose Garden yesterday. The leaders pledged that
Afghanistan would hold its first democratic elections in September. (Photo by
Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A1)
Vice President Dick Cheney standing behind Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Secretary of Defense
Donald H. Rumsfeld yesterday in the Rose Garden, where President Bush discussed
the handover of Saddam Hussein to the Iraqi government. (Photo by Doug Mills/The
New York Times)
 Saddam Hussein after his capture by American forces in December. (pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(84%); TERRORISM (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); POLITICS (79%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); TORTURE (76%); CHILD CUSTODY & SUPPORT (72%);
CORRECTIONS (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%); GENOCIDE (66%); JURISDICTION (66%);
POWS & MIAS (65%); CIVIL WAR (64%); MILITARY WEAPONS (63%) Terrorism; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government;
Terrorism; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Elections; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (94%); HAMAD KARZAI (90%); DICK
CHENEY (89%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%) Saddam (Pres)
Hussein; George W (Pres) Bush; Hamid (Pres) Karzai; Iyad (Prime Min) Allawi;
Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; Moktada Al- Sadr; Ghazi Al- (Sheik) Yawar; L Paul III
Bremer; Elisabeth Bumiller; Edward Wong

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             830 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 16, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sierra Leone: War Crimes Court Hears First Witness

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 93 words


His identity concealed behind a walled witness stand, a sobbing 52-year-old
watch repairman opened testimony in the United Nations-backed Special Court for
Sierra Leone by describing how he was tortured and his brother beheaded during a
raid by the notorious pro-government militia called the Kamajors. In his opening
statement, Sam Hinga Norman, above, a former government minister who headed the
Kamajors during the country's decade-long civil war, said the court had no
jurisdiction over him. He and two other militia leaders are the court's first
defendants.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WITNESSES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CIVIL WAR (86%); GENOCIDE (85%);
JURISDICTION (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (82%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture  ; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) Kamajors

PERSON: Sam Hinga Norman

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             831 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 16, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Scolds U.S. Officials Over Barring Jet Travelers

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


A federal judge on Tuesday accused the federal government of using ''frivolous
claims'' to avoid publicly disclosing who is banned from boarding airplanes
because of terrorism concerns.

The sharply worded accusation came in a lawsuit brought by the American Civil
Liberties Union and others seeking to find out how hundreds of people wound up
on the government's ''no fly'' list after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The
list of banned passengers has been a frequent target for civil rights advocates
who accuse the Bush administration of using excessive secrecy in its campaign
against terrorism.

The judge who is hearing the lawsuit, Charles R. Breyer of Federal District
Court in San Francisco, said in an opinion released Tuesday that he had
privately reviewed voluminous government materials and that in many cases,
government lawyers did not appear to have met their burden of proving that the
material was exempt from the Freedom of Information Act.

Judge Breyer directed the government to review all the material it had withheld
and to reconsider whether it could be properly exempted from public disclosure.

He said the defendants -- the Justice Department, the F.B.I. and the
Transportation Security Administration -- had used an overly broad and ''liberal
application'' of the law to justify the refusal to turn over critical
information about how the government determined who was barred from flying and
who was affected.

The A.C.L.U. estimates that more than 500 people in San Francisco alone have
been stopped from boarding planes because of terrorist concerns, some of them
after their names mistakenly wound up on no-fly lists.

Some passengers say they believe they were stopped because their names were
similar to those of terrorist suspects, while others say they suspect their
strong liberal politics were a factor. In one well-publicized incident in 2002,
some two dozen members of a group called Peace Action of Wisconsin, including a
priest, a nun and high school students, were detained in Milwaukee on their way
to a ''teach-in'' and missed their flight.

Government lawyers refused to turn over much of the material sought by the
A.C.L.U. because they said it involved sensitive security information or other
material exempted from public disclosure.

But Judge Breyer said the withheld material included ''innocuous information''
about aviation protocols, publicly available information from newspapers and the
names of senior transportation officials.

''Who holds a particular office at a particular time is a matter of public
record,'' the judge wrote. ''Thus, the redaction makes no sense.''

He added that his review ''demonstrates that in many instances the government
has not come close to meeting its burden and, in some instances, has made
frivolous claims of exemption.''

A Justice Department lawyer refused to comment on the opinion.

Thomas Burke, a San Francisco lawyer representing the A.C.L.U. in the case, said
the ruling represented a significant victory and could lead to more light being
shed on how the government determined who should be barred from flying -- and
how people mistakenly put on the list might be able to get off.

''The end goal here,'' Mr. Burke said, ''is to determine how these names were
even developed in the first place.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); TERRORISM (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); WAR ON TERROR
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); TRAVELER SAFETY &
SECURITY (75%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (75%); AIRLINES (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(72%); AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (71%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (50%); HIGH
SCHOOLS (50%) Airlines and Airplanes; Security and Warning Systems; Suits and
Litigation; Government Information Policies; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION (55%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE (55%) American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Charles R (Judge) Breyer; Charles R (Judge) Breyer; Eric Lichtblau

CITY: MILWAUKEE, WI, USA (79%)

STATE: WISCONSIN, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             832 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Genocide Case Against Milosevic Upheld

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 127 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal dismissed a mid-trial motion to acquit
Slobodan Milosevic on genocide charges, handing the former Yugoslav president a
setback three weeks before he is to begin his defense. Three lawyers appointed
by the court to ensure fairness had argued that the prosecution failed to
provide sufficient evidence to support the genocide charges.

The tribunal released its decision one day before it reconvenes for a procedural
hearing. The trial, which has been repeatedly interrupted because of Mr.
Milosevic's health since it began in February 2002, has been in recess since
February, when the prosecution rested its case. Mr. Milosevic, who is
representing himself on 66 charges, is to begin presenting his case on July 5.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); ACQUITTAL (88%); EVIDENCE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); VERDICTS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO
(79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             833 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Voices From the Past

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

As a historian of American slavery and emancipation, I was overjoyed to read
''Journals of 2 Former Slaves Draw Vivid Portraits'' (front page, June 14).

Both Wallace Turnage and John Washington appear to have braved incredible
circumstances to claim their freedom, providing strong testimony to the horrors
and abuses of the slave system and the immense desire for freedom of the slaves.
One suspects that there are many more like documents -- diaries, poems, lost
newspapers -- squirreled away that may yet find a wider audience.

As we acknowledge a more inclusive past that better recognizes the agency of
former slaves in shaping American freedom and democracy, we create a more
conducive atmosphere for such sources to be read and interpreted. In the
process, may the image of the docile, idle slave forever vanish!

HAMPTON CAREY
Redding, Conn., June 16, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); HISTORY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Slavery

PERSON: Hampton Carey; Wallace (d1916) Turnage; John (D1918) Washington

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             836 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Account of Plot Sets Off Debate Over Credibility

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE
INTERROGATIONS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


In the Sept. 11 commission reports released Wednesday, the striking portrait of
Al Qaeda as a wobbly but determined organization lurching toward its
catastrophic strike against America was built largely on the two plot leaders'
own words.

In a series of interrogations in secret locations with United States officials,
two of the plot masterminds, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Ramzi bin al-Shibh, have
provided the most detailed account yet of the origins of the Sept. 11 attacks
and the challenges faced by the group's top lieutenants.

But their accounts have stirred an unresolved debate about their credibility.
Mr. bin al-Shibh, who was captured in 2002, and Mr. Mohammed, who was
apprehended in 2003, have been the subjects of highly coercive interrogation
methods authorized by the Bush administration for use against high-level Qaeda
detainees, senior government officials say. Those methods, some officials said,
cast doubt on the reliability of the accounts.

In interviews earlier this year, some counterterrorism officials in the United
States and Europe said that Mr. Mohammed had begun to cooperate and that
important breakthroughs were being made in the understanding of the Sept. 11
plot and Al Qaeda's strengths and limitations. ''He's singing like a bird,'' a
senior European counterterrorism official said in a recent interview.

Mr. bin al-Shibh has also proven to be cooperative with interrogators, several
senior officials said. But they said his cooperation also did not begin
immediately. Several senior counterterrorism officials overseas said recently
that they understood that both men possibly had begun to cooperate either after
being subjected to coercive interrogations or after being threatened with
torture, an accusation adamantly denied by American officials.

None of the high-level Qaeda figures like Mr. bin al-Shibh and Mr. Mohammed was
questioned under the rules of the Geneva Conventions, which require humane
treatment of prisoners in questioning. Senior officials have said Mr. Mohammed
was ''waterboarded,'' a technique in which his head was pushed under water and
he was made to believe that he might drown. Another detainee had a noose placed
around his neck.

These techniques have led to a debate within the government about the
completeness and reliability of the detainees' statements. While the accounts of
Mr. bin al-Shibh and Mr. Mohammed are believed to be mostly credible, the
officials said that a significant number of law enforcement and intelligence
officials took a more skeptical view than was reflected in the commission
reports.

At Wednesday's hearing, at least one commissioner, Fred F. Fielding, wondered
aloud about how trustworthy Mr. Mohammed's information was, declaring, ''Our
concern is that while there's some that can be verified, there are other areas
where it certainly could be a source of disinformation for whatever reason.''
The disagreements are nuanced, but significant. Not all counterterrorism
officials believe, for example, that Osama bin Laden exercised the kind of
command over the Sept. 11 operation that is described in the report released
Wednesday. In part, the officials said, they suspect that the captured Qaeda
figures have a strong desire to play down their own roles and have been willing
to make it appear that Mr. bin Laden was the dominant figure in an effort to
enhance his stature.

Investigators conducted a vast analysis of communications, including cellphone,
Internet and courier traffic between the Sept. 11 plotters and their
confederates, like Mr. Mohammed, the officials said. That analysis failed to
show a close collaboration between them in the months before the attacks and
virtually no communication with Mr. bin Laden, a finding that contradicts
Wednesday's reports.

As portrayed by Mr. Mohammed and Mr. bin al-Shibh, Mr. bin Laden was far more
hands-on than was previously known, establishing attack dates and approving
target sites in Washington. His subordinates say he wanted them to try to ram a
plane into the White House, though Mohamed Atta, the hijacking leader who died
in the 9/11 attacks, and Mr. Mohammed were reported to have been concerned that
it might prove to be too difficult.

Moreover, under harsh interrogation methods, both Mr. Mohammed and Mr. bin
al-Shibh appear to have been willing to provide elaborate accounts of past
events. But they appeared to have been less willing to describe operations that
have not yet been carried out, leading some of the intelligence officials to
raise questions about the truthfulness of some or all of their statements.

In releasing a staff report on the plot on Wednesday, the commission staff
members wrote that they did not have direct access to any detainee and had based
their account on intelligence reports drawn from the interrogations. ''Some of
this material is inconsistent,'' one report said. ''We have had to make judgment
calls based on the weight and credibility of the evidence.''

Much of the information cited in the reports as fact is actually uncorroborated
or nearly impossible to confirm, the officials said, citing as an example the
statements contained in the reports about the thinking and motivations of
hijackers like Mr. Atta.

The absence of corroborating evidence was one reason that so much of the
material has never been cited before by senior law enforcement or intelligence
officials who have testified repeatedly about the plot. At the same time, the
commission staff investigators are the first independent researchers to review
the large cache of interrogation reports, which has remained classified.

The interrogation methods were authorized by a secret set of rules that were
endorsed by the Justice Department and the Central Intelligence Agency. The
rules were among the first adopted after the Sept. 11 attacks and appear to have
contributed to a new understanding throughout the government that intelligence
and military officials would have wider latitude to deal harshly with detainees.

Some Bush administration officials have said that the interrogation techniques
stopped short of torture as defined in a federal criminal statute that outlaws
the use of extreme methods against detainees by Americans overseas. They have
said that the methods were justified in order to obtain potentially lifesaving
information to disrupt pending attacks.

The interrogation of the high-level Qaeda operatives was among the most
secretive of the administration's intelligence efforts after the attacks. All of
the 12 to 24 detainees are being held outside the United States. None has ever
been visited by a lawyer or human rights organization.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); LAW OF WAR (76%); HIJACKING
(76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) Airlines and Airplanes; Torture; Airlines and Airplanes; World Trade
Center (NYC); Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) George W (Pres) Bush; David Johnston; Don Jr Van
Natta; Khalid Shaikh Mohammed; Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             837 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Requests Subpoena of Western Leaders in Crimes Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, June 17


Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, requested Thursday that
former President Bill Clinton, Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany and Prime
Minister Tony Blair of Britain testify at his war crimes trial.

''They were heads of state, I was a head of state,'' said Mr. Milosevic, who
faces charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide stemming from
the Balkan conflicts of the 1990's. ''You are trying me here as a head of
state.'' He wanted them to testify, he said, about the war they waged against
Yugoslavia.

The former Balkan strongman, looking rested after a long break, was in court
Thursday for a procedural hearing about his defense case, which is scheduled to
start on July 5.

The three politicians Mr. Milosevic wants to question are from a list of nearly
1,400 witnesses he has submitted to the United Nations tribunal. Only a small
portion of these candidates are likely to be heard. He has been granted 150
court days for his defense, which at best would leave room for about 300 people.

They include former Serb prisoners, academics and military and civilian
officials of his own government, said Zdenko Tomanovic, a member of the team of
Belgrade lawyers who assist Mr. Milosevic unofficially while he conducts his own
defense in court.

But he has also called on a number of prominent Westerners who occupied crucial
positions during the wars of the 1990's that broke up Yugoslavia, Mr. Tomanovic
said.

At Mr. Milosevic's request, letters have been sent to former United States
officials like Richard C. Holbrooke and Madeleine K. Albright, former French
prime minister Alain Juppe, as well as to Mr. Blair, Mr. Schroder and Mr.
Clinton, Mr. Tomanovic said in an interview.

''They were asked to testify more than two months ago, but no one has replied,''
he said. ''That is why my client is now asking the judges to call them.''

Subpoenas have been rare at the United Nations court, and officials concede that
the court can do little to compel anyone to testify. Before the judges will
consider Mr. Milosevic's request to issue the subpoenas, he will have to submit
in writing the arguments why a person is essential to his case. He has not done
so.

Mr. Milosevic also said he wanted the judges to issue an order to the secret
services of Britain, the United States, France and Germany demanding they
disclose relevant documents. In court he gave no details of what documents he
had in mind.

Judge Patrick Robinson, who has been presiding over the trial since illness
forced Richard May, a British judge, to step down earlier this year, reminded
Mr. Milosevic of some of the ground rules for the coming phase of the trial. He
said that Mr. Milosevic had no right to ask leading questions or make speeches,
and must conduct his defense in an orderly manner and produce all necessary
documents well ahead of time to allow for translation.

This may be a hard task for Mr. Milosevic who, while often cross-examining
prosecution witnesses with vigor, has also rambled, digressed and delivered
political commentary in the guise of questions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); SUBPOENAS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); WITNESSES (78%); INTERVIEWS
(78%); GENOCIDE (77%); JUDGES (77%); LAWYERS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (90%); GERHARD SCHRODER (90%); BILL CLINTON (88%); RICHARD
HOLBROOKE (50%) Slobodan Milosevic; Marlise Simons; Gerhard (Chancellor)
Schroder; Tony (Prime Min) Blair; Bill Clinton

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); GERMANY
(93%); UNITED STATES (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); FRANCE (90%); KOSOVO
(79%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Great Britain; Great Britain; Bosnia and
Herzegovina; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             840 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Genocide in Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 116 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's gut-wrenching report from the Chad-Sudan border (''Dare We
Call It Genocide?,'' column, June 16) reminds me of the debate in Washington and
Brussels during the genocide in Yugoslavia in the 1990's.

The United States and NATO at the time were trying to decide what to call the
orgy of killings and rapes, in order to decide whether to intervene. And during
their debate, thousands who could have been saved were killed, raped or made
stateless.

It seems to me that history is repeating itself, and so are we.

Shouldn't some of the ''compassionate'' politicians, who have the power to
intervene on behalf of humanity, do so?

GEZA MADARASZ
Edison, N.J., June 16, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)

PERSON: Geza Madarasz; Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHAD (90%); BELGIUM (71%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             841 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contractor Indicted in Afghan Detainee's Beating

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr. and ARIEL HART; Richard A. Oppel Jr. reported
from Washington for this article and Ariel Hart from Atlanta. James Dao
contributed reporting from Wilmington, N.C.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: PRISONER ABUSE;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


A federal grand jury in North Carolina on Thursday indicted a contractor
employed by the Central Intelligence Agency who is accused of kicking and
beating a detainee over two days at a military base in Afghanistan last June.
The detainee died the next day.

Prosecutors said the Afghan detainee had voluntarily surrendered at the front
gate of the Asadabad base in Afghanistan and was suspected of involvement in
rocket attacks on the base.

The indictment is the first against any civilian as part of the prisoner abuse
scandal that now involves six investigations of military and civilian personnel
in Afghanistan and Iraq.

At a news conference in Washington, Attorney General John Ashcroft announced
that David A. Passaro, 38, a resident of Lillington, N.C., had been indicted in
Raleigh on two counts of assault with a dangerous weapon and two counts of
assault resulting in serious bodily injury. If convicted, Mr. Passaro faces up
to 40 years in prison.

Mr. Ashcroft said Mr. Passaro ''brutally'' beat the detainee, Abdul Wali, with
his hands, feet and a large flashlight, during interrogation sessions on June 19
and 20 last year. Mr. Ashcroft declined to provide additional details -- or say
whether other factors might have contributed to Mr. Wali's death -- except to
say that the assault charges reflect what the government believes ''will be
supported at trial.''

''The United States will not tolerate criminal acts of brutality and violence
against detainees such as those alleged in this indictment,'' Mr. Ashcroft said.

Mr. Passaro's lawyer, Gerald Beaver, said he was stunned when his client was
picked up, saying he had been in consultation with the government since March
and believed Mr. Passaro would be allowed to surrender himself if there were any
indictments.

''Of course he claims innocence,'' Mr. Beaver said. ''The events did not happen
and those that were described have been exaggerated substantially.''

Fourteen years ago, Mr. Passaro was fired by the Police Department in Hartford,
Conn., just months after graduating from the Police Academy, after being
arrested, according to a department spokeswoman, Nancy Mulroy. The state police
in Connecticut said Mr. Passaro had been arrested in October 1990, on felony
assault charges and was convicted of the lesser charge of breach of peace, a
misdemeanor, in July 1991. He paid a $100 fine.

The C.I.A. declined to say Thursday whether agency officials had been aware of
that history, or whether it would have prohibited him from working with
detainees.

C.I.A. officials emphasized that they immediately referred the beating case to
law enforcement authorities last year.

''We take allegations of wrongdoing very seriously, and it's important to bear
in mind that the C.I.A. immediately reported these allegations to the agency's
inspector general and the Department of Justice,'' said an agency spokeswoman,
Anya Guilsher. ''While we cannot comment on the specifics of this case, given
that it is currently before the court, the agency does not support or condone
unlawful activities of any sort and has an obligation to report possible
violations of the law to the appropriate authorities, which was done promptly in
this case.''

Mr. Passaro was arrested Thursday at Fort Bragg, in Fayetteville, N.C., where he
had worked as a medical specialist in the deputy chief of staff surgeon's office
at the Army's Special Operations command headquarters. In that job, Mr. Passaro
served as a civilian medical planner, working with small teams of Special Forces
personnel, but he requested and was granted an unpaid leave to go to Afghanistan
in 2003, said Walter Sokalski, a spokesman for the Army Special Operations
command at Fort Bragg.

Mr. Passaro worked directly for the C.I.A. as an independent contractor for six
months in 2003, a United States official said.

Mr. Ashcroft said that the investigation into Mr. Wali's death would continue,
and that additional charges could be brought if further evidence developed.
Referring to other prisoner abuse allegations, Mr. Ashcroft said the Justice
Department had received one referral from the Department of Defense and
''additional'' referrals from the C.I.A.

Mr. Passaro is being prosecuted by the office of the United States attorney in
Raleigh, Frank Whitney, a decision that Mr. Ashcroft said was made early this
year ''before the exposure generally of the allegations about the prison in
Iraq.''

He said future abuse cases would be handled by federal prosecutors in the
eastern district of Virginia, whose territory includes the Pentagon and C.I.A.

Officials have said that the C.I.A. inspector general has been investigating the
involvement of C.I.A. contractors and officers in two other deaths in Iraq and
Afghanistan.

Mr. Passaro's former wife, Kerry, said in an interview from Fayetteville, N.C.,
that the marriage lasted from 1988 to 2001. She said Mr. Passaro trained as an
Army Ranger and was posted at Fort Bragg as a member of the Special Forces.

''He did that a couple years,'' Ms. Passaro said. ''Then he just decided not to
re-enlist, which kind of surprised me. He got a government job.''

Ms. Passaro said that during their marriage her husband was secretive about his
work and that she never heard that he might be working for the C.I.A.

She and Mr. Passaro's brother, Stephen, recalled the incident, a fight that cost
Mr. Passaro his police job, differently. Neither was a witness.

Ms. Passaro recalled that Mr. Passaro started beating a man at a bar whose
attitude offended him. But Stephen Passaro said that after some disagreement at
the bar, the man approached Mr. Passaro as he sat in his car at a gas station
and started hitting him through the car window.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Attorney General John Ashcroft announced the indictment
yesterday of David A. Passaro. He is accused of beating an Afghan detainee.
(Photo by Associated Press)
 David A. Passaro worked for the C.I.A. as a civilian contractor. (Photo by
WRAL, via Associated Press)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); GRAND JURY (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%);
POLICE FORCES (85%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
MISDEMEANORS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); DISORDERLY CONDUCT (78%);
FELONIES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
FINES & PENALTIES (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%);
GENOCIDE (72%); SCANDALS (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (64%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Central
Intelligence Agency; Justice Department

PERSON: David A Passaro; John (Atty Gen) Ashcroft; Richard A Jr Oppel; Ariel
Hart

CITY: RALEIGH, NC, USA (79%); HARTFORD, CT, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); CONNECTICUT, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             842 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan's Final Solution

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE SUDAN-CHAD BORDER


In my last column, I wrote about Magboula Muhammad Khattar, a 24-year-old woman
whose world began to collapse in March, when the Janjaweed Arab militia burned
her village and slaughtered her parents.

Similar atrocities were happening all over Darfur, in western Sudan, leaving 1.2
million people homeless. Refugees tell consistent tales of murder, pillage and
rape against the Zaghawa, Fur and Masalit tribes by the Arabs driving them away.

As this genocide unfolded, the West largely ignored it. That was not an option
for Ms. Khattar and her husband, Ali Daoud.

The night after the village massacre, survivors slipped out of the forest to
salvage any belongings and bury their dead. They found the bodies of Ms.
Khattar's mother and father; her father's corpse had been thrown in a well to
poison the water supply. Ms. Khattar was now responsible for her 3-year-old
sister as well as her own two children.

Then, as they prepared the bodies, one moved. Hussein Bashir Abakr, 19, had been
shot in the neck and mouth and left for dead, but he was still alive. His
parents had both been killed, along with all his siblings except for one
brother, who had been shot in the foot but escaped.

That brother, Nuradin, gave up his duty to bury their parents, choosing instead
to carry Hussein into the forest and to try to nurse him with traditional
medicines. Nuradin's bullet wound made every step agonizing, but he was
determined to save the only member of his family left. Over the next 46 nights,
Nuradin dragged himself and his brother toward Chad.

Finally, they staggered over the dry riverbed marking the border, where I found
them. Hussein has lost part of his tongue and many of his teeth and cannot eat
solid food. He is sick and inconsolable; his wife and baby were carried off by
the Janjaweed and haven't been seen since. As I interviewed him, he bent over to
retch every couple of minutes, Nuradin still cradling him tenderly.

Ms. Khattar and most of the other villagers decided they could not make the long
trek to Chad. So they inched forward at night to find refuge on a nearby
mountain.

Every other night, she crept down the mountain to fetch water, risking
kidnapping by the Janjaweed. ''It was so hard in the mountains,'' Ms. Khattar
recalled. ''There were snakes and scorpions, and a constant fear of the
Janjaweed.'' Six-foot cobras have killed some of the refugees. To feed her
children, Ms. Khattar boiled leaves and plants normally eaten only by camels.
Even so, her mother-in-law died.

Officially, Sudan had agreed to a cease-fire in Darfur. But at the end of May, a
Sudanese military plane spotted the villagers' hideout, and soon after, the
Janjaweed attacked.

''Ali had told me: 'If the Janjaweed attack, don't try to save me. You can't
help. Don't get angry. Just keep the children and run away to Bahai [in Chad].
Don't shout or say anything,' '' Ms. Khattar said. So she hid in a hollow with
the children, peeking out occasionally. She saw the Janjaweed round up all the
villagers, including her husband and his three young brothers: Moussa, 8,
Mochtar, 6, and Muhammad, 4. ''Even the boys,'' she remembers. ''They tied their
hands like this'' -- she motioned with her arms in front of her -- ''and then
forced them to lie on the ground.'' Then, she says, the males were all shot to
death, while women were taken away to be raped.

There were 45 corpses, all killed because of the color of their skin, part of an
officially sanctioned drive by Sudan's Arab government to purge the western
Sudanese countryside of black-skinned non-Arabs.

The Sudanese authorities, much like the Turks in 1915 and the Nazis in the
1930's, apparently calculated that genocide offered considerable domestic
benefits -- like the long-term stability to be achieved by a ''final solution''
of conflicts between Arabs and non-Arabs -- and that the world would not really
care very much. It looks as if the Sudanese bet correctly.

Perhaps Americans truly don't care about the hundreds of thousands of lives at
stake -- we have other problems, and Darfur is far away. But my hunch is that if
we could just meet the victims, we would not be willing to acquiesce in
genocide.

After two Janjaweed attacks, Ms. Khattar was left a widow, responsible for three
small, starving children in a land where showing her face would mean rape or
death. I'll continue her saga in Wednesday's column.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); MOUNTAINS (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%);
IMMIGRATION (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); GENOCIDE (76%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (76%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (73%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(72%); NECK DISORDERS & INJURIES (67%); HOMELESSNESS (57%) Politics and
Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Immigration and
Refugees

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Magboula Muhammad Khattar

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             845 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Life, and Death, in Israel

SECTION: Section 7; Column 4; Book Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 304 words



To the Editor:

In his one-sided, positive review of David Horovitz's equally one-sided,
anti-Palestinian ''Still Life With Bombers: Israel in the Age of Terrorism''
(May 23), Walter Reich rewrites history with a vengeance when he states that
''after the failure of the Camp David negotiations in July 2000 . . . the
Palestinian leadership . . . launched a campaign of terror designed to kill and
maim as many Israeli civilians as possible.''

The second intifada did not begin until late September 2000, when Ariel Sharon
triggered it by taking his extremely provocative walk on the Noble
Sanctuary/Temple Mount -- a destabilizing act for which he was ultimately
rewarded by voters with the prime ministership of Israel.

Reich engages in similar revisionism when he agrees with Horovitz, ''Bill
Clinton and other American witnesses'' that ''Arafat walked out of the Camp
David negotiations not . . . because the Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak had
offered him a bad deal, but for other reasons,'' specifically disagreements over
control of the Temple Mount and the Palestinian right of return. Arafat walked
out principally because Bill Clinton ganged up with Ehud Barak and attempted to
bully Arafat into accepting their ''take it or leave it'' terms.

Finally, in her similarly one-sided, negative review of Richard Ben Cramer's
much more balanced ''How Israel Lost: The Four Questions'' (May 23), Elena
Lappin neglects to note that, although ''the Israelis did not level Jenin, as
Cramer implies, but used infantry troops, going house to house, searching
booby-trapped buildings and thus exposing their soldiers to Palestinian sniper
fire,'' they did so while using Palestinians as human shields -- a human rights
violation that has been documented, along with the absence of a massacre in
Jenin.

John S. Koppel
Bethesda, Md.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (71%) Books and Literature

PERSON: EHUD BARAK (73%) John S Koppel; David Horovitz; Walter Reich

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             847 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Strike Aimed at Terrorists Kills 17 in Falluja

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG and SOMINI SENGUPTA; Khalid W. Hassan contributed
reporting from Falluja for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE MILITARY; Pg.
11

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 19


The American military on Saturday carried out a rare airstrike in a poor
residential neighborhood in the volatile city of Falluja, firing missiles that
killed at least 17 people, said residents and a doctor. An American general said
the target of the assault was a terrorist safe house.

A warplane fired two missiles that reduced to rubble four homes in the Jubail
district, residents said. People spent the morning and afternoon pulling bodies
and body parts from the debris. They said women and children were among the
dead.

Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, a spokesman for the occupation forces, said the strike
was aimed at a safe house for fighters linked to the Jordanian terrorist Abu
Musab al-Zarqawi, whom American officials accuse of being responsible for many
of the spectacular suicide car bombs that have devastated Iraq.

''We know there were members of the Zarqawi network inside the house,'' the
general said. He added that the attack was based on ''actionable intelligence.''
But there was no evidence that Mr. Zarqawi was in the house or anywhere else in
Falluja, he said.

Multiple explosions in the area showed that the targeted house was being used to
store weapons and ammunition, General Kimmitt said.

The strike was the first assault by the Americans on Falluja, 35 miles west of
Baghdad, since the Marines withdrew from the city in late April. Falluja has
become one of the strongest symbols of resistance to the occupation.

After a three-week assault that month, the Marines turned over control of the
city to the Falluja Brigade, a 2,000-member militia composed partly of
insurgents and former members of the ruling Baath Party. But the city remains
firmly under the sway of hard-line Sunni clerics and guerrilla fighters, and the
Americans have expressed dissatisfaction with the performance of the brigade.

The assault on Saturday, apparently pre-empting the brigade, was the strongest
indication so far that the American military will continue to carry out
operations on its own after June 30, when an interim Iraqi government is
scheduled to assume limited sovereignty.

A senior American military official said Saturday afternoon that Iraqis were
still in no position to guarantee security in the country from internal or
external threats. ''It will be some period of time until Iraqis can do this
independently and without the partnership of multinational forces,'' the
official said. ''We will not stay in this country one day longer than necessary,
nor will we leave one day sooner than necessary.''

How Iraqi soldiers will work with occupying troops remains a thorny issue. After
June 30, the official said, Iraqis will no longer take orders from American
commanders. It is unclear how one command structure will work with the other.

The airstrike also allowed the military to stage an attack in Falluja without
sending troops into the city, avoiding the kind of pitched urban battles that
resulted in the April bloodbath. Ten marines and hundreds of Iraqis were killed.
This strike could be the first of a series by the Americans in a new style of
offensive there.

Such airstrikes have seldom been used by the Americans since the toppling of
Saddam Hussein. Researchers at Human Rights Watch concluded in a recent report
that American airstrikes during this war have rarely succeeded in killing their
intended targets and have mostly harmed civilians.

In the late afternoon, gunmen with straps of bullets crisscrossing their chests
stood at checkpoints in Falluja. Residents of the city predicted angry
reprisals. ''They want to provoke the people of Falluja,'' said Ahmed Sabah, 36.
''This is a very bad violation. It's not only Falluja people who will stand up
to them, it's all of Iraq.''

Fighting flared up elsewhere in the so-called Sunni Triangle, as battles
continued between American soldiers and insurgents around Baquba, 35 miles
northeast of Baghdad. It was the fourth consecutive day of heavy fighting. An
American soldier died Saturday of wounds sustained the previous day.

The clashes took place in Buhritz, on the outskirts of Baquba. Residents have
been forced to flee the area. Plumes of smoke have filled the sky as armored
vehicles have surrounded the village.

The battles began Wednesday, when American soldiers visiting the mayor's office
came under fire from guerrillas armed with AK-47's and rocket-propelled
grenades, said Maj. Neal E. O'Brien, a spokesman for the First Infantry
Division.

At 3 a.m. Thursday, American forces raided the home of Hussein al-Septi,
suspected of being a guerrilla leader. A firefight ensued. Mr. Septi was wounded
and arrested, Major O'Brien said.

In the southern city of Basra, a roadside bomb killed three Iraqis and one
Portuguese contactor, who worked for a telecommunications company.

In the afternoon, Iraqi security guards discovered a white Chevrolet Caprice
believed to be loaded with explosives parked near the Basra headquarters of the
Coalition Provisional Authority. Guards yelled at the driver to move the car,
one guard said. The driver sprinted from the car and jumped into a BMW that
raced from the scene.

British forces then sealed off the area and used a robot to detonate explosives
in the car.

The rebel Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr's budding campaign to insert himself
into the mainstream political landscape continued on Saturday, with a
demonstration by the women's wing of his organization in his Baghdad stronghold.
Several hundred women, all shrouded in black, turned up Saturday morning under
his portrait to call for the ouster of American troops from their neighborhood.

''Blow them up! Oh Mahdi Army,'' the women chanted, referring to the heavily
armed militia led by Mr. Sadr. ''All of us will sacrifice ourselves for Moktada
Sadr.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Falluja residents combed through the wreckage of homes destroyed
in an American airstrike yesterday. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (78%); MISSILE
DEFENSE SYSTEMS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); CHILDREN (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%) Terrorism;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Missiles and Missile Defense Systems

PERSON: Edward Wong; Somini Sengupta; Abu Musab Al- (Ahmad Fadil Nazzal
Al-Khalayleh) Zarqawi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Falluja (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             850 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Rules on Prisoners Seen as a Back and Forth of Mixed Messages to G.I.'s

BYLINE: The following article was reported by Douglas Jehl, Eric Schmitt and
Kate Zernike and was written by Mr. Jehl.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: DETAINEE
TREATMENT; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 2303 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the Bush administration's new rules governing
treatment of foreign prisoners have been contradictory and have sent mixed
messages to American soldiers, according to military personnel and documents.

Six investigations are under way into abuses of detainees; none are expected to
produce any conclusions soon. A close review of recently disclosed documents and
interviews with soldiers, officers and government officials find a broader
pattern of misconduct and knowledge about it stretching into the middle chain of
command. But there is no clear evidence to date that the highest military or
civilian leaders ordered or authorized the mistreatment of prisoners at
American-run prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Still, the ever-shifting rules, in which lists of accepted interrogation tactics
were widened drastically before being reined in over 17 crucial months, helped
foster a climate in which abuse could flourish.

Starting with the 17 interrogation techniques approved in a standard Army
manual, commanders at the Guantanamo prison doubled the permitted methods by
late 2002, before shrinking the list. In Iraq last fall, directives on treatment
of prisoners were changed at least three times in six weeks. Some of the
procedures authorized in Iraq had been banned as too harsh months earlier at
Guantanamo.

Some officers skirted international treaties governing prisoner treatment, some
soldiers have said, instructing subordinates to hide detainees from monitors
sent by the International Committee of the Red Cross. In one instance, Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld approved an order to hold a suspected Iraqi
terrorist but to keep his name off the prison rolls, effectively shielding the
''ghost detainee'' from Red Cross inspectors.

Lacking clear guidance, soldiers at various jails were apparently confused about
the rules. In Iraq, some guards were such sticklers that they demanded paperwork
to take away detainees' blankets, while others did not understand that they
needed written authorization to intimidate prisoners with dogs.

Many guards at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq said they had been told by
intelligence officers to ''soften up'' detainees, but some thought that meant
making them do calisthenics to tire them out, while others took it to mean
forcing them to crawl naked on leashes for hours.

Beatings were accepted enough at Abu Ghraib that some soldiers recorded the
number of stitches their victims required with tack marks on the wall. In the
worst cases in Afghanistan and Iraq, abuse resulted in deaths, including 10
cases now being investigated as homicides.

While President Bush has portrayed the events at Abu Ghraib as the actions of
just a few soldiers at one prison, the picture emerging from documents,
interviews and Congressional testimony points to a broader pattern of misconduct
and knowledge about it stretching up the chain of command.

While the mistreatment did not go entirely unnoticed, many soldiers who had
hints of the abuse did not report it. In a chaotic environment in the midst of a
war, some soldiers said later, they assumed it must have been authorized.

''It was confusing the way the place was run,'' Sgt. Samuel Jefferson Provance
III, who worked in interrogations at Abu Ghraib as part of the 302nd Military
Intelligence Battalion, testified at a military hearing last month. ''It was a
shocking experience.''

For military officials at the highest levels, the administration's fight against
terrorism was a new kind of war. As Gen. James T. Hill, head of the military's
Southern Command, said, describing the government's post-Sept. 11 effort to
rewrite longstanding practices about prisoner treatment, ''we really were moving
into uncharted waters.''

Geneva Rules Didn't Apply

 Soon after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, as planning began for the invasion of
Afghanistan, the Pentagon asked Justice Department lawyers to assess whether
detainees held in Afghanistan or in the new American-run prison at Guantanamo
Bay could claim they had been mistreated under the Geneva Conventions and
federal and international laws.

The lawyers concluded that the Geneva Conventions did not apply, because
Guantanamo was outside the territorial United States, and because Al Qaeda and
the Taliban were not legitimate states, so were not parties to the agreements.
One memorandum argued that the president could authorize even ''cruel, inhuman,
and degrading'' treatment to protect national security, as long as it did not
cause ''great suffering or serious bodily injury'' to detainees, like ''killing
or torturing them.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and State Department lawyers fired back
objections, but apparently lost. An August 2002 memo on interrogation standards
from the Justice Department to the White House counsel further whittled down the
definition of torture. To qualify, the document said, mistreatment had to
inflict pain ''equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious physical
injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even death.''

Military officials have described those legal arguments as theoretical and
removed from the decision making about rules for interrogation and treatment of
prisoners.

But first in Guantanamo and Afghanistan, and then in Iraq, commanders authorized
procedures harsher than those spelled out in the Army's interrogations field
manual. The 17 general techniques, like manipulating a prisoner's emotions or
persuading the prisoner that it was futile to resist, formed a boundary that the
American military had heeded in the recent past.

Like the legal memorandums, the decision to go beyond the field manual was based
on the ground that the Geneva Conventions did not apply. For prisoners in Iraq,
the reasoning was that the protections were not as restrictive as previously
interpreted by the United States.

Harsher Procedures Added

 At Guantanamo, the first clear widening of authority came in December 2002,
when commanders asked the Pentagon for more latitude in interrogating a Saudi
Arabian prisoner believed to be the planned 20th hijacker of Sept. 11.

The authorities thought the man, Mohamed al-Kahtani, had information about
possible future attacks, but he had resisted standard interrogation techniques.

In response, Mr. Rumsfeld authorized at least 17 new procedures beyond those in
the field manual, a senior Pentagon official said. They applied to all
Guantanamo prisoners.

Those harsher techniques included hooding; exploiting a prisoner's phobias,
sometimes using muzzled dogs in interrogations; removing some of a detainee's
clothing; and the use of ''minimum physical contact'' like poking or grabbing.

Even though these harsher techniques were approved, senior military officials
said last week that those four specific practices were never used at Guantanamo.
Still, interrogators at the site and military lawyers in Washington objected.
Just over a month later, Mr. Rumsfeld ordered a group of military lawyers,
intelligence analysts and policy makers to review the rules.

On April 16, 2003, Mr. Rumsfeld narrowed the list of approved techniques. He
permitted 24 methods at Guantanamo, including 17 from the Army manual, but
stipulated that 4 of them required his explicit approval. They involved using
incentives to cooperate, like offering hot showers in the winter, segregation
for more than 30 days, good-cop-bad-cop interrogation and an approach called
''pride and ego down,'' which exploits a prisoner's loyalty, intelligence or
perceived weakness.

Defense officials said those more aggressive techniques had been used with only
two prisoners at Guantanamo and did not constitute torture.

In Iraq, there had been no formal interrogation rules in place beyond those in
the Army manual until late August 2003.

Then, officers at Abu Ghraib sought to give interrogators more freedom and
proposed a set of rules drafted by an Army unit that had recently arrived from
Afghanistan. The unit, the 519th Military Intelligence Battalion, had a
questionable record. Two prisoners under its supervision at Bagram Collection
Point in Afghanistan died in December 2002, apparently in homicides that are
still being reviewed by criminal investigators.

The battalion's commander, Capt. Carolyn A. Wood, proposed 30 interrogation
techniques, and two lawyers working for Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the ground
commander in Iraq, approved them. Defense officials have refused to say exactly
what procedures were authorized under the proposal or under later directives put
into effect in Iraq. A senior Pentagon official said last week that it was
unclear whether those additional techniques had ever been used in
interrogations.

Wider, Then Narrower Policy

 Meanwhile, another crucial chain of events had already been set in motion.
Stephen A. Cambone, Mr. Rumsfeld's top intelligence official, encouraged Maj.
Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, then the head of detention operations at Guantanamo, to
visit Iraq to find ways to improve the quality of intelligence extracted from
detainees about the growing anti-American insurgency.

On Sept. 9, General Miller completed a review of operations in Iraq and
recommended a detainee interrogation policy that borrowed heavily from the
procedures approved for Guantanamo. He proposed establishing a new interrogation
and debriefing center and ensuring that military police officers were assigned
to help set the conditions for questioning.

On Sept. 14, General Sanchez authorized variations on what General Miller had
recommended. Those rules allowed the use of harsh procedures banned from
Guantanamo, including using sleep deprivation, to as little as four hours' rest
each 24 hours, and making prisoners stand or crouch in positions for up to an
hour, according to Senate aides who have read the confidential document.

As in Guantanamo, the policy ignited a debate among military lawyers, with
particular objections coming from the Central Command.

So on Oct. 12, General Sanchez issued a much narrower policy. Most of the
harsher methods automatically authorized in the earlier directive, like
segregating a prisoner for more than 30 days, would not be permitted without the
general's approval.

According to General Sanchez's top lawyer, Col. Marc Warren, the new procedures
were consistent with the Geneva Conventions. But the policy still allowed
interrogators to improvise if they received approval, according to a senior
military official who briefed reporters at the Pentagon last month.

It remains unclear whether the changes were communicated through the ranks of
interrogators and guards, particularly those at Abu Ghraib. Rules posted on the
wall in the prison's Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center, for example,
were apparently outdated.

Some troubling practices were clearly tolerated, soldiers said in interviews and
sworn statements. Forced nudity was common in the prison's highest-security
area, or ''hard site,'' overseen by military intelligence officers. One
interrogator told investigators that he ''generally'' threw tables around a room
holding detainees, while another said she did not regard slapping a detainee as
abusive.

Several soldiers said in interviews that Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan, who was in
charge of the interrogation center, had handcuffed and hooded detainees who had
been beaten and had hidden them in a cell during a Red Cross visit. Others said
Col. Thomas M. Pappas, the highest-ranking military intelligence officer at the
prison, had permitted them to intimidate detainees with dogs. None of the dog
handlers have been charged with wrongdoing, and two of them have said they were
following orders from Colonel Pappas.

By the accounts of the seven soldiers now charged, the abuses seen in the
notorious photographs from the prison began as an attempt to encourage prisoners
to talk.

Pfc. Lynndie R. England, telling investigators last month about what was going
on in prison photographs, said making prisoners crawl with leashes was intended
as a ''humiliation tactic'' to get them to tell more about the rape of an Iraqi
boy.

But several of the soldiers charged said later acts depicted in photographs,
like piling prisoners naked or forcing them to masturbate, had nothing to do
with interrogations. ''We thought it looked funny, so pictures were taken,''
Private England told investigators.

Senior Army officers in Baghdad say they did not learn about those abuses until
a soldier came forward in January. But several senior Army officers knew by last
November that the Red Cross had complained about problems at the prison,
including forced nudity and physical and verbal abuse of prisoners.

Among those aware of the concerns were General Sanchez's top deputy, Maj. Gen.
Walter Wojdakowski; his intelligence officer, Maj. Gen. Barbara G. Fast; and his
top lawyer, Colonel Warren. In addition, a small unit inside the prison began
reporting beatings and other abuses last fall in documents sent to military
lawyers in Baghdad and a review board of colonels, according to military
intelligence officers.

The role played by General Sanchez remains a particular focus of investigators.
He authorized interrogation procedures in September that he banned 28 days
later, and he visited Abu Ghraib at least three times in October, when the worse
of the abuses occurred. He has said he did not learn of the incidents until
January.

Last month, in response to growing concerns in Congress, General Sanchez
narrowed the interrogation rules in Iraq once again, barring virtually all
coercive tactics.

In early June, the general removed himself as the officer overseeing an inquiry
into the role of military intelligence soldiers in the prisoner abuse, clearing
the way for an Army general to interview him for the investigation.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Photos: ''Under Scrutiny In Abuse Scandal''A number of
investigations are under way to determine how detainee abuses occurred at Abu
Ghraib prison in Iraq and what officials might have known about them. Here is a
look at some of the main figures up and down the chain of command at the time of
the abuses, and what is known about their roles.Donald H. RumsfeldSecretary of
DefenseSaid last week that in November he ordered a suspected Iraqi terrorist
held but kept off prisoner lists at the request of the C.I.A. chief, George J.
Tenet. This meant the Red Cross could not monitor the man's treatment. Mr.
Rumsfeld issued a directive in December 2002 that expanded the range of
interrogation techniques that could be used on prisoners at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.Stephen A. CamboneUnder secretary of defense for intelligenceHas said he
encouraged the review last fall of detention and interrogation operations in
Iraq by Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, then the head of detention operations at
Guantanamo Bay. He disagreed with a senior Army investigator's conclusion that
having military police ''set the conditions'' for interrogations violated Army
doctrine.SENIOR COMMANDERS IN THE REGION AND IN IRAQGen. John P.
AbizaidCommander, U.S. Central CommandHas said that he did not learn of abuses
until shortly after they were reported by a soldier on Jan. 13, and that he did
not learn about last November's Red Cross report about abuses at Abu Ghraib
until early this May. Said the system the military uses to handle Red Cross
reports was ''broken.''Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. SanchezCommander of occupation forces
in IraqVisited Abu Ghraib at least three times in October. Drafted various rules
spelling out interrogation procedures, including one in September with harsh
provisions that were later scaled back. Has said he knew nothing about the
abuses until they were reported to criminal investigators in January.SENIOR
AIDES TO GENERAL SANCHEZMaj. Gen. Walter WojdakowskiDeputy commanderIs said to
have been present at a meeting in late November at which the Red Cross report on
abuses at Abu Ghraib was discussed. As deputy commander, he oversaw military
police and military intelligence day to day.Brig. Gen. Barbara G.
FastIntelligence officer for General SanchezOversaw all miltary intelligence
efforts in Iraq. Also knew of the November Red Cross report. She is said to have
pressed hard for more and better intelligence as the insurgency grew in
November.Col. Marc WarrenTop legal officer on General Sanchez's staffGave final
approval to a Dec. 24 military response to the Red Cross report. The response
did not acknowledge abuses and indicated that the Red Cross should not expect to
have no-notice access to the prison.MILITARY INTELLIGENCECol. Thomas M.
PappasCommander, 205th Military Intellligence BrigadeTold Army investigators
that intelligence officers sometimes instructed M.P.'s to force Iraqi detainees
to strip naked and to shackle them before questioning them. Acknowledged that
there had been no formal system in place to monitor instructions given to
guards. The senior Army investigator concluded that an order last November put
Colonel Pappas in control of the prison.Lt. Col. Steven L. JordanDirector, Joint
Interrogation and Debriefing CenterOversaw interrogation center at prison from
September to December 2003. He has acknowledged to investigators that he had no
experience interrogating prisoners. Some M.P.'s have said they softened up
detainees with encouragement of officers, including Colonels Pappas and Jordan.
The senior Army investigator said he suspected Colonels Pappas and Jordan were
''directly or indirectly responsible'' for the misconduct at the prison.MILITARY
POLICEBrig. Gen. Janis KarpinskiCommander, 800th Military Police BrigadeIn
charge of all prison operations in Iraq last fall, she has said that she knew
nothing about the abuse until weeks after it took place and that the cellblock
where it occurred had been under tight control by military intelligence
officers. She was admonished in January, and the senior Army investigator
highlighted lapses in her oversight of troops under her command.Capt. Donald J.
ReeseCommander, 320th Military Police CompanyThe former warden of the so-called
hard site, he was recommended for reprimand for failing to supervise soldiers
under his command properly. In a rebuttal, he blamed an ''incompetent'' chain of
command and said that there had been visits to the prison by General Sanchez and
others but that no one had mentioned any problems.372nd Military Police
CompanySome of the seven members of the company facing criminal charges have
said they were acting on the orders or encouragement of military intelligence.
Other M.P.'s have agreed that they were encouraged to ''soften up'' detainees,
but said acts depicted in the photographs, like having detainees masturbate,
would not be appropriate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); PRISONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (90%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); MISCONDUCT (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); ARMIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (77%); EVIDENCE (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); DOGS (73%); NAVIES (72%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); TESTIMONY (70%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (64%); HOMICIDE (63%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (51%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(54%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (54%)

PERSON: Douglas Jehl; Eric Schmitt; Kate Zernike; Stephen A (Under Sec) Cambone;
John P (Gen) Abizaid; Barbara G (Brig Gen) Fast; Ricardo (Lt Gen) Sanchez;
Walter (Maj Gen) Wojdakowski; Marc (Col) Warren; Thomas M (Col) Pappas; Janis
(Brig Gen) Karpinski; Donald J (Capt) Reese; Steven L (Lt Col) Jordan

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             851 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Tries Ads, Again, To Capture War Suspect

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, June 21


After trying for almost nine years to help find and arrest the region's most
wanted war crimes suspect, NATO peacekeeping forces in Bosnia are renewing their
effort.

The military alliance paid for a billboard advertising campaign to coincide with
Radovan Karadzic's birthday last Saturday. He is the most wanted suspect, the
former Bosnian Serb leader.

The advertisements offer him a free one-way plane ticket to The Hague, the home
of the United Nations war crimes tribunal. Advertising campaigns have been tried
before, but without success.

Dr. Karadzic is accused of genocide by the tribunal, a charge that includes the
accusation that he ordered the killings of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys
in the town of Srebrenica near the end of the 1992 to 1995 war.

''Radovan, we didn't forget,'' reads the advertisement, which was also placed in
the country's two leading newspapers, above a picture of an airline ticket with
Dr. Karadzic's name written on it.

In spite of the presence in Bosnia of thousands of peacekeeping troops -- 60,000
at one time, but down to about 7,000 now -- Dr. Karadzic has managed to elude
numerous operations to arrest him. He is believed by NATO officials and Western
diplomats in Sarajevo to be hiding in the Serbian Republic, the Bosnian
Serb-controlled half of Bosnia.

Efforts to arrest him have been stepped up in the last six months as NATO is due
to withdraw from Bosnia at the end of this year and be replaced with forces led
by the European Union.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld announced in December that more American
military resources were being deployed in the hunt for Dr. Karadzic. The F.B.I.
is helping to track financial networks that support Dr. Karadzic while he is in
hiding.

The billboard campaign is the latest in a series of media advertisements
designed to convince Dr. Karadzic that his time on the run is limited.

Previous billboards have said, ''The noose is tightening.''

''Even if he doesn't read it himself, I'm sure that someone will pass the
contents on to him,'' said a spokesman for the peacekeeping force, Lt. Mark Hope
of the British Royal Navy. ''I think we can be reasonably certain he will get to
hear about it.''

Lieutenant Hope added that the campaign was also designed as a reminder to Dr.
Karadzic's supporters that helping him to remain in hiding was illegal.

In addition to trying to track down Dr. Karadzic, the peacekeepers have been
trying to find the former Bosnian Serb Army commander, Ratko Mladic, who is also
wanted by The Hague. Many Bosnian Serbs regard both men to be war heroes and are
hostile toward the court.

But local analysts remain skeptical about the effectiveness of NATO's birthday
offer to Dr. Karadzic, with one describing it as a reminder of what little
progress the alliance has made in tracking down its most wanted war criminal.

''I like to think of NATO as a military alliance and not a P.R. company,'' said
Mirza Hajric, a Bosnian Muslim and a onetime adviser to the former Bosnian
Muslim leader, Alija Izetbegovic.

''NATO has been here for over 3,000 days, and it has not succeeded in arresting
a few war criminals. That seriously undermines its credibility.''

Senior international officials say that Dr. Karadzic's arrest can only be
facilitated with the help of the Bosnian Serb politicians in the Serb Republic.
The same officials have repeatedly accused local police commanders of helping
Dr. Karadzic's support network.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An unidentified resident of Sarajevo with a newspaper
advertisement on Saturday that invited a war crimes suspect to return and face
trial. (Photo by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
(91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); ARMIES (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); MEN (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(73%); NAVIES (73%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)
United Nations; North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Radovan Karadzic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);
LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SLOVENIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             852 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TOP COMMANDERS FACE QUESTIONING ON PRISON ABUSE

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: ABU GHRAIB; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1318 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 21


A military judge ruled Monday that the top American commanders currently
involved in the Iraq war will have to submit to questioning by lawyers for two
servicemen charged in the Abu Ghraib prison abuse case. The defense lawyers said
they would show that the most senior military and civilian officials approved
interrogation methods that violated the Geneva Conventions.

Among those who could be questioned are Gen. John P. Abizaid, commander of the
United States Central Command, and Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior
American commander in Iraq; and Lt. Gen. Thomas F. Metz, who is overseeing daily
military operations.

The judge, Col. James Pohl, also called Abu Ghraib a ''crime scene'' and ordered
the government to ''take all steps possible'' to preserve the prison, 15 miles
west of Baghdad. That command, issued during a pretrial hearing, seemed to
override an earlier pledge by President Bush to raze the prison. A defense
lawyer, Paul Bergrin, said members of the court should ''smell the fecal matter
and the urine'' that the prison guards lived with every day.

As the court proceedings got under way, Islamic guerrillas threatened to behead
a South Korean civilian hostage by sundown, unless the South Korean government
canceled plans to send 3,000 troops to Iraq. The deadline passed without any
news on the hostage's fate. The South Korean government said Monday that it
would not change its plans to send the troops.

Four marines were killed by insurgents on Monday in the western town of Ramadi,
the American military said. The men mysteriously lacked the helmets and body
armor that soldiers routinely wear. Ramadi is an area of increasing concern to
military officials.

Iran on Monday seized three small British Royal Navy boats being delivered to
the Iraqi Riverine Patrol Service, saying they had strayed into Iranian waters.
[Page A7.]

Judge Pohl's order to preserve Abu Ghraib came during pretrial hearings for
Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., whom investigators call a ringleader of the
seven military police officers accused of torturing prisoners and photographing
them, and Sgt. Javal S. Davis. A third scheduled hearing, for Staff Sgt. Ivan L.
Frederick II, did not go forward because the civilian lawyer for Sergeant
Frederick failed to show up, citing the extreme danger here.

The hearings gave the strongest indication to date that defense lawyers plan to
pin blame for the abuses on the most senior officials in the White House and
Pentagon, as well as the top generals in Iraq. They suggested in arguments on
Monday that the officials had created an atmosphere that encouraged the flouting
of the conventions of war during interrogations.

''I feel that all seven M.P.'s are being made scapegoats,'' Guy Womack, the
civilian lawyer for Specialist Graner, told reporters after his client's
hearing. ''No one can suggest with a straight face that these M.P.'s were acting
alone.''

The three defendants, dressed in their tan desert uniforms, sat quietly the
entire day in a makeshift courtroom inside the American headquarters in central
Baghdad. Their lawyers did the talking. Specialist Graner, a former corrections
officer, stared at the black-robed judge from behind silver-rimmed glasses.

Among other things, Specialist Graner is accused of ordering prisoners to
masturbate in front of each other and of punching an Iraqi so hard in the head
that he lost consciousness. If found guilty, Mr. Graner faces a maximum sentence
of up to 24 and a half years in prison and a dishonorable discharge.

Last month, Specialist Jeremy C. Sivits pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a
year in prison.

The Army on Monday postponed a hearing for Pfc. Lynndie R. England, who was
photographed holding a naked Iraqi inmate on a leash, until the week of July 12.
The hearing had been scheduled for Tuesday.

Mr. Womack said the seven military police guards were following instructions
from the military intelligence officers who ran the prison. But he added that
the ultimate responsibility lay with Mr. Bush and Defense Secretary Donald H.
Rumsfeld, both of whom indicated after the Sept. 11 attacks that the Geneva
Conventions regarding the treatment of prisoners no longer applied.

''Because of the war on terrorism, the highest levels of government authorized
an unusual proceeding,'' Mr. Womack said. In this atmosphere, he added,
officials ''lessened the normal restraints on interrogations.''

American commanders have sought to portray the seven accused soldiers as a rogue
outfit acting on their own.

Mr. Womack said he had evidence that a senior male Army officer was present
during several of the interrogation sessions captured in the photographs whose
release started the prison scandal in April. The officer tried to hide the
interrogations from outsiders, Mr. Womack said. He declined to identify the
officer.

Mr. Womack also asked the judge to order the government to release several memos
written at the top levels of the Bush administration that showed officials
trying to stretch the allowable limits for prisoner interrogations. Recent news
reports have said that the memos -- including one by the White House counsel,
Alberto R. Gonzales, that called the Geneva Conventions ''quaint'' -- were
written to advise Mr. Bush that international laws concerning torture did not
apply to ''unlawful combatants'' captured during the ''war on terror.''

Judge Pohl denied the motion, saying that discussions taking place in Washington
did not appear relevant to the immediate cases.

The judge also denied a similar request by Mr. Bergrin, a civilian lawyer for
Sergeant Davis, who said L. Paul Bremer III, the top American administrator in
Iraq, had written a memo asking for a definition of interrogation methods for
prisoners. Mr. Rumsfeld and his top aide for intelligence policy, Stephen A.
Cambone, also wrote memos asking for such clarifications, Mr. Bergrin said.

But Judge Pohl did say the American government had to make available for
interviews all the top commanders currently involved in the Iraq war. In
addition to General Abizaid, General Sanchez and General Metz, those could
include Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, who controls American-run prisons in Iraq;
and Maj. Gen. Barbara Fast, in charge of intelligence operations here.

Depending on what emerges in the interviews, the lawyers could decide to call
the commanders to the witness stand or ask them to give a deposition.

Mr. Womack also said there was ''a good chance'' that he would try to question
Mr. Rumsfeld.

Mr. Bergrin's plans were even more ambitious. ''We will ask to have the
president of the United States as a witness,'' he said. ''Whether that's
granted, that's a different story.''

The two lawyers also asked the judge to move the venue of the courts-martial out
of Iraq, arguing that the dangers here will dissuade civilian witnesses from
attending. While soldiers who are witnesses can be ordered to travel anywhere,
civilians can be compelled to attend trials only in the United States.

Judge Pohl denied the motions on the grounds they were ''speculative,'' but said
he would revisit the situation if hostilities here changed.

The prosecutor, Capt. Christopher Graveline, agreed to some demands from the
defense. The government will turn over copies of background files on the Iraqi
prisoners after the files are cleared of any classified material, he said. It
will also declassify all parts of the Army report written by Maj. Gen. Antonio
M. Taguba, who recently concluded a three-month investigation of interrogation
practices at Abu Ghraib.

Judge Pohl ordered lawyers for both sides to file all motions by July 31. He
also rescheduled Sergeant Frederick's hearing for July 23, despite harshly
denouncing his civilian lawyer for failing to appear Monday.

Mr. Womack said the trials were not likely to start until October at the
earliest, after both sides have interviewed possible witnesses.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers cleared debris yesterday at a liquor store in Baghdad
after a bomb blast there. Another bomb was defused in a liquor store nearby.
Several such shops have been targets since the ouster of Saddam Hussein. (Photo
by Agence France-Presse--Getty Images)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (87%); LAW OF
WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); APPROVALS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); NAVIES (78%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); TORTURE (77%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(74%); NAVAL VESSELS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%);
TERRORISM (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); RELIGION (52%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva Conventions; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Edward Wong; John P (Gen) Abizaid; Ricardo (Lt Gen)
Sanchez; Thomas F (Lt Gen) Metz; James (Col) Pohl; George W (Pres) Bush; Charles
A (Specialist) Graner; Javal S (Sgt) Davis; Ivan L II (Sgt) Frederick

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (93%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             853 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 23, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein Status Will Change, But U.S. Holds Him Physically

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; REACH OF WAR: THE DICTATOR; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 312 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 22


The United States will transfer legal custody of Saddam Hussein and other top
prisoners to Iraqi authorities as soon as Iraqi courts issue the necessary
warrants, an American official said Tuesday.

But American forces will not let go of the former dictator, even after Iraq
regains sovereignty next week, because it does not have a prison strong enough
to hold him, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.

American forces will honor transfer-of-custody requests from Iraq's new
government, which takes power June 30, as long as they are accompanied by arrest
warrants from an Iraqi court, the official said in a legal briefing with
reporters.

Details of the transfer will be laid out in a memorandum of understanding
between American-led multinational forces and the newly appointed Iraqi interim
government, he said.

American forces need to keep Mr. Hussein and other top figures from his
government in prison for their own safety and to secure them against escape, the
official said.

Once his legal custody shifts, Mr. Hussein will lose his prisoner of war status
and will be considered an accused criminal. He will win due process rights,
including access to a lawyer, and will be subject to questioning by an
investigating judge from the special Iraqi war crimes tribunal, the official
said.

American troops captured Mr. Hussein in December near his hometown of Tikrit.

In the meantime, the International Committee of the Red Cross is pressing United
States authorities to release three letters Mr. Hussein wrote to his family
while in captivity, saying the usual censorship process has been inexplicably
delayed.

Nada Doumani, a spokeswoman for the Red Cross delegation to Iraq, said Tuesday
that the letters had been given to American authorities for checking, as the
Geneva Conventions provide, but had apparently never been forwarded as
addressed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DUE PROCESS (78%); POWS & MIAS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); LAWYERS (75%); JUDGES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%); GENOCIDE (65%); TERRORISM (59%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(54%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 23, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Magboula's Brush With Genocide

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE SUDAN-CHAD BORDER


Meet Magboula Muhammad Khattar and her baby, Nada.

I wrote about Ms. Khattar in my last two columns, recounting how the Janjaweed
Arab militia burned her village, murdered her parents and finally tracked her
family down in the mountains. Ms. Khattar hid, but the Janjaweed caught her
husband and his brothers, only 4, 6 and 8 years old, and killed them all.

Ms. Khattar decided that the only hope for saving her two daughters and her baby
sister was to lead them by night to Chad. They had to avoid wells where the
Janjaweed kept watch, but eight days later, half-dead with hunger and thirst,
they staggered across the dry riverbed that marks the border with Chad.

That's where I found Ms. Khattar. She is part of a wave of 1.2 million people
left homeless by the genocide in Darfur.

Among those I met was Haiga Ibrahim, a 16-year-old girl who said her father and
three older brothers had been killed by the Janjaweed. So Haiga led her crippled
mother and younger brothers and sisters to Chad. But the place they reached
along the border, Bamina, was too remote to get help from overtaxed aid
agencies.

So when I found her, Haiga was leading her brothers and sisters 30 miles across
the desert to the town of Bahai. ''My mother can't walk any more,'' she said
wearily. ''First I'm taking my brother and sisters, and then I hope to go back
and bring my mother.''

There is no childhood here. I saw a 4-year-old orphan girl, Nijah Ahmed,
carrying her 13-month-old brother, Nibraz, on her back. Their parents and
15-year-old brother are missing in Sudan and presumed dead.

As for Ms. Khattar, she is camping beneath a tree, sharing the shade with three
other women also widowed by the Janjaweed. In some ways Ms. Khattar is lucky;
her children all survived. Moreover, in some Sudanese tribes, widows must endure
having their vaginas sewn shut to preserve their honor, but that is not true of
her Zaghawa tribe.

Ms. Khattar's children have nightmares, their screams at night mixing with the
yelps of jackals, and she worries that she will lose them to hunger or disease.
But her plight pales beside that of Hatum Atraman Bashir, a 35-year-old woman
who is pregnant with the baby of one of the 20 Janjaweed raiders who murdered
her husband and then gang-raped her.

Ms. Bashir said that when the Janjaweed attacked her village, Kornei, she fled
with her seven children. But when she and a few other mothers crept out to find
food, the Janjaweed captured them and tied them on the ground, spread-eagled,
then gang-raped them.

''They said, 'You are black women, and you are our slaves,' and they also said
other bad things that I cannot repeat,'' she said, crying softly. ''One of the
women cried, and they killed her. Then they told me, 'If you cry, we will kill
you, too.' '' Other women from Kornei confirm her story and say that another
woman who was gang-raped at that time had her ears partly cut off as an added
humiliation.

One moment Ms. Bashir reviles the baby inside her. The next moment, she
tearfully changes her mind. ''I will not kill the baby,'' she said. ''I will
love it. This baby has no problem, except for his father.''

Ms. Khattar, the orphans, Ms. Bashir and countless more like them have gone
through hell in the last few months, as we have all turned our backs -- and the
rainy season is starting to make their lives even more miserable. In my next
column, I'll suggest what we can do to save them. For readers eager to act now,
some options are at www.nytimes.com/kristofresponds, Posting 479.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CHILDREN
(89%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(83%); ORPHANS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WOMEN (77%); PREGNANCY &
CHILDBIRTH (73%); HOMELESSNESS (68%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (68%); SEX OFFENSES
(62%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sex Crimes

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); CHAD (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             856 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The White House Papers

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 832 words


It was certainly good to finally see documents indicating that President Bush
did not order the torture of prisoners. The newly released presidential memo of
Feb. 7, 2002, talks about treating detainees humanely and refers comfortingly to
American values. Unfortunately, beyond that there's not much comfort in these
documents, which only confirm that the Bush administration fostered a culture of
permissiveness regarding the treatment of prisoners that ultimately led to the
Abu Ghraib disaster.

We're still being denied the full picture because the documents on planning for
the treatment of prisoners were selected by the White House, which has for
months ignored the Senate Armed Services Committee's demand for the whole
record. These hundreds of pages, which the administration has kept classified
for so long, pose no possible security danger. About the only thing in them
worth keeping secret was the degree to which the administration had decided to
exempt itself from the Geneva Conventions and then spent months debating whether
there was a legalistic way to justify what ordinary people would consider the
torture of prisoners.

If the White House thought the documents it doled out this week would put to
rest the concern that the brutal behavior of American soldiers in Iraqi prisons
had been sanctioned from above, it was wrong. While Mr. Bush's 2002 memo does
not condone torture, it opens loopholes in the treatment of prisoners that the
military could drive a Hummer through -- and some clearly did.

We can understand why Mr. Bush decided not to apply the Geneva Conventions to Al
Qaeda just months after 9/11. It's a terrorist organization, not a country's
army. But Mr. Bush also took Attorney General John Ashcroft's misguided advice
that the Geneva protocols did not apply to the Taliban army, a position based on
the flimsy pretext that Afghanistan was a ''failed nation.''

Mr. Bush's memo instructed the armed forces to treat Taliban prisoners in a way
consistent with the ''principles of Geneva.'' (The top White House lawyer,
Alberto Gonzales, refused to say whether that also applied to the Central
Intelligence Agency or to others interrogating prisoners.) But Mr. Bush added
that this instruction applied only ''to the extent appropriate and consistent
with military necessity.'' That phrase is repeated throughout later government
documents on the treatment of prisoners, including one prepared during the
invasion of Iraq.

In his memo, Mr. Bush wrote, ''Of course, our values as a nation, values that we
share with many nations in the world, call for us to treat detainees humanely,
including those who are not legally entitled to such treatment.'' We asked the
White House what part of American law denies humane treatment to anyone, but did
not get an answer.

In another memo, to the military jailers at Guantanamo Bay, Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld denies ''blanket authorization'' of a request to use
interrogation techniques that seem clearly beyond the Geneva Conventions,
including hooding prisoners, depriving them of sleep, forcing them to stand or
squat for hours at a time, threatening their loved ones, pushing their heads
underwater, stripping them and shaving them. But Mr. Rumsfeld said those methods
were ''legally available.''

The documents do not explain how we got from Mr. Rumsfeld's memo to the actual
practice in Iraq, where these methods came to be routinely used and where one
commander -- presumably with an awareness of the Pentagon's thinking --
authorized the use of snarling guard dogs in interrogation sessions.

The document dump only reaffirms the need for a more robust Congressional
response to this mess. The record is no straighter now than it was last week. It
is time for Republican leaders in Congress to back up Senator John Warner, the
chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and either compel full disclosure by
the administration or create a new panel with subpoena powers.

This partial view of the thinking of the administration on the prisoner issue
did provide, once again, confirmation of how this president and his team
consider themselves above the rules that bind ordinary mortals. From the start
of his presidency, Mr. Bush has resisted scrutiny and regulation, taking the
position that the public should recognize that his people are good people with
good intentions, and trust them to do the right thing.

The nation, of course, has always held to a different tradition that relies on
the restraint of the rule of law rather than individual goodness. The debacle at
Abu Ghraib shows how badly things can go when average Americans are let loose
from those restraints, or allowed to believe that such restraints do not apply
to them. The political and moral disasters of this administration, from the
current dreadful state of American prestige abroad to the injustices perpetrated
on innocent Americans erroneously suspected of terrorist ties, show that the
same thing applies to the people at the top.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); LAW OF WAR (88%); TALIBAN (87%);
TERRORISM (86%); PRISONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); IRAQ WAR (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(75%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(71%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (71%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (71%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (69%); GENOCIDE (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%); AL-QAEDA (64%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Editorials;
Torture; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (50%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             857 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Bill Dies, and the Blame Game Begins

BYLINE: By MARC SANTORA

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 23


The anti-terrorism legislation that Gov. George E. Pataki said was the most
important thing his administration hoped to accomplish this year died Tuesday
night in the final hours of the official legislative session, leaving in its
wake a trail of bitter recriminations and contradictory statements over who was
at fault.

Mr. Pataki, as with every other issue where agreement has eluded lawmakers,
blamed the Democratic Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, for holding up the
effort.

Mr. Silver, also holding to form, said the governor was at fault.

''I was greatly encouraged when an agreement was reached last night,'' Mr.
Silver said in a statement. ''Those good feelings were dashed two hours later,
however, when the measure that had been advanced by his own administration was
personally rejected by the governor.''

With the bill negotiated behind closed doors, it is difficult to know what truly
happened. But the back-and-forth on Wednesday provided a political autopsy that,
if not revealing the killer, at least provided a glimpse at how laws die in
Albany.

This law, which would have increased the penalties for people found guilty of
laundering money for terrorists, was actually very close to happening. The
Senate and the Assembly were working toward a compromise between their versions
of anti-terror legislation.

In particular, there was a serious discussion about money laundering. .

Things broke down around one question: how much money someone would have to be
found guilty of laundering to face the penalty that comes with a class B felony.

In regards to terrorism, federal law sets the bar at roughly $10,000. New York
has only a general statute that sets the bar at $1 million.

The Assembly and civil liberties groups had feared that lowering the bar could
lead to overzealous, unjust prosecutions. But negotiators said they had come up
with language to protect individual rights.

On Tuesday night there was a feeling in Mr. Pataki's office that a deal might be
near, people involved in both sides of the negotiations said.

The two sides tell different stories about what happened next.

Mr. Silver contends that Mr. Pataki, a Republican, sent his negotiator to make a
deal and set the bar at $100,000. Mr. Silver said he accepted the deal, but that
Mr. Pataki then reneged on the offer.

Mr. Pataki said that Mr. Silver's version of events could not be more
inaccurate. .

The Assembly, Mr. Pataki said, ''came down from their ridiculous $350,000
number, but they never came near what we were talking about as a number.'' Mr.
Pataki, according to aides, had wanted a figure closer to $10,000.

Two people involved in the negotiations said they believe Mr. Silver pulled a
clever move that allowed him to say there was a deal, while there never was a
deal at the table.

According to this version, the office of Attorney General Eliot Spitzer told Mr.
Pataki's negotiator that the Assembly might be ready to make a deal that set the
bar at $100,000. The negotiator floated the idea, not intending it to be taken
as coming from Mr. Pataki himself.

The Assembly negotiators then seized on that proposal because they could
truthfully say it had come from Mr. Pataki's side, and they quickly put Mr.
Pataki in a corner in which he seemed to reject his own proposal.

In the end, the issue remained unsolved, the legislation dead.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); GOVERNORS (90%); DEATHS (90%); MONEY LAUNDERING (89%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AUTOPSIES (73%);
FINES & PENALTIES (72%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (50%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (50%);
FELONIES (50%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (58%) Marc Santora; George E (Gov) Pataki; Sheldon
(Speaker) Silver

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (87%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: New York State; New York State

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             860 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: 'Traditional' Courts For Genocide Cases

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 132 words


President Paul Kagame officially inaugurated a traditional court system that has
been tested for three years to speed up prosecution of those who carried out the
genocide of 1994. The so-called gacaca courts are faced with trying some of the
100,000 defendants charged in the massacre of an estimated 800,000 Tutsi and
moderate Hutu. Most defendants tried by gacacas so far have been set free or
sentenced to community work. Now the courts are expected to start trying
relatively high-level cases and impose stiffer punishments. Gacaca hearings,
which pit neighbor against neighbor in painful accounts of how ordinary Rwandans
took part in the rampages, are barred from trying leaders of the genocide, most
of whom face formal trial at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in
Tanzania.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); SENTENCING (73%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Tutsi Tribe; Hutu Tribe

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (56%)

PERSON: Paul (Pres) Kagame

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA (64%)

REGION: Rwanda; Tanzania

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             863 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Germany: SS Officer Wins Appeal

BYLINE: By Victor Homola (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 111 words


The Federal Court of Justice has overturned a war-crimes conviction of a former
SS officer, Friedrich Engel, 95, for ordering the execution of 59 Italian
prisoners near Genoa in May 1944. Ruling on Mr. Engel's appeal, the court said
that the case had been dealt with ''incomprehensibly late,'' and that given Mr.
Engel's age and frailty, it was no longer possible to hold a new trial to clear
up doubts about a 2002 verdict by a Hamburg court, which had found him guilty
and sentenced him to seven years. He has been free pending his appeal. In 1999
Mr. Engel was convicted in absentia in Italy for killing 246 Italian prisoners
in four incidents.   Victor Homola (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); VERDICTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); APPEALS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); WORLD WAR II (88%); LITIGATION
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (85%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%) World War II (1939-45); Decisions and Verdicts;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Victor Homola; Friedrich Engel

CITY: HAMBURG, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: ITALY (93%); EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: Genoa (Italy); Italy

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             864 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dithering As Others Die

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE SUDAN-CHAD BORDER


The ongoing genocide in Darfur is finally, fortunately, making us uncomfortable.
At this rate, with only 250,000 more deaths it will achieve the gravitas of the
Laci Peterson case.

Hats off to Colin Powell and Kofi Annan, who are both traveling in the next few
days to Darfur. But the world has dithered for months already. Unless those
trips signal a new resolve, many of the Darfur children I've been writing about
over the last few months will have survived the Janjaweed militia only to die
now of hunger or diarrhea.

I've had e-mail from readers who are horrified by the slaughter, but who also
feel that Africa is always a mess and that there's not much we can do. So let me
address the cynics.

Look, I'm sure it's terrible in Darfur. But lots of places are horrific, and we
can't help everyone. Why obsess about Sudan?

The U.N. describes Darfur as the No. 1 humanitarian crisis in the world today.
The U.S. Agency for International Development estimates that at best 320,000
more people will still die of hunger and disease this year -- or significantly
more if we continue to do nothing.

Moreover, apart from our obligation to act under the Genocide Convention,
acquiescence only encourages more genocide -- hence the question attributed to
Hitler, ''Who today remembers the Armenian extermination?''

Haven't we invaded enough Muslim countries?

The U.S. is not going to invade Sudan. That's not a plausible option.

But we can pass a tough U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing troops, as
well as more support for African peacekeepers. If Germany, France and Spain
don't want to send troops to Iraq, then let them deploy in Darfur. And we must
publicly condemn the genocide.

What good is a speech in the U.N.? Why would Sudan listen?

Governments tend to be embarrassed about exterminating minorities. In Sudan, a
bit of publicity about Darfur coupled with a written statement from President
Bush led Sudan to agree to a cease-fire in April and to improve access for aid
agencies. More publicity prompted it to promise to disband the Janjaweed
raiders.

Sudan lies and wriggles out of its promises, but its genocide is still
calibrated to the international reaction. Likewise, it is still denying visas
and blocking supplies for emergency relief, but pressure has led it to improve
access.

So, Mr. Bush, if a single written statement will do so much good, why won't you
let the word ''Darfur'' pass your lips? Why the passivity in the face of evil?
You could save tens of thousands of lives by making a forceful speech about
Darfur. Conversely, your refusal to do so is costing tens of thousands of lives.

If the Sudanese were notorious pirates of American videotapes, if they were
sheltering Mullah Omar, you'd be all over them. So why not stand up just as
forcefully to genocide?

Mr. Bush seems proud of his ''moral clarity,'' his willingness to recognize evil
and bluntly describe it as such. Well, Darfur reeks of evil, and we are allowing
it to continue.

What can ordinary Americans do?

Yell! Mr. Bush and John Kerry have been passive about Darfur because voters are.
If citizens contact the White House or their elected representatives and demand
action, our leaders will be happy to follow.

Readers can also contribute to one of the many aid agencies saving lives in
Darfur. (I've listed some at www.nytimes.com/kristofresponds, Posting 489.)

Be realistic. We don't have our national interest at stake in Darfur.

But we do. Sudan's chaos is destabilizing surrounding countries, especially
Chad, which is an increasing source of oil for us. Moreover, when states
collapse into chaos, they become staging grounds for terrorism and for diseases
like ebola and polio (both have broken out recently in Sudan).

In any case, America is a nation that has values as well as interests. We
betrayed those values when we ignored past genocides, and we are betraying them
again now.

In my last three columns, I wrote about Magboula Muhammad Khattar, a 24-year-old
woman struggling to keep her children alive since her parents and husband were
killed by the Janjaweed. Each time I visited the tree she lives under, she
shared with me the only things she had to offer: a smile and a bowl of brackish
water.

Is a cold shoulder all we have to offer in return?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%);
HUNGER IN SOCIETY (76%); PEACEKEEPING (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (72%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (65%); POLITICS (65%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (51%) Electronic Mail; Politics and Government; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); US AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
(55%) United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (60%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (79%); IRAQ (79%); GERMANY
(79%); CHAD (79%); SPAIN (78%); FRANCE (53%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             865 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Contractor To Be Held Till Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.C., June 25


A C.I.A. contractor accused of beating an Afghan detainee who later died will be
held without bond until his trial, a federal magistrate ruled Friday.

The magistrate, William Webb, linked a 1990 assault by the contractor, David A.
Passaro, when he was a police officer in Hartford, Conn., and the beating of the
detainee, Abdul Wali.

Mr. Passaro, of Lillington, N.C., is charged with four counts of assault and
assault with a dangerous weapon, a large flashlight.

Mr. Wali, who was 28, died at an American base in Asadabad, Afghanistan, in June
2003.

Alan DuBois, the public defender representing Mr. Passaro at the hearing, argued
that the government was using fragments of conversations to build an inaccurate
picture of his client.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MAGISTRATES (91%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (88%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); BAIL (88%);
TERRORISM (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); GENOCIDE (85%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Central
Intelligence Agency

PERSON: William Webb; David A Passaro; Abdul Wali

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (92%); RALEIGH, NC, USA (78%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (92%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             867 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Far Can a Government Lawyer Go?

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review; The Nation: Torture and Legal
Ethics; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 784 words


A CLIENT asks his lawyer a question: During an interrogation of a suspected
terrorist, how much pain can I legally inflict?

The lawyer should:

a) Explore every legal avenue available for his client, including all possible
defenses should criminal charges be filed.

b) Give legal guidance but add advice on the wisdom and morality of what the
client is considering.

c) Tell the client to take a walk.

The lawyers at the Justice Department who prepared the memos concerning torture
seemed to have decided on Option A.

These memos, released last week, raise profound questions about the ethical and
moral limits of what lawyers can and should do in advising their clients. It is
hardly unusual, of course, for lawyers in private practice to give narrow and
comprehensive advice on how to comply with, say, the tax laws to maximum
advantage. But lawyers serving private clients rarely confront questions as
morally perilous as torture.

For instance, an August 2002 memo, by Jay S. Bybee, the assistant attorney
general in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel who has since become a federal
appeals court judge, concluded that only physical pain as intense as that
accompanying organ failure or death qualified as torture. After harsh criticism,
the Bush administration distanced itself from the memorandum law week.

Judge Bybee declined requests for an interview. John Yoo, a former deputy in the
Legal Counsel's office, has said that the exploration of the question of what
constitutes torture is important and legitimate. A good analogy, he said, was
the legal advice police officers receive on the use of force.

''This is an unprecedented conflict with a completely new form of enemy that
fights in unconventional ways that violate the very core principles of the laws
of war by targeting civilians,'' Professor Yoo said in an interview last week.

Geoffrey C. Hazard Jr., who teaches legal ethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, said ''It was very appropriate for lawyers'' in the government
''to think in concrete terms about what is meant by torture.''

Other lawyers stressed that a lawyer's proper task is a narrow one.

''When a government is faced with a situation and is faced with options,'' said
Charles Fried, a law professor at Harvard and a former solicitor general in the
Reagan administration, ''surely one of the questions it asks -- but only one of
them -- is, what does the law require? Another question is, is it effective?
Another is, is it moral? Those are not the same questions.''

The lawyer's role, he said, is to answer the first question.

Still, government lawyers have more complicated obligations than those in
private practice do. The government lawyer's ultimate client, after all, is the
public, and government lawyers have not infrequently told their bosses things
they did not want to hear.

Attorney General Francis Biddle, for instance, opposed the internment of
American citizens of Japanese ancestry during World War II. His boss, President
Franklin Roosevelt, overruled him.

Douglas W. Kmiec, who led the Office of Legal Counsel in the Reagan
administration, recalled delivering bad news himself. ''One of the least happy
days in my life,'' he said, ''was telling President Reagan that he could not
exercise an inherent line-item veto,'' because it wasn't implicit in the
Constitution, ''even though he dearly wanted it.''

Walter Dellinger, who ran the office in the Clinton administration, said the
torture memos represent a departure from the disinterested advice the office has
historically given to presidents in both parties.

The development is particularly unfortunate because it indicates that the
no-holds-barred advocacy common in the private sphere has started to infect the
work of government lawyers, argued Philip Lacovara, who served in the Nixon
administration and as a Watergate prosecutor.

''If you set loose very smart and very energetic lawyers and tell them their
task is to justify the unjustifiable, they will do it,'' he said.

Which, according to critics, is just what happened, giving potential abusers a
road map for how to avoid prosecution. ''It reminded me,'' Mr. Lacovara said,
''of the first time I heard one of the Nixon tapes, when Nixon was giving a
little primer on how to escape prosecution for perjury. 'Just tell them you
don't recall.' The tone was the same.''

Stephen Gillers, who teaches legal ethics at New York University, said the memos
illuminate a larger issue of professional responsibility. ''A good lawyer does
not think of himself as merely a technician,'' he said. ''A good lawyer advises
on the wisdom of a particular course of conduct. The consequences of being a
technician and not a conscience are stunning.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Memo writers: John Yoo, left, and Jay S. Bybee. (Photo by
University of California at Berkeley)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (97%); ETHICS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(87%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); TERRORISM
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS
(78%); JUDGES (78%); LEGAL ETHICS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (76%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
LAW OF WAR (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); INTERVIEWS (70%); TAX LAW (68%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (63%); TAXES & TAXATION (55%); APPEALS COURTS (52%) Torture  ;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Ethics;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (55%)
Justice Department

PERSON: Adam Liptak; Jay S Bybee

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             869 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Defining Torture: Russian Roulette, Yes. Mind-Altering Drugs, Maybe.

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review; Word for Word / A Fine Line; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1260 words


OF all the memos released by the White House last week in response to the prison
abuse scandal in Iraq, none have been more incendiary than the so-called torture
memo, dated Aug. 1, 2002, and written by Jay S. Bybee, the assistant attorney
general in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel at the Justice Department.

The department and the White House have distanced themselves from the document.
But the memorandum's antiseptic discussion of the definition of torture is
likely to continue to fuel the debate. Following are a few excerpts.
   KATE ZERNIKE
 The memo starts by explaining that some acts may be ''cruel, inhuman or
degrading'' but not constitute torture under Section 2340, the federal law
criminalizing torture. To rise to the level of torture, it argues, the acts must
be of an extreme nature, specifically intended to inflict severe pain or
suffering, mental or physical. But the statute is vague on the meaning of
''severe,'' so the authors try to construct one.

In the absence of such a definition, we construe a statutory term in accordance
with its ordinary and natural meaning. The dictionary defines severe as
''unsparing in exaction, punishment or censure'' or ''inflicting discomfort or
pain hard to endure; sharp; afflictive; distressing; violent; extreme; as severe
pain, anguish, torture'' ''extremely violent or grievous, severe pain'' ''of
pain, suffering, loss, or the like: grievous, extreme'' and ''of circumstances
hard to sustain or endure.'' Thus the adjective ''severe'' conveys that the pain
or suffering must be of such a high level of intensity that the pain is
difficult for the subject to endure.

 A good model, the memo suggests, can be found in statutes regulating what kind
of emergency medical conditions qualify for payments of health benefits.

Although these statutes address a substantially different subject from Section
2340, they are nonetheless helpful for understanding what constitutes severe
pain. They treat severe pain as an indicator of ailments that are likely to
result in permanent and serious physical damage in the absence of immediate
medical treatment. Such damage must rise to the level of death, organ failure or
the permanent impairment of a significant body function. These statutes suggest
that ''severe pain'' as used in Section 2340, must rise to a similarly high
level, the level that would ordinarily be associated with a sufficiently serious
physical condition or injury such as death, organ failure or serious impairment
of body functions in order to constitute torture.

 Turning to the matter of what constitutes severe mental pain, the memo notes
that the statute prohibits torture caused by mind-altering substances, which the
authors take to mean drugs. But, the memo argues, this doesn't rule out all
drugs.

Instead, it prohibits the use of drugs that ''disrupt profoundly the sense or
the personality.'' By requiring that the procedures and the drugs create a
profound disruption, the statue requires more than that the acts ''forcibly
separate'' or ''rend'' the senses or personality. Those acts must penetrate to
the core of an individual's ability to perceive the world around him,
substantially interfering with his cognitive abilities or fundamentally alter
his personality.

 The authors say they cannot find a definition of profound mental disruption in
mental health literature or United States law, so they offer some examples of
their own.

Such an effect might be seen in a drug-induced dementia. In such a state, the
individual suffers from significant memory impairment, such as the inability to
retain any new information or recall information about thin previously of
interest to the individual. This impairment is accompanied by one or more of the
following: deterioration of language function, e.g., repeating sounds and words
over and over again; impaired ability to execute simple motor activities, e.g.,
inability to dress or wave goodbye; inability to recognize and identify objects
such as chairs or pencils despite normal vision functioning. Moreover, we think
that pushing someone to the brink of suicide, particularly where the person
comes from a culture with strong taboos against suicide and it is evidenced by
acts of self-mutilation, would be a sufficient disruption of the personality to
constitute a ''profound disruption.''

 The torture statute also says that severe mental pain can result from the
threat of imminent death, the authors note. Imminent, however, is the operative
word.

Threats referring vaguely to things that might happen in the future do not
satisfy this immediacy requirement. Such a threat fails to satisfy this
requirement not because it is too remote in time but because there is a lack of
certainty it will occur. Indeed, timing is an indicator of certainty that the
harm will befall the defendant. Thus, a vague threat that someday the prisoner
might be killed would not suffice. Instead, subjecting a prisoner to mock
executions or playing Russian roulette with him would have sufficient immediacy
to constitute a threat of imminent death.

 The authors then look to the federal Torture Victims Protection Act to see how
it defines torture. They note that the courts have not given lengthy analysis on
this subject. But at least seven acts consistently reappear in decisions about
violations of the law, suggesting to the authors at least seven firm examples of
torture.

1) Severe beatings using instruments such as iron barks, truncheons and clubs;
2) threats of imminent death, such as mock executions; 3) threats of removing
extremities; 4) burning, especially burning with cigarettes; 5) electric shocks
to genitalia or threats to do so; 6) rape or sexual assault, or injury to an
individual's sexual organs, or threatening to do any of these sorts of acts; and
7) forcing the prisoner to watch the torture of others. While we cannot say with
certainty that acts falling short of these seven would not constitute torture
under Section 2340, we believe that interrogation techniques would have to be
similar to these in their extreme nature and in the type of harm caused to
violate the law.

 In an appendix, the memo lists several cases in which American courts have
ruled that the victim was tortured. One case describes what happened to three
Americans who were held as hostages in Lebanon. They sued the government of Iran
for its role in their kidnapping.

Plaintiff was kidnapped at gunpoint. He was beaten for several days after his
kidnapping. He was subjected to daily torture and threats of death. He was kept
in solitary confinement for two years. During that time, he was blindfolded and
chained to the wall in a 6-foot-by-6-foot room infested with rodents. He was
shackled in a stooped position for 44 months, and he developed eye infections as
a result of the blindfolds. Additionally, his captors did the following: forced
him to kneel on spikes; administered electric shocks to his hands; battered his
feet with iron bars and struck him in the kidneys with a rifle; struck him on
the side of his head with a hand grenade, breaking his nose and jaw; placed
boiling tea kettles on his shoulders; and they laced his food with arsenic.

 The memo ends by noting two cases in which courts ruled there was no torture.

The plaintiff was held for eight days in a filthy cell with drug dealers and an
AIDS patient. He received no food, no blanket and no protection from other
inmates. Prisoners murdered one another in front of the plaintiff. The court
flatly rejected the plaintiffs claim that this constituted torture.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Torture, by anyone's definition: on a wheel of fire during the
Inquisition. (Photo by Bettman/Corbis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); SCANDALS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WRITERS (77%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
ANTI-INFECTIVES (71%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%);
MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (62%); TERRORISM (60%) Torture; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL
COUNSEL (58%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (58%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; George W (Pres) Bush; Jay S Bybee

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             871 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

IRAQ GROUP ISSUES THREAT TO BEHEAD A MISSING MARINE

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Khalid al-Ansary contributed reporting from Hilla,
Iraq, for this article, Eric Schmitt from Istanbul and Melissa Sanford from West
Jordan, Utah.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: INSURGENCY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1329 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 27


A militant Iraqi group threatened Sunday night to behead an American marine it
said it had abducted from a military base unless the United States released all
Iraqi prisoners, according to a video broadcast on the Qatar-based television
network Al Jazeera.

The video shows a man identified as Cpl. Wassef Ali Hassoun sitting on the
ground in desert-patterned camouflage fatigues, with a thick blindfold over his
eyes and a long, curved sword held over his head.

Marine officials said Sunday night that Corporal Hassoun, who is of Lebanese
descent, had been missing since June 21.

The kidnappers belong to a little-known group called the Islamic Reaction, which
referred to itself as the security wing of the 20th Revolution Regiment. They
did not give a deadline for taking action but said Corporal Hassoun would be
killed if their demands were not met.

The new beheading threat adds to the anxiety that has been steadily rising in
Iraq with the approach of the transfer of sovereignty on Wednesday. Now five men
-- three Turks and a Pakistani as well as the American -- face grisly execution
if their countries do not bow to their captors' demands.

Also on Sunday, a passenger on a military flight was fatally shot when the plane
was fired on during takeoff from Baghdad International Airport. In a separate
incident, two children reportedly died after a mortar crashed into the waters of
the Tigris River.

In Baghdad, extra police officers were called up to guard major intersections
and search cars. American military officials warned that Monday could see the
beginning of a wave of insurgent attacks that they are calling the ''Baghdad
offensive.''

Earlier on Sunday, another Arab television network broadcast a video of masked
men holding a Pakistani contractor hostage. The masked men, apparently not from
the same group as the one holding Corporal Hassoun, said they would cut off
their hostage's head within 72 hours unless Pakistan closed its embassy in
Baghdad and recalled all of its workers. The Pakistani government has not issued
a response.

In the video, the Pakistani hostage looked ashen-faced and terrified as he sat
at the feet of four gunmen. He held up a badge identifying himself as an
employee of the American contractor Kellogg Brown & Root.

In the video of the man identified as Corporal Hassoun, no kidnappers are
clearly shown, although someone standing off camera is holding a sword over the
marine's head. In a statement by the group, the kidnappers said they had sneaked
into an American base, lured Corporal Hassoun out and then kidnapped him.

Marine officials said Corporal Hassoun is a member of the First Marine
Expeditionary Force, which has many troops based in the strife-ridden Falluja
area, where several other Americans have been abducted. The officials said that
while they could confirm that Corporal Hassoun was missing, they could not
confirm he had been kidnapped. In the short, grainy video, the camera lingers on
his Marine identification card that says, ''Hassoun, Wassef Ali'' and ''Active
Duty.''

The group's name, 20th Revolution Regiment, is thought to refer to the violent
uprising in Iraq against the British after World War I.

Family members gathered Sunday night at the home of a close relative of Corporal
Hassoun's in West Jordan, Utah, southwest of Salt Lake City.

The blinds of the house were closed and the curtains pulled shut. Friends and
relatives, some wearing head scarves, stopped by. A group of cameramen and
reporters stood on the corner with their large trucks and lights on.

''In the name of Allah, the merciful, the compassionate, we accept destiny with
its good parts and its bad,'' said Tarek Nosseir, a family friend and spokesman,
reading a statement to reporters. ''We pray and we plead for his safe release,
and we ask all people of the world to join us in our prayers. May God bless us
all.''

In the community, where children ride bikes down the street, neighbors say the
family members keep to themselves. Usually, when they were seen outside, they
were working on their lawn or their cars, said Rob L. Grimstad, a neighbor. He
saw one of the family members on Sunday and said it was clear that he was
suffering.

''You can tell he's upset from his expression,'' Mr. Grimstad said. ''He's
obviously in distress. That's not the way he usually looks.''

Meanwhile, three Turkish men remain in captivity, also facing a threat of
beheading. Neither Turkey nor Pakistan has troops in Iraq though the two
countries, both Muslim, supply many workers. Turkey said Sunday that it would
not give in to the kidnappers' demands that it quit doing business with American
forces in Iraq.

Already, two hostages seized in Iraq have been decapitated, on video, by
insurgents connected to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian fugitive suspected of
masterminding a bombing campaign that has killed hundreds of people. In recent
weeks, he has emerged as the brutal new terror boss in Iraq, though it is not
clear if he is linked to other groups like Al Qaeda or is operating on his own.
Some intelligence officers have even said Mr. Zarqawi may be a rival, not an
ally, of Osama bin Laden.

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Sunday that
occupation forces had recently captured two top Zarqawi aides. ''We've picked up
a couple of his key lieutenants, and that's helpful,'' he said.

A defense official said one of the aides, who was captured last week, had told
American interrogators that Mr. Zarqawi was less interested in the future of
Iraq specifically than he was in establishing a base in Falluja from which to
foment violence against the United States and American allies in the region.

Sunday in Baghdad started out grimly when several large mortar shells thudded
into the Tigris River around 11 a.m. There was a second mortar attack in the
evening, and news agencies later reported that between two and five people had
been killed, including two boys playing on the riverbank.

Reuters reported that a rocket strike had killed an American soldier in Baghdad
and that insurgents had killed six Iraqi soldiers near Baquba, a small city
north of the capital and the scene of other recent violence.

The military released few details about the attack on the airplane, thought to
be one of the first deadly incidents of its kind. A short news release said that
a C-130 troop transport plane was hit by gunfire around 5 p.m. and that the
pilot had returned to the ground to seek medical treatment for the passenger,
who later died.

In Hilla, south of Baghdad, the death toll rose to 37 from a suicide car bomb
that exploded on a busy street on Saturday night.

Sadiq Hashim was driving with his family to an ice cream parlor when the
explosion ripped next to his car. His wife and two sons burned to death inside
the car.

On Sunday, Mr. Hashim, a civil engineer, curled up in a hospital bed, his face
and chest a mess of burn salve and gauze.

''The street was like a piece of fire,'' Mr. Hashim said. ''It all happened
before my eyes, and I was unable to help my kids, who were burning.''

His 4-year-old daughter, Nergis, survived, but Mr. Hashim said the skin on her
face now looked as though it had melted.

''I've been through a lot in my life, and I went through several wars,'' Mr.
Hashim said. ''But never have I seen something so horrible.''

Car bombs have become one of the deadliest tools of terror in Iraq. But most are
aimed at police stations or military targets. What was unusual about the Hilla
bomb, which went off around 8:30 p.m. on Saturday, was that it was directed
against a strip of juice stands, clothing stores and ice cream shops, at the
precise hour when families go out for a stroll or a drive after the desert sun
sets and the air begins to cool.

Many people were outraged.

''I just want to ask one question to those who call themselves freedom
fighters,'' said Ali Kadum al-Hamdani, the provincial human rights chief in
Hilla. ''What did Nergis do to them?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A car was removed yesterday in Hilla, Iraq. It was destroyed
Saturday in a suicide bombing that killed 37. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg.
A10)
 A man identified as Cpl. Wassef Ali Hassoun of the Marines was shown with a
captor brandishing a sword. (Photo by Al Jazeera, via APTN)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (91%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); MILITARY BASES
(89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (77%);
AIRPORTS (74%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); VEHICLE SEARCH (71%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (69%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (66%); RELIGION (55%); SHOOTINGS (53%)
Kidnapping; Hostages; Politics and Government; Security and Warning Systems;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Recordings (Video); Capital Punishment; Terrorism

COMPANY: KBR INC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: Al Jazeera; Kellogg Brown & Root

TICKER: KBR (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS238110 POURED CONCRETE FOUNDATION & STRUCTURE CONTRACTORS (51%);
NAICS237310 HIGHWAY, STREET & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (51%); NAICS237120 OIL & GAS
PIPELINE & RELATED STRUCTURES CONSTRUCTION (51%); NAICS236210 INDUSTRIAL
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (51%); SIC8711 ENGINEERING SERVICES (51%); SIC1629 HEAVY
CONSTRUCTION NEC (51%)

PERSON: Jeffrey Gettleman; Wassef Ali (Cpl) Hassoun

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (96%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); PAKISTAN (93%); TURKEY (92%); QATAR
(92%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Turkey; Pakistan; Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Lebanon;
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             873 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush's Rating Falls To Its Lowest Point, New Survey Finds

BYLINE: By ADAM NAGOURNEY and JANET ELDER; Fred Backus contributed reporting for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: PUBLIC OPINION;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1737 words


President Bush's job approval rating has fallen to the lowest level of his
presidency, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll. The poll found
Americans stiffening their opposition to the Iraq war, worried that the invasion
could invite domestic terrorist attacks and skeptical about whether the White
House has been fully truthful about the war or about abuses at the Abu Ghraib
prison.

A majority of respondents in the poll, conducted before yesterday's transfer of
power to an interim Iraqi government, said that the war was not worth its cost
in American lives and that the Bush administration did not have a clear plan to
restore order to Iraq.

The survey, which showed Mr. Bush's approval rating at 42 percent, also found
that nearly 40 percent of Americans say they do not have an opinion about
Senator John Kerry, the likely Democratic presidential nominee, despite what
have been both parties' earliest and most expensive television advertising
campaigns.

Among those who do have an opinion, Mr. Kerry is disliked more than he is liked.
More than 50 percent of respondents said that Mr. Kerry says what he thinks
voters want to hear, suggesting that Mr. Bush has had success in portraying his
opponent as a flip-flopper.

Americans were more likely to believe that Mr. Bush would do a better job than
Mr. Kerry would in steering the nation through a foreign crisis, and protecting
it from future terrorist attacks. Support for Mr. Bush's abilities in those
areas has declined in recent months, but the findings suggest that Americans are
more comfortable entrusting their security to a president they know than a
relatively unknown challenger.

Even so, the poll was scattered with warning flags for Mr. Bush, and there was
evidence that his decision to go to war against Iraq has left him in a
precarious political position.

As he heads into the fall election, Mr. Bush appears to have much riding on the
transfer of power in Baghdad yesterday. The 42 percent of Americans who say they
approve of the way Mr. Bush is handling his job is the lowest such figure in a
Times/CBS News survey since the beginning of Mr. Bush's presidency in January
2001; 51 percent say they disapprove.

Over the last 25 years, according to pollsters, presidents with job approval
ratings below 50 percent in the spring of election years have generally gone on
to lose. Mr. Bush's father had a 34 percent job approval rating at this time in
1992.

Similarly, 45 percent said they had an unfavorable opinion of Mr. Bush himself,
again the most negative measure the Times/CBS Poll has found since he took
office. And 57 percent say the country is going in the wrong direction, another
measure used by pollsters as a barometer of discontent with an incumbent.

Yet the survey found little evidence that Mr. Kerry has been able to take
advantage of the president's difficulties, even though Mr. Kerry has spent $60
million on television advertising over the last three months.

Nationwide, Mr. Kerry has the support of 45 percent of registered voters, with
Mr. Bush supported by 44 percent. When Ralph Nader, who is running as an
independent, is included, he draws 5 percent, leaving 42 percent for Mr. Kerry
and 43 percent for Mr. Bush.

In the 18 states viewed by both parties as the most competitive, the race was
equally tight. Forty-five percent of voters in those states said they would
support Mr. Kerry, and 43 percent said they would back Mr. Bush. Indeed, on a
host of measures, the poll found little difference in public opinion between the
nation as a whole and voters in the competitive states.

The tight race indicated by the poll reflects how aides to both Mr. Bush and Mr.
Kerry have described the overall state of play for weeks. But other polls have,
at times, shown Mr. Kerry or Mr. Bush bumping ahead. A CBS News poll taken last
month found Mr. Kerry with a lead of 49 percent to 41 percent over Mr. Bush.

The new Times/CBS News poll, of 1,053 adults, including 875 registered voters,
was taken by telephone June 23 to June 27. It has a margin of sampling error of
plus or minus 3 percentage points.

For all the signs of opposition to the war, Americans appear prepared to stay in
Iraq until the situation becomes stable. Fifty-four percent of poll respondents
said that the United States should remain in Iraq ''as long as it takes,'' while
40 percent said the United States should withdraw ''as soon as possible.''

Over all, the poll's findings left little doubt about the extent to which Mr.
Bush's decision to go to war is proving to be the most fateful of his
presidency. About 60 percent of respondents said they disapproved of Mr. Bush's
Iraq policy, while just over 50 percent said they disapproved of his foreign
policy.

And 60 percent of respondents said the war has not been worth the cost.

''We attacked a sovereign nation, and we went in there and we did things that
the United States shouldn't have done,'' Charles Drum, 36, a Republican from
Alameda, Calif., said in an interview after the poll was taken. ''I feel that we
went after the wrong people, and it's unacceptable, and it's absolutely
ridiculous that innocent people are dying over there in Iraq, and our own troops
are dying for a cause that is not just.''

Respondents said that Mr. Bush's policies in Iraq were having the effect of
creating terrorists and of increasing the chances of another terrorist attack at
home. Concerns about the war appear to undercut what has long been one of Mr.
Bush's strong suits, his handling of the fight against terrorism. Fifty-two
percent of Americans now say they approve of the way Mr. Bush is conducting that
fight, down from 90 percent in December 2001.

''I watch the news quite a bit, and I'm kind of thinking it's getting these
terrorists motivated to do more,'' said Charlie Buck, 54, a Republican from
Indiana, Pa. ''Whether it's their religious beliefs or it's us trying to step
into their country, I just get that feeling that they feel that we're stepping
into where we shouldn't be, and it's inciting them.''

In what could prove to be a particularly far-reaching development for Mr. Bush
-- especially because he and his campaign have sought to undercut Mr. Kerry's
credibility -- nearly 60 percent said he was not being entirely truthful when
talking about Iraq. Similarly, just 15 percent said the administration had told
the entire truth when it came to abuses at the Abu Ghraib prison.

There are some ways in which Mr. Kerry and Mr. Bush are viewed similarly. They
are seen as leaders who keep their word, and both are viewed as optimistic,
suggesting that Mr. Bush's attempt to portray Mr. Kerry as pessimistic has not
taken hold.

But Mr. Kerry was described as more likely than Mr. Bush to admit a mistake, and
to listen to divergent opinions. Mr. Bush is viewed as someone who takes a
position and sticks with it.

''Kerry has flip-flopped too many times,'' said Joseph Martin, 52, an
independent voter who lives outside Seattle. ''The one thing that I think that a
lot of people understand is a position of strength, and you cannot be waffling
around. You've got to show a commitment, show a determination and keep a steady
hand, and I just don't think Kerry has got that.''

For Mr. Bush, the poll contains a number of potentially worrisome findings. By
51 to 32 percent, Americans believe that he has divided the nation, rather than
brought it together. The number of Americans who said that Mr. Bush did not care
about the ''needs and problems of people like you'' edged up to 42 percent from
36 percent in March.

On the issue of the economy, even though job-creation numbers have been rising
over the last few months, 45 percent of Americans say that the Bush
administration has been responsible for a decline in jobs, compared with 24
percent who say it has brought an increase.

Republicans, remembering what happened when Mr. Bush's father lost in 1992, have
long expressed concern that any improvement in the economy will happen too late
to capture the notice of voters.

More people held unfavorable than favorable opinions of Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry.
The number of people who view Mr. Kerry unfavorably has jumped to 35 percent
from 29 percent in mid-March, when Mr. Bush began a huge television advertising
campaign against his opponent.

In Mr. Kerry's case, 36 percent said they had no opinion of him, despite the
campaign's record-setting expenditure on television advertisements. That figure
is fairly typical for challengers at this point in the campaign; in June 1992,
44 percent of the public did not have an opinion of Bill Clinton.

How the Poll Was Conducted

 The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Wednesday through Sunday with 1,053 adults throughout the United
States. Of these, 875 said they were registered to vote.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer
from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the
country. Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete
telephone number, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers alike.
Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the
respondent for the survey.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variation in the sample
relating to geographic region, sex, race, Hispanic origin, marital status, age
and education.

Residents of 18 political swing states were oversampled for analysis and then
weighted to their proper share of the population.

Based on the 2000 presidential vote, residents of heavily Republican counties,
heavily Democratic counties, and politically competitive counties were weighted
to their proper share of the population.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, overall results based on such samples will
differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what
would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

For smaller subgroups the margin of sampling error is larger.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
Variation in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to
somewhat different results.

Complete questions and results are available at nytimes.com/politics.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''Presidential Candidates and Iraq''Graphs track the
following:Do you approve or disapprove of the way George W. Bush is handling his
job as president?Do you think the result of the war with Iraq was worth the loss
of American life and other costs?What is your opinion of:George W. BushJohn
KerryRegistered voters onlyIn his statements about the war in Iraq, do you think
President Bush is telling the entire truth, mostly telling the truth but hiding
something, or mostly lying?ENTIRE TRUTH: 18%HIDING SOMETHING: 59MOSTLY LYING:
20NO OPINION: 3As a result of the United States military action in Iraq, do you
think the threat of terrorism against the United States has increased, decreased
or stayed about the same?INCREASED: 47%DECREASED: 13STAYED SAME: 38NO OPINION:
2After control of the government is turned over to the Iraqi people, do you
think the Iraqi people will be safer, less safe or about as safe as they are
now?SAFER: 16%LESS SAFE: 20ABOUT AS SAFE: 59NO OPINION: 5Is the United States's
involvement in Iraq creating more, eliminating, or not affecting terrorists who
are planning to attack the U.S.?CREATING TERRORISTS: 55%ELIMINATING TERRORISTS:
17NOT AFFECTING: 21NO OPINION: 7Based on nationwide telephone surveys conducted
by The New York Times and CBS News. Latest results are based on telephone
interviews conducted June 23 through 27 with 1,053 respondents.(pg. A24)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLLS & SURVEYS (94%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS
& ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (79%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); VOTERS & VOTING (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(79%); INTERVIEWS (79%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%);
TELEVISION ADVERTISING (73%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (54%); BROADCAST ADVERTISING
(53%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Election
Issues; New York Times/cbs News Poll; Public Opinion; Presidential Election of
2004; Terrorism; Presidents and Presidency (US)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (93%); JOHN KERRY (79%) Adam Nagourney; Janet Elder;
George W (Pres) Bush; John (Sen) Kerry

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             875 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan's Agony: Why No Outcry?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 204 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof cites many good reasons we should stop dithering about
genocide in Sudan, call it by its right name and help ''pass a tough U.N.
Security Council resolution authorizing troops, as well as more support for
African peacekeepers.''

Not only are there moral and legal obligations to stop genocide, but there is
also a good economic reason to do so.

Those who argue over the costs of stopping genocide are not considering the
costs of ignoring it. This was illustrated by our refusal to recognize and deter
genocide in Rwanda in 1994. It cost the international community up to 20 times
more for aid and trials after the Rwandan genocide than early intervention to
halt the genocide would have cost.

The international community can and should also demand restitution for the
victims, who will need not only aid to survive this year but also a great
capital investment to rebuild homes that have been set on fire in the destroyed
villages when they go back, as well as military protection.

It is time to make the perpetrators of genocide and crimes against humanity pay
for the injuries to the victims.

HELEN FEIN
Executive Director, Institute
for the Study of Genocide
Cambridge, Mass., June 26, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); WAR CRIMES (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (72%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%)

PERSON: Helen Fein; Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); RWANDA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             876 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan's Agony: Why No Outcry?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 113 words



To the Editor:

I support Nicholas D. Kristof's call to action from Western powers to address
the tragedy in Sudan and address it with the sense of urgency that it deserves
and requires (''Dithering as Others Die,'' column, June 26). But what of
regional responses or lack thereof?

Where is the Arab recognition of a Muslim nation's and a Muslim population's
responsibility for the slaughter? And where is the public outcry, in the United
States, in Europe and around the world? Where are the protests?

Or is outrage in order only when a particular political slant (imperialism,
colonialism) or target (the United States, Israel) can be cited?

ERIC D. TUCKER
New York, June 26, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: Eric D Tucker; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             877 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A U.N. Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 204 words



To the Editor:

The United Nations' ability to charge American soldiers with war crimes is
broader than you report in ''U.S. Drops Plans to Exempt G.I.'s From U.N. Court''
(front page, June 24).

Your statement ''Neither the United States nor Iraq is a member of the tribunal,
and its jurisdiction is limited to countries that do not themselves prosecute
crimes by their military'' misses the wider powers of the United Nations
Security Council, which may refer cases to the International Criminal Court
whether or not the countries are parties to the court. And the court may
determine that a country is ''unwilling'' to prosecute crimes if it is
''shielding'' someone from prosecution for a crime, clearly jurisdictional
wiggle room.

The withdrawn resolution raises serious issues: war crimes charges against
American forces down the road, the broader impact of the prison abuse scandal
and what could happen if the new sovereign government of Iraq joins the
International Criminal Court or signs a declaration with the court register
allowing the prosecutor to bring charges in his ex officio capacity.

PAMELA S. FALK
New York, June 24, 2004

The writer, a professor at CUNY School of Law, covers the United Nations for CBS
News.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); WRITERS (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (65%);
TERRORISM (59%); SCANDALS (52%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United Nations

PERSON: Pamela S Falk

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scrappy Group of Lawyers Shows Way for Big Firms

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK and MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE
ADVOCATES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1207 words


The Center for Constitutional Rights, the scrappy left-leaning public-interest
group that filed the first lawsuits on behalf of people detained as suspected
terrorists in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, works out of an office in Lower Manhattan,
not far from some of the biggest law firms in the nation.

But until the cases reached the Supreme Court, the group fought almost alone.

''Early on, we felt very, very isolated because we were going against the grain
of the superpatriotism around us,'' Ron Daniels, executive director of the
center, said.

The offices are dingy, with scuffed metal doors and odd carpeting held together
by filth and duct tape. But for the political posters, the law books and the
photographs of its founders tangling with the House Un-American Activities
Committee and celebrating voting rights victories in the South, the place could
be the home of a third-tier municipal agency.

The mood in the offices was bright yesterday, as the group savored its victory
in what some legal scholars are calling the most important civil liberties case
in half a century. On Monday, the Supreme Court ruled that the more than 600
detainees at the Guantanamo naval base had the right to challenge their
detentions in court.

''I feel most vindicated,'' Mr. Daniels said, ''by the way many organizations
are now trying to claim a piece of this.''

That is a new phenomenon. Early on, the establishment bar mostly kept its
distance from the cases, filed in early 2002, months after the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks.

''They made a decision that it was too hot and too soon,'' said Barbara
Olshansky, deputy legal director of the center.

There was a single exception.

After representatives of a group of Kuwaiti detainees tried and failed to
convince two major firms to take those cases in 2002, they called on a lawyer at
Shearman & Sterling, Thomas B. Wilner. Mr. Wilner said his firm's decision to
take the cases, separate from the ones that the center litigated for Australian
and British detainees, was harder than the center's had been.

''That's their job to do these things,'' he said. ''For a private law firm to
take it on at that time was very, very controversial. We were sort of
ostracized. It was very difficult for Shearman & Sterling.''

Ms. Olshansky said times had changed.

''He had to fight with his partners to take the case,'' she said about Mr.
Wilner. ''Now they use this case to recruit people.''

The president of the center, Michael Ratner, was impressed by the firm's
commitment and its decor.

''I was walking into a place with marble floors,'' Mr. Ratner said yesterday,
speaking from Greece. ''We have totally frayed carpets and can't afford to
replace them.''

The firm, which handled a separate client from the center, donated the fees it
earned in the case to a 9/11-related charity, Mr. Wilner said. The cases of the
firm and the center were consolidated and the two worked closely together.

The phones were ringing at the center yesterday, and the big firms that had
steered clear of the case as too controversial were getting in line to help
represent the detainees.

''We're getting some very big, very straight law firms,'' said Jeffrey E. Fogel,
the center's legal director.

Mr. Fogel was not ready to name them, he said, until they had sorted out just
what they were signing up for.

Douglass Cassel, a law professor at Northwestern who was a consultant in the
Guantanamo cases, said the ruling on Monday left much to be determined about
detainees' representation.

''I'm not sure a big law firm would be enthusiastic about sending down their
trial partners or even associates to Guantanamo for extended proceedings before
military commissions,'' Professor Cassel said. ''But I'm sure they would be
happy to file papers in federal court in Washington.''

Officials at the Defense and Justice Departments could not clarify what
proceedings would satisfy the Supreme Court decision.

''We are still working though the ruling,'' a Pentagon official said. ''It's not
something that we can move through that fast. There is so much we have to look
at. We're still trying to figure out how to work through it.''

In a statement on Monday, the Justice Department said it was reviewing the
decision. On Tuesday, a spokeswoman said she had nothing to add.

Experts in international law said the ruling basically gave the administration
two choices. It could allow the detainees to argue their case in federal court
or challenge the federal courts as the proper setting, insisting that a military
tribunal of some sort or the Pentagon's new annual review of detainee status
provides all the protections that the Constitution requires.

On Tuesday, the Pentagon announced that it had formed a five-member tribunal to
hear cases against the first three of nearly 600 Guantanamo detainees. The
three, Ali Hamza Ahmed Sulayman al-Bahlul of Yemen, Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud
al-Qosi of Sudan and David Hicks of Australia, have been assigned to the same
panel. Trial dates have not been set, and it is unclear whether their cases
could also provide a forum to pursue their contentions that their detentions are
unlawful.

Bettina B. Plevan, a lawyer at Proskauer Rose in New York and the president of
the City Bar Association in New York, said the association was organizing a
meeting to discuss how firms could help with the Guantanamo cases.

The atmosphere was quite different in early 2002. Then, Mr. Ratner was
approached by representatives of Mr. Hicks. Even in the center, not everyone was
eager to take his case.

''Folks in the development department, the fund-raisers, were concerned about
what the reaction was going to be,'' Ms. Olshansky said.

Even filing the cases in federal court in Washington was difficult, lawyers for
the center said, because they could not for some time find a local lawyer to
sign the papers.

''The only lawyers we could get at that point were lawyers used to dealing with
really unpopular clients,'' Mr. Ratner said. Among them was Joseph Margulies, a
criminal defense lawyer from Minneapolis.

The first argument, before Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly in Federal District
Court in Washington, did not go well. The case attracted little attention and no
supporting briefs.

''I just can't say how unreceptive the court seemed to me,'' Mr. Ratner said.
''It felt hopeless.''

Things were no better in the appeals court in Washington.

''The circuit court argument went very badly,'' Mr. Ratner said. ''It was a very
hostile bench. By the time the case got to the Supreme Court, you had to beat
the lawyers off with a stick.''

Even in the Supreme Court, though, only one domestic bar association filed a
brief. The City Bar Association claimed that distinction in a news release on
Monday.

That is odd, Mr. Fogel, the legal director, said.

''These are lawyers' issues,'' he said. ''The right to counsel, the right to the
essential elements of due process. You would have thought you would have seen
some of the legal organizations be more sharp on these issues.''

The general counsel of the bar association, Alan Rothstein, said the group was
surprised to be alone.

''Most bar associations,'' Mr. Rothstein said when asked about the situation,
''have stayed away from issues of this level of controversy.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lawyers at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which won an
important case before the Supreme Court this week allowing detainees at the
Guantanamo naval base to legally challenge their detentions, include, from left,
Jeffrey E. Fogel, Barbara Olshansky, Ron Daniels and Steven Watt. (Photo by
Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)
 Michael Ratner, president of the center, said his group's cases in the lower
courts ''felt hopeless.'' (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUPREME COURTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TERRORISM (89%); LEGAL SERVICES
(89%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NAVIES (71%); EXECUTIVES (70%)
Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War

COMPANY: SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP (85%); AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO
KSCC (53%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)
Center for Constitutional Rights; Supreme Court (US)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (85%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (85%);
NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (53%); SIC6513
OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (53%)

PERSON: Adam Liptak; Michael Janofsky

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             880 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Court Sentences Croatian-Serb Leader

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 61 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal sentenced Milan Babic, a leader of
Croatia's rebellious Serbs, to 13 years in prison for inflaming an ethnic
cleansing campaign that killed 200 Croats and expelled tens of thousands in the
1990's war there. He was convicted in January of one count of persecution after
he pleaded guilty in a deal with prosecutors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); CIVIL
WAR (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); GUILTY PLEAS (88%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Milan Babic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS
(74%)

REGION: Croatia

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             881 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 30, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women Are Still Paid Less

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 180 words



To the Editor:

While the size of the Wal-Mart sex discrimination lawsuit (editorial, June 25)
understandably draws attention to a single company, women suffer pay inequities
across the nation. It's not simply a matter of promoting more women, because
women are shortchanged at all levels.

In 2002, the General Accounting Office examined the salaries of full-time
managers in 10 industries from 1995 to 2000. In no industry did women managers
earn the same as men, and in most industries women lost ground in the five-year
period. How bad is the gap? The 2000 Census found that the average earnings for
women in management and professional occupations was about $15,000 less than
men.

Many of the rationalizations to justify the discrepancies have been debunked. A
2003 G.A.O. report controlled for several factors -- from education level to
other family income to work interruptions -- and still found a 21 percent gender
gap.

Clearly, the struggle for equality is far from over.

KATHY RODGERS
New York, June 25, 2004

The writer is president of Legal Momentum, a women's rights group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN WORKERS (90%); EQUAL PAY (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); WOMEN (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (77%); COMPANY EARNINGS
(75%); RETAILERS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); CENSUS
(69%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (66%) Retail Stores and Trade; Women;
Discrimination; Labor; Suits and Litigation; Wages and Salaries

ORGANIZATION: US GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE (58%) Legal Momentum (Orgn);
Wal-Mart Stores Inc

PERSON: Kathy Rodgers

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             887 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hazardous Assignments Killed 36 Journalists in '03

BYLINE:  By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 2


The number of journalists who died on assignment rose sharply last year, to 36
from 19 in 2002, largely because of their work in Iraq, according to a report
released Friday by the Committee to Protect Journalists, a research and advocacy
group based in New York.

Thirteen journalists were killed by hostile actions in Iraq last year, the
report said, and six more died as a result of traffic accidents or illness.
Outside Iraq, nearly all other journalists killed were targets because of their
reporting.

"The war that began in March posed many hazards for journalists," Ann Cooper,
the group's executive director, said in a statement. "But seasoned war
correspondents tell us that even in the postwar period, Iraq remains the most
dangerous assignment they have ever had."

The deaths of 19 journalists in Iraq is the highest toll in a single country
since 24 journalists were killed in Algeria in 1995 at the height of the
conflict between the government and Islamist insurgents, according to the
report. Because of the new process of assigning reporters to travel with the
American-led military forces during the Iraq war, journalists fell prey to the
same deadly hazards that soldiers faced. But during the last nine months of the
occupation in Iraq, the risks have not abated.

Reporters face threats from both sides of the guerrilla war in Iraq. Like Iraqis
themselves and occupation soldiers, journalists risk being at the wrong place at
the wrong time in this period of frequent car bombings and roadside explosions.
Three American reporters for The Los Angeles Times and five of their Iraqi
colleagues were wounded and eight people were killed on New Year's Eve when a
car bomb exploded next to a Baghdad restaurant popular with foreigners and
affluent Iraqis.

When reporters travel to the restive areas of the so-called Sunni Triangle north
and west of Baghdad, a swath that formed the power base of the ousted
government, their cars are routinely chased by gunmen and frequently fired upon.
Reporters have also been attacked by angry crowds when covering suicide
bombings.

But at least four journalists have been killed to date by the American military,
including a Palestinian cameraman for Reuters, who was shot as he filmed outside
a prison in August. The committee "continues to demand a full public accounting
from the Pentagon" for the incidents, Ms. Cooper said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF PRESS (91%); WRITERS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
IRAQ WAR (90%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (87%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (75%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%);
GUNSHOT WOUNDS (69%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (66%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (66%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (66%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); ALGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             890 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 4, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Without End

BYLINE:  By Adam Hochschild; Adam Hochschild is the author of "King Leopold's
Ghost," "Finding the Trapdoor: Essays, Portraits, Travels" and other books.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1101 words


IN THE LAND
OF MAGIC SOLDIERS
A Story of White and Black in West Africa.
By Daniel Bergner.
216 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.

WHEN the first generation of abolitionists exhibited thumbscrews and slave whips
on lecture platforms in England some 200 years ago, audiences were genuinely
shocked that such things could exist. After the full nature of the Holocaust
became clear, many felt that it surpassed all other horrors in memory. Africa's
recent crop of civil wars -- most notably in Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone --
seem to represent yet new depths of human cruelty: forcing children at gunpoint
to cut off their parents' hands; can we imagine anything more vicious?

Unfortunately, of course, such cruelty is all too familiar. Slavery was
widespread for most of recorded history. There were outbreaks of genocide long
before the word was coined. And forced cannibalism may have been known to the
ancient Greeks, for in the Oresteia trilogy of Aeschylus, Thyestes is tricked
into eating the flesh of his own children.

The journalist and novelist Daniel Bergner is right, however, to see Africa's
civil wars as a horror of our time that deserves exploration, and that is what
drew him to spend time in Sierra Leone in the aftermath of the gruesome conflict
there that ended several years ago -- for the time being, anyway.

There seems something especially tragic about Sierra Leone's civil war, because
the country was not known for great violence in the recent past. Although it was
once a center of the slave trade, its origins lie partly in a remarkably utopian
18th-century settlement of emancipated slaves. Later, British rule there was far
more benign than colonialism in most of Africa, and independence in 1961 came
peacefully. But by the 1990's, Sierra Leone was the same story as too many other
African nations: a government that essentially no longer provided services,
marauding rebel soldiers fueled by drugs and lust for diamonds, children
wielding AK-47's, mass rapes.

Bergner has a keen eye, although at times his writing feels frustratingly
elliptical. It is occasionally hard to keep his characters straight, and he
never tells us exactly how much time he spent in the country. He renounces any
attempt to explain fully the impoverished nation's descent into savagery.
Instead the strength of his spare and evocative account is his gallery of
characters, whose stories weave through the book and at times intersect with one
another. One, Lamin Jusu Jarka, had both his hands chopped off by rebel
soldiers. He takes Bergner to the place where it happened, and, with steel
pincer prostheses, holds his hand against the mango tree root -- still marked by
the blows of an ax -- where he lost his own. At the end of the book, Lamin leads
a group of amputees to wait under another mango tree to vote in the country's
first postwar election. Where the ballots call for a thumbprint, he marks his
with his big toe.

The man who crippled Lamin, a rebel wearing a white T-shirt with the words "C.
O. Cut Hands," has recently been seen around the capital in the uniform of the
new national army, composed of veterans of both sides of the civil war. Bergner
is not able to track the man down, but he does talk to others who carried out
mutilations. Some are teenage orphans, often unable to return to their
communities because they were inducted into the rebel army by being forced to
cut off the limbs of their own parents, brothers, sisters. One tells Bergner how
he killed a Nigerian peacekeeper who he felt wronged him, tore out his heart and
liver, and boiled and ate them. The stories numb us with their horror. And yet
at the same time, after Sept. 11, 2001, Bergner writes, "the condolences offered
me, as an American, were constant and, as best I could tell, shocked and sincere
and weighted with empathy."

Hovering uneasily in the background of the book is the question: Is this level
of barbarity unique to Africa? Bergner once or twice asks the question directly,
wonders if he is racist for asking it, then backs away from it. But his final
chapter seems to imply, at least, that Africa is more primitive and less
rational than other violent parts of the world: he visits a village witch
doctor, whose apprentices put on a demonstration of eating razor blades, placing
flaming sticks on their skins and other such feats. The scene is perhaps meant
to justify the book's title, and it is true that one of many ingredients in
Africa's wars has long been the belief that the proper magic can make one immune
to bullets. However, conjurers perform similar feats in other countries. One
could also argue that Washington's confidence in high-tech weaponry represents a
different kind of faith in magic. And to a civilian on the receiving end, a
piece of depleted-uranium shrapnel can feel as inexplicable a horror as an ax
wielded by a drugged teenager.

What is of value in this book is less what it says about Sierra Leone than about
the human condition. Here Bergner's most haunting figure is Neall Ellis, a white
South African mercenary who flies the sole combat helicopter the Sierra Leone
government owns. Ellis lives for the thrill of rocketing and machine-gunning
from the air: "Better than sex. . . . There's a lot of adrenaline going. You're
all keyed up, and when you realize you're on target, that you've taken out the
enemy, it's a great feeling." Human Rights Watch has documented dozens of dead
or wounded civilians in towns he attacked. Yet at the same time, Ellis is using
some of his salary to pay school fees for local children, to put one of his
Sierra Leonean girlfriends through nursing and midwifery school in England and
to put a young man through medical school. Later on, as the fighting winds down,
Ellis raises funds for the treatment of a badly burned young woman, and plans a
local burn center, "because right now there isn't a place like that in the whole
of Sierra Leone, nowhere a victim can go to get that type of treatment." A few
months later, however, Bergner gets an e-mail message from Ellis: civil war has
broken out in the Ivory Coast, and he is "hoping for a possible contract."

Ellis is so memorable because the strange blend of killing and healing in his
life is a reminder of the potential for each that we all carry within us, of how
precarious is the balance between them, and of how easily it can be tipped one
way or the other by the societies we build for ourselves. "In the Land of Magic
Soldiers" does not analyze the causes of Sierra Leone's war, but it reminds us
of this precarious balance, and that may be the greater service.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); WRITERS
(89%); SLAVERY (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HISTORY (77%); NOVELS &
SHORT STORIES (73%); CLASSICS (73%); HOLOCAUST (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (70%); PROSTHETICS & ORTHOTICS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: FARRAR STRAUS & GIROUX INC (58%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); AFRICA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); ENGLAND (90%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%); LIBERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             892 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 7, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

California School District Settles Harassment Suit by Gay Students

BYLINE:  By CAROL POGASH

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 6


After a five-year legal battle, a school district near San Jose has agreed to
settle a lawsuit brought by six gay students by paying $1.1 million and
providing mandatory training for teachers, administrators and other staff
members to eliminate harassment and discrimination against gay and lesbian
students.

The school district, Morgan Hill Unified, will also provide antiharassment
programs for seventh and ninth graders.

In the lawsuit, the students said teachers and administrators failed to act when
classmates harassed and discriminated against them from 1991 to 1998.

The settlement was signed Tuesday and announced at a news conference here called
by the American Civil Liberties Union, which along with the National Center for
Lesbian Rights and a San Francisco law firm represented the six former middle
school and high school students.

One plaintiff, Freddie Fuentes, 24, said at the news conference that he was in
the seventh grade when he was badly beaten at a bus stop by students yelling a
sexual slur. Only one attacker was disciplined. After being advised that the
school could not ensure his safety, Mr. Fuentes said, he transferred schools.

"I wasn't aware that what people said to me and what they were doing to me and
beating me up was wrong," he said yesterday. "I thought this was how school is."

The school district argued that it had an antidiscrimination policy and that the
accusations were untrue. It said administrators were not guilty of "deliberate
indifference."

In a 3-to-0 ruling in April, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit found that school officials who did not take action when
discrimination occurred were in violation of the equal protection clause of the
Constitution.

The settlement requires Morgan Hill schools to provide three and a half hours of
training annually for teachers and other staff members, including bus drivers
and janitors. Employees must report antigay accusations, and schools must
designate a compliance coordinator to investigate every report.

The Morgan Hill superintendent of schools, Carolyn McKennan, said in a statement
that "the district has been against all forms of harassment before, during and
after this litigation." Ms. McKennan noted that the agreement did not include
any admission of wrongdoing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SCHOOL DISTRICTS (93%); GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(91%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES
(90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); TEACHER EDUCATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (78%);
GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); EQUAL PROTECTION (78%);
MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (78%); LAWYERS (75%); PRESS CONFERENCES (75%); LGBT RIGHTS
(73%); SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENTS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (68%); APPEALS COURTS (50%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%); NATIONAL CENTER FOR LESBIAN
RIGHTS (56%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SAN JOSE, CA, USA (73%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             896 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing West: California: Deal Leaves Scouts To Fight Alone

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 140 words


San Diego agreed to settle a lawsuit with the American Civil Liberties Union
over land in two public parks the city leases to the Boy Scouts free or for a
nominal charge. The city's decision to step aside in the case leaves the Boy
Scouts alone to fight the A.C.L.U., which contends that the group should be
evicted from the parks because it discriminates on the grounds of sexuality and
religion.

To settle the case, the city will pay the A.C.L.U. of San Diego and Imperial
Counties $950,000 in legal fees and court costs. The city also agreed to ask a
federal judge to enter a judgment that would void the Scouts' lease in Balboa
Park, which it has held for nearly a half-century. City officials said
continuing to fight could leave the city stuck with an even bigger bill. The Boy
Scouts said it would continue to fight the A.C.L.U.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); COURT COST FINES (86%); JUDGES (73%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (72%); CITIES (72%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION (56%)

CITY: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (93%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             899 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Spinning Into Control'

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE; E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 730 words


The strategic reason for crushing Saddam was to reverse the tide of global
terror that incubated in the Middle East.

Is our pre-emptive policy working? Was the message sent by ousting the Baathists
as well as the Taliban worth the cost?

Set aside the tens of thousands of lives saved each year by ending Saddam's
sustained murder of Iraqi Shia and Kurds, which is of little concern to human
rights inactivists. Consider only self-defense: the practical impact of American
action on the spread of dangerous weaponry in antidemocratic hands.

1. In Libya, Colonel Qaddafi took one look at our army massing for the invasion
of Iraq and decided to get out of the mass-destruction business. He has since
stopped lying to gullible U.N. inspectors and -- in return for U.S. investment
instead of invasion -- promises civilized behavior. The notion that this
terror-supporting dictator's epiphany was not the direct result of our military
action, but of decade-long diplomatic pleas for goodness and mercy, is
laughable.

2. In Afghanistan, supposedly intractable warlords in a formerly radical
Islamist, female-repressing culture of conflicting tribes and languages have
come together. Under our NATO security umbrella and with some U.N. guidance, a
grand conclave of leaders freed by U.S. power surprised the Arab world's
doubting despots with the elements of a constitution that leads the way out of
the past generation's abyss of barbarism.

3. In Syria, a hiding place for Saddam's finances, henchmen and weaponry -- and
exporter of Hezbollah and Hamas terrorism -- Dictator Bashar al-Assad is
nervously seeking to re-open negotiations with Israel to regain strategic
heights his father lost in the last Syrian aggression. Secret talks have already
begun (I suspect through Turkey, Israel's Muslim friend, rather than the
unfriendly European Union); this would not have happened while Saddam was able
to choke off illicit oil shipments to Syria.

4. On the West Bank, incipient Israeli negotiations with Syria -- on top of the
overthrow of the despot who rewarded Palestinian suicide bombers -- further
isolates the terror organizations behind Yasir Arafat. Under the pressure of
Israel's security fence, and without the active support of Egypt and Saudi
Arabia (each eager to retain protection of a strong-willed Bush administration),
Palestinians now have incentives to find an antiterrorist leader who can deliver
statehood.

5. In Iran, the presence of 130,000 U.S. troops near the border was not lost on
the despot-clerics in power, who suddenly seemed reasonable to European
diplomats seeking guarantees that Russian-built nuclear plants would be
inspected. Colin Powell has been secretly dickering with the so-called reform
ayatollah for a year in hopes of being on the right side of a future revolution.
The old "Great Satan" crowd has just barred four-score reformist Parliament
members from seeking re-election. That panicky crackdown in Teheran is a sign of
the rulers' weakness; the example of freedom in neighboring Iraq will help cause
another part of the axis to fall.

6. In Iraq, where casualties in Baghdad could be compared to civilian losses to
everyday violence in New York and Los Angeles, a rudimentary federal republic is
forming itself with all the customary growing pains. After the new Iraq walks by
itself, we can expect free Iraqis to throw their crutches at the doctor. But we
did not depose Saddam to impose a puppet; we are helping Iraqis defeat the
diehards and resist fragmentation to set in place a powerful democratic example.

7. In North Korea, a half-world away from that example, an unofficial U.S. group
was shown nuclear fuel facilities at Yongbyon to demonstrate that the world
faced a real threat. But the U.S. has given China to understand that
nuclear-armed Pyongyang would lead to missile defenses in Japan and Taiwan, a
potential challenge to China's Asian hegemony. Our new credibility is leading
China to broker an enforceable agreement like the kind Libya has offered, with
economic sweeteners tightly tied to verification.

The columnist Jim Hoagland cautions that it is too early to proclaim that
nonproliferation is "spinning into control." But taken together, this phased
array of fallout to our decision to lead the world's war against terror makes
the case that what we have been doing is strategically sound as well as morally
right.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (78%); HAMAS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); ARMIES (77%); HEZBOLLAH (76%);
WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); INSPECTIONS (73%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (73%); POWER PLANTS (70%); ARMED FORCES (69%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (65%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (94%); SYRIA (94%); IRAQ (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPE (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
LIBYA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); TURKEY (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             901 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Top Bosnian War Crimes Suspect Again Eludes NATO Searchers

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: PALE, Bosnia, Jan. 11


NATO troops on Sunday scaled down a major weekend hunt for a top Bosnian Serb
war crimes suspect, Radovan Karadzic, set off by a tip that an injury may have
forced him to seek help in the town where his headquarters were once situated.

If Dr. Karadzic had indeed been there, he appeared to have once again slipped
the net. By nightfall, only an ex-paramilitary policeman said to be "a
supporter" had been detained, outside a nearby ski-resort hotel. "They have been
looking for my husband in the walls, in every inch of the house and, how absurd,
in the septic tank," said the former leader's wife, Ljiljana. "They seem to
believe Radovan would hide like Saddam Hussein."

The hunt began in a snowstorm on Saturday, as 200 troops and police officers
fanned out in Pale to search hospital and church buildings from top to bottom.

Dr. Karadzic's onetime fief is in the mountains above the Bosnian capital,
Sarajevo, whose siege between 1992 and 1995 led to his indictment for genocide
by the international criminal tribunal in The Hague.

Leaders of the unit of the NATO stabilization force that conducted the operation
said they were acting on reliable information that Dr. Karadzic had contacted
his family and supporters, and might be injured.

The mission carried out by the search team, which included local Bosnian Serb
police officers, was the "single biggest joint operation we have conducted in 18
months" said Capt. Mathew Brock of the NATO force.

"Mr. Karadzic has not been located," he said. But ammunition and documents found
in his wife's house could be "very useful in determining his whereabouts, he
added."

He said the force would maintain a presence in Pale overnight and probably end
the operation by noon Monday.

Dr. Karadzic and his military chief, Gen. Ratko Mladic, are both also indicted
for genocide in the massacre of up to 8,000 Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995.

Informants are offered a $5 million reward for the capture of Dr. Karadzic, one
of the world's most elusive fugitives. The prospect of injury or illness forcing
him to surrender would be tantalizing for NATO, which has sought him for eight
years.

His arrest would also be a milestone for Bosnia, still poisoned by bitterness
from the ethnic war that took more than 200,000 lives from 1992 to 1995.

Some Serbs, however, regard Dr. Karadzic and General Mladic as national heroes
and would hate to see either in handcuffs.

An Orthodox priest in Pale, Jeremija Starovlah, was quoted by the Bosnian Serb
news agency as saying troops searched the local church and church buildings at
midnight. "They opened wardrobes, looked under beds, tapped on walls and floors
and looked into the bell tower," he said.

Saturday and overnight, the troops searched four medical facilities, including
two belonging to the Karadzic family.

Dr. Karadzic's daughter, Sonja, protested that she and her family had been kept
as "hostages" by the troops.

"We are embittered by the behavior of the soldiers," she said by telephone from
the house, after British and American soldiers entered and Slovenian troops and
Italian police officers were deployed around it. "We feel like hostages. This is
a violation of human rights."

The NATO troops conducted several operations last year intended to capture Dr.
Karadzic and General Mladic but the troops failed to find either. Dr. Karadzic
is believed to hide in eastern Bosnia and neighboring Montenegro, and General
Mladic is usually said to be hiding in Serbia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); RELIGION (73%); ARRESTS (73%); RESORTS (71%); MOUNTAINS (70%);
SKIING (70%); HEALTH CARE (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (61%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%)

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             907 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Australian Parents Have New Hope for U.S.-Detained Son

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: ADELAIDE, Australia, Jan. 13


Last year ended a bit brighter for Terry and Beverly Hicks, a working-class
couple here. Ten days before Christmas, they were allowed to speak to their
28-year-old son, David, for the first time in more than two years.

"It was pretty exciting, pretty emotional," Mrs. Hicks said, sitting at the
kitchen table of her simple home. Most of the conversation was about family;
besides, the censors would not let him talk about other things, like how he was
being treated, his parents said.

The Hicks's son, a high school dropout and roustabout adventurer, has been
confined in a 6-feet-by-7-feet wire cage at the American military base at
Guantanamo Bay since he was seized in Afghanistan in December 2001. He gets two
brief exercise periods a week.

In December, Mr. Hicks was also finally allowed a visit by a lawyer, Stephen
Kenny of Adelaide, who has often taken difficult and unpopular cases. It was the
first time a civilian lawyer had been allowed access to a Guantanamo detainee,
Mr. Kenny said, adding that he won access by agreeing not to discuss the
conditions of Mr. Hicks's confinement.

Mr. and Mrs. Hicks do not believe that those belated gestures are a coincidence.
A few weeks earlier, in November, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear
arguments in a lawsuit brought by Mr. Hicks and 15 other foreigners detained at
Guantanamo Bay, challenging their lack of access to civilian courts.

The Bush administration argued that the court should not take the appeal. If it
is to avoid a potentially adverse ruling, the administration needs to dispose of
the detainees' cases before the scheduled argument in March.

In December, a Marine Corps lawyer, Maj. Michael Mori, was appointed to
represent Mr. Hicks. He assured the Hickses that he would not "lie down for
anyone," the senior Mr. Hicks said.

David Hicks's case may be the stickiest of those involved. The administration is
now negotiating for the release of some of the detainees to their home
countries, principally Britain, where they would be tried. But Australia says
that if Mr. Hicks fought for the Taliban in Afghanistan, he did not violate any
Australian laws at the time.

The Bush administration is holding some negotiations to urge Mr. Hicks to plead
guilty to a crime, but it is unclear what crime he might have committed.

His case is often compared to that of John Walker Lindh, the Californian who was
seized fighting for the Taliban. Mr. Lindh pleaded guilty to violating an
American antiterrorism law and was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

But Mr. Hicks is not an American citizen. There is no evidence that he killed or
wounded any civilians or any American soldiers, said Mr. Kenny, his lawyer, who
has enlisted the help of the Center for Constitutional Rights, a liberal public
interest group in New York.

Nor does Mr. Hicks have any history of anti-Americanism, his parents said. In
1998, he fought with the Kosovo Liberation Army against the Serbian government
of Slobodan Milosevic. A year later, a convert to Islam, he went to Pakistan.
There, he joined Lashkar-e-Taiba, a guerrilla group used by Pakistan's
intelligence service to fight in Kashmir.

Lashkar-e-Taiba was closely linked with Al Qaeda, and Mr. Hicks was sent to
Afghanistan, where he was when the United States went to war after the Sept. 11
attacks.

Contrary to most reports, he was not captured by the Americans on the
battlefield, his father contended. The elder Mr. Hicks, a printer, went to
Afghanistan last August, for a documentary being made about his son's life by a
Sydney filmmaker, Curtis Levy. Mr. Hicks said he had met the commander of the
Northern Alliance, the anti-Taliban group allied with the United States, which
did capture his son.

The commander told Mr. Hicks that his son had been arrested while traveling in a
van with several Afghan men, none of them armed, the father said.

Ten days later, the Afghan commander turned David Hicks over to the Americans,
his father said.

His family has received fewer than a dozen letters from him in the last two
years, and there is often a long delay before they are delivered.

"I have nothing to say because today is the same as six months ago and six
months before that," David wrote to his parents last March; they received the
letter in July. He wrote that he knew his father was "doing a lot to help me,
but do not do it to a point so that it affects your health."

The next five lines of the letter were blacked out by the censors. "That's
Cuba," were the next readable words. His parents assume that David had just
described something about life at Guantanamo Bay.

In September, David Hicks received a letter his parents had written in May, with
news that an aunt, Pat, had died of cancer.

"The news about Pat is extremely sad; in fact, unbelievable," David wrote back.
"Why these things happen to good people."

He told his parents that he had been moved away from the rest of the detainees
-- the reason is not clear -- and that as a result he saw only military police
officers.

A lot has changed in the last year, said Mrs. Hicks, who is David's stepmother,
and the developments in December suggest that some resolution appears to be
ahead.

"But we've still got another harrowing year ahead," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Terry and Beverly Hicks, left, the parents of David Hicks,
above, are putting their hopes in a lawsuit filed by their son and 15 other
foreigners detained at Guantanamo Bay. (Photo by News Ltd., via Associated
Press); (Photo by David Mauriz/Associated Press, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (88%); TALIBAN (88%); LAWYERS (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(86%); GUILTY PLEAS (86%); CHRISTMAS (78%); PRISONS (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (74%);
ARMED FORCES (74%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (71%); FAMILY (71%); SENTENCING (70%); JAIL SENTENCING
(65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%); COUNTERTERRORISM (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (54%)

CITY: ADELAIDE, AUSTRALIA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AUSTRALIA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AUSTRALIA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (90%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             911 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Rebels Said to Recruit More Children

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 459 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka, Jan. 22


The separatist rebels known as the Tamil Tigers have stepped up recruitment of
children and are holding more than 1,300 of them, Unicef said Thursday.

The rebels recruited 709 young soldiers last year, bringing the total to 1,301
at the end of December, the United Nations agency said in appealing for their
release.

The increased recruitment came even after the group, the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam, entered into a truce with the government that was brokered by
Norway in February 2002, and despite pledges not to enlist youngsters below the
age of 18.

"The L.T.T.E. must cease all recruitment of children and they must release all
child soldiers immediately," said a Unicef representative, Ted Chaiban.

Even after the opening of the first transit home in October to help demobilized
children reintegrate into society, the Tigers drafted more of them, Unicef said.
Between October and December, the number of young soldiers jumped by 203.

Unicef said the figures in its report "could be lower than the actual number of
children recruited, due to parents not coming forward and reporting cases."
Humanitarian agencies say parents fear reprisals if they complain.

Mr. Chaiban said plans to open a second transit home in Batticaloa had been put
on hold.

A first batch of 49 children were released by the Tamil Tigers and sent to the
first transit home, in Kilinochchi, in early October, and six more were sent
there in December, Unicef said.

The agency could not immediately say how many had been recruited in 2002, but
the Tamil Tigers are known to have drafted children for several years.

Mr. Chaiban said a plan to help children in the embattled northern and eastern
regions could not succeed unless the Tigers honored their pledge not to recruit
any.

He said the three-year, $14.2 million plan had helped provide the first formal
mechanism for the release and reintegration of child soldiers.

At a meeting last week with S. P. Thamilselvan, head of the Tamil Tigers'
political wing, Mr. Chaiban said, he emphasized that implementation of the plan
depended on an end to the recruitment of children.

"If fully implemented over the period envisaged by the plan, the result would be
a vast improvement in the lives of war-affected children," he said.

"Substantial work has been done and important foundations have been laid," he
said. But "since peace talks were suspended, clearly there has been a
deterioration of human rights and child rights."

He was referring to the Tamil Tigers' withdrawal from peace talks last April.

The Unicef statement came as the rebels warned of a return to war after
President Chandrika Kumaratunga's alliance on Tuesday with a radical party that
opposes granting autonomy to the minority Tamils in exchange for ethnic peace.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
CHILDREN IN ARMED CONFLICT (89%); MILITARY RECRUITING (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); PEACE PROCESS (70%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND (94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (93%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             922 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bogota's Social Capitalism, Led by a Marxist of Old

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section W; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1318 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 5


Dressed in a silk tie and tailored navy blue suit, Antonio Sanguino looks every
bit the chief executive. His cellphone chirps endlessly, the callers eager to
make business propositions. With three bodyguards at his side, he dashes from
one end of Bogota to the other attending one meeting after another.

From offices in an elegant Tudor home in one of Bogota's grand old
neighborhoods, Mr. Sanguino oversees what in Colombia could be called an empire
-- a 35-room hotel downtown, a national construction operation that has built
600 homes, an agricultural brokerage firm and other ventures. Other deals are in
the works, from a string of Internet cafes in Costa Rica to a partnership with a
factory that makes light fixtures for export.

It is the kind of work that may seem sharply out of the ordinary for Mr.
Sanguino and the board members of Nuevo Arco Iris, or the New Rainbow. They are,
after all, former Marxist guerrillas.

These are men and women who once plotted to overthrow the state. Now they
embrace capitalism, or at least Arco Iris's quirky, socially minded model, which
channels money from business enterprises into social programs.

"We believe the market can generate wealth, which benefits people in the long
run," said Mr. Sanguino, 37, who is broad shouldered, and, with his combed-back
hair and brash self-confidence, looks more like James Gandolfini's Tony Soprano
than the iconic revolutionary he once emulated, Che Guevara.

"Our ideas are the inverse of George Soros's," explained Mr. Sanguino, speaking
of the billionaire philanthropist. "He discovered the satisfaction of social
work after accumulating riches. We discovered the abundance of the market after
preaching socialism."

The survival of Arco Iris, along with similar but smaller programs run by former
rebels, is crucial in a country that is trying, through a two-pronged strategy
of military offensives and disarmament negotiations, to sideline three armed
insurgencies.

Though Colombia is far from achieving peace, the rigors of war prompted 1,739
rebels to desert last year, up from 1,307 in 2002. The government has entered
negotiations with a right-wing paramilitary organization, the archenemies of the
Marxist rebels, that potentially could disarm 15,000 fighters or more by the end
of next year.

The throngs of newly disarmed former combatants are clearly good news for the
conservative government of President Alvaro Uribe, who won election here in 2002
by pledging to weaken rebel movements that have been waging war here since the
1960's.

But the former guerrillas have needs in building new lives as members of
society, and making the transition from the mountains to the cities is a process
fraught with risk. Many rebels wind up jobless and homeless. Those who desert
from Colombia's largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,
or FARC, are seen as turncoats, and are at times hunted and killed.

Even at Arco Iris, though firmly established, the obstacles are all too clear.
"To run a company, oh, my friend, it's not easy at all," Rodrigo Osorno, a
former rebel and now a board member of Arco Iris, said with a sigh. "Building
peace is much harder than making war."

In this business like no other, threats from enemies are constant. About 15 of
Arco Iris's employees have been killed in recent years, most likely by
right-wing paramilitary gunmen, forcing the group to close a farm in one state
and all its operations in another.

The danger is mitigated by 40 bodyguards, all former rebels who are employed by
Colombia's secret police to protect Arco Iris employees.

"The FARC see us as traitors; the paramilitaries see us as part of a larger
guerrilla strategy; the military has us in their files; businessmen lack
confidence in us," Mr. Sanguino said. "It has been a fight to win space in
society, to win respect."

Simply carving out a niche was not what many of Arco Iris's managers had in mind
when they were members of the National Liberation Army, a Cuban-inspired rebel
group.

Many were former university students steeped in radical thought. Mr. Sanguino
himself was among the most committed, having grown up in a humble household
where his father, a farmer, struggled to feed eight children.

The E.L.N., as the rebel group is known from its Spanish name, Ejercito
Liberacion Nacional, offered them a vehicle for violently reordering Colombian
society.

"In those days, we were convinced the armed struggle was the way to resolve the
country's problems," said Mr. Osorno, the board member. "We always saw
socialism, classic socialism, as the way to go, putting workers in charge."

But after Soviet Communism collapsed, a dissident faction of the E.L.N. split
off. About 800 former rebels, with Mr. Sanguino leading the way, disarmed a
decade ago.

Bankrolled by the government, Arco Iris was founded to coordinate the
integration of guerrillas into society.

Arco Iris is not exactly a company. It works more like a foundation, with
nonprofit status, though it is apparently breaking even. It depends heavily on
money from the governments of various countries, including Spain and the
Netherlands, as well as the European Community and contracts with organizations
like the United Nations Development Program.

Arco Iris stresses that its focus is not to make money, but to finance a host of
programs, from teaching children about conflict resolution to training human
rights workers to running a crop substitution program for coca farmers. About
200 people have permanent jobs in Arco Iris's programs and at the organization's
offices around the country; of those, about 115 are former rebels.

But Arco Iris is also very much like a company. It operates with a seven-member
board. It is guided by the standard business model.

"We are nonprofit, but we also do not want to go broke," said Mr. Sanguino,
noting that the organization's budget, up to half a million dollars a year, is
not considered small in Colombia. To survive, Mr. Sanguino says, Arco Iris has
to wheel and deal like any other enterprise.

These days, Mr. Sanguino seeks advice among the established, meeting with
everyone from Nicanor Restrepo, one of Colombia's leading industrialists, to
Colombian congressmen to diplomats. Mr. Sanguino also lets Colombia know where
Arco Iris stands, recently testifying in Congress against Mr. Uribe's
negotiations with the paramilitaries, saying the talks would reward murderers
and drug-traffickers.

"Our companies have to be competitive," Mr. Sanguino said. "They have to play in
accordance with market forces. We have to offer services people want."

So when Arco Iris purchased the five-story Santa Monica hotel, which had been in
financial troubles, it contracted a manager who knew how to run a hotel. The
hotel has been remodeled, with new, spacious convention rooms and an executive
suite complete with a Jacuzzi, fax and a stunning view of downtown.

Former rebels have worked at the Santa Monica, and the hotel says it is
important to keep the social aspects of Arco Iris in mind. But Hernan Franco,
the hotel manager, says his priority is that the Santa Monica attract customers,
lots of them. "This is live and direct and there is no margin for error," Mr.
Franco said. "We cannot just do social work here. We are a business."

Arco Iris's approach has drawn praise from some of the people rebels here
consider enemies.

One is Eugenio Marulanda, the executive president of the Colombian Confederation
of Chambers of Commerce, a well-known entrepreneur with close ties to Mr. Uribe.
Mr. Marulanda could not be more opposed to Colombia's insurgents, but he
believes that Arco Iris can serve as a model as the government tries to entice
other combatants to disarm.

"We have to find projects for peace," he said. "We have to find projects that
are creative and intelligent, to incorporate people who in other eras were in
gangs but today are a part of civil society."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Antonio Sanguino, a former rebel fighter, right, leads a
nonprofit business that supports social causes. (Photo by Scott Dalton for The
New York Times)(pg. W1); A renovation at the Hotel Santa Monica in Bogota. The
hotel is owned by a group of former rebel guerrillas. (Photo by Scott Dalton for
The New York Times)(pg. W7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXECUTIVES (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); COUPS
(72%); DISARMAMENT (72%); CONSERVATISM (71%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (67%); ARMS
CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (67%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (66%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (60%);
AGRICULTURE (55%); PHILANTHROPY (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (55%); GEORGE SOROS (50%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (93%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (95%); COSTA RICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             923 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
In a Land of Female Repression, a Girl Survives as a Boy

BYLINE:  By A. O. SCOTT

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg.
28

LENGTH: 907 words


One of the effects of the 9/11 attacks was to wake up the distracted Western
public to the horror of Taliban rule in Afghanistan. Now, with the Taliban out
of power, "Osama," the first film produced in Afghanistan since they took over
in 1996, arrives to nudge us back into a state of alertness, and also, as
remnants of the ousted regime continue to menace that nation's peace and
stability, to trouble our sleep and our consciences as well.

Written and directed by Siddiq Barmak, an Afghan filmmaker trained in Moscow in
the 1980's and clearly influenced by the Iranian humanist cinema of the 90's,
"Osama" begins with an apt epigraph from Nelson Mandela: "I can forgive, but I
cannot forget." Mr. Barmak is unsparing in his anatomy of the Taliban's cruelty,
especially as it was directed against women, but there is very little feeling of
vengefulness or hatred in the film, which makes it all the more devastating in
the end.

The opening scenes, a kind of trompe l'oeil documentary within the movie whose
meaning becomes clear only much later, capture the violent suppression of a
women's-rights demonstration in the sandy, war-blasted streets of Kabul. A
scared young girl (Marina Golbahari) watches from a doorway as Taliban soldiers,
using water hoses, live ammunition and grenade launchers, scatter a crowd of
women in blue and ocher burkhas.

This is only the most brutal and public manifestation of the pervasive terror
under which women in Kabul must live. The hospital where the girl's mother works
is raided, and the mother (Zubaida Sahar) is saved from arrest only when a man
whose father is in her care says he is her husband. There is an almost absurd
sadism to the Taliban's regulations of women's behavior. Even when a household
includes no men -- hardly uncommon after so many years of war -- the women still
may not be seen in public or earn a living. An uncovered foot or an unwelcome
word can lead to harassment, or even severe punishment.

Despite all this injustice, the girl's kindly grandmother insists that the
sufferings of men and women are equal because the sexes themselves are equal.
This leads her to conclude that they may also be interchangeable, and so her
granddaughter, with a short haircut and a dark skullcap, is sent out to work for
a sympathetic shopkeeper. (She is later given the name Osama by a young beggar
who knows the secret of her identity.) A similar masquerade was at the heart of
Majid Majidi's film "Baran," about an Afghan refugee in Tehran who disguised
herself as a boy to work at a construction site.

Like Mr. Majidi, Mr. Barmak has a gently poetic visual sense: after her
metamorphosis, one of the girl's severed braids is planted in a flower pot and
watered by an intravenous drip her mother rescued from the shut-down hospital.
He is also able to find moments of tenderness and humor in his bleak story. One
sequence that stands out is a lesson in intimate hygiene taught to madrasa
students by an elderly mullah -- a glimpse at the radical Islamist approach to
sex education.

Mr. Barmak's patron was the Iranian director Mohsen Makhmalbaf, whose "Kandahar"
is set in Taliban-era Afghanistan and whose daughter Samira's "At Five O'Clock
in the Afternoon" takes place in Kabul after the American-led rout of the
Taliban. Some of the surrealist touches in "Osama" -- gorgeous, haunting images
that call for an adjective like Makhmalbafian -- may be a result of this
association, and the orange glow that suffuses the landscape in all three movies
may owe something to the fact that they share the gifted cinematographer Ebrahim
Ghafuri. This is not to take anything away from Mr. Barmak, who had the
self-confidence to embark on this project with donated equipment, a tiny budget
and a cast of nonprofessionals recruited from the streets of Kabul.

The mere existence of the movie, which received the Camera d'Or special mention
for best first feature in Cannes last year and the Golden Globe for best foreign
film last month, would be impressive enough. But the movie's power and coherence
are such that you forget completely about the hard circumstances of its making,
which is nothing short of astonishing.

There is not much overt or explicit violence in "Osama," which opens today in
New York, but an unshakable dread shadows the bright alleyways of Kabul and
seeps through the heavy wooden doors of the houses. Like "The Pianist," Roman
Polanski's tour of Nazi-occupied Warsaw, "Osama" is a meticulous and beautifully
made inquiry into the ways that ideological evil can infect, and ultimately
destroy, the intimacies and small pleasures of daily life.

Osama has no special resiliency or survival skills; her face is, at every
moment, a study in suppressed panic and worried passivity. Her unvarnished
vulnerability, along with the director's combination of tough-mindedness and
lyricism, prevents the movie from becoming at all sentimental; instead, it is
beautiful, thoughtful and almost unbearably sad.

OSAMA

Written (in Dari Farsi, with English subtitles), directed and edited by Siddiq
Barmak; director of photography, Ebrahim Ghafuri; music by Mohammad Reza
Darwishi; set designer, Akbar Meshkini; produced by Barmak Films; released by
United Artists. At the Lincoln Plaza, Broadway at 62nd Street. Running time: 82
minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Marina Golbahari (Osama), Arif Herati (Espandi), Zubaida Sahar (Mother),
Khwaja Nader (Mullah) and Hamida Refah (Grandmother).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marina Golbahari plays a young girl posing as a boy in "Osama."
(Photo by Wahid Ramaq/United Artists)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MOVIE REVIEWS (77%); FILM DIRECTORS (77%); MOVIE
& VIDEO PRODUCTION (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); VISUAL & PERFORMING
ARTS (72%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (72%); VISUAL ARTISTS (72%); GRANDCHILDREN (70%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (68%); REFUGEES (67%);
GRANDPARENTS (66%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (57%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); IRAN (57%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             929 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecutor Says No. 1 War Crimes Suspect Is Hiding in Belgrade

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Feb. 11


The United Nations chief war crimes prosecutor said Wednesday that the leading
Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect, Dr. Radovan Karadzic, is hiding in Belgrade,
the Serbian capital.

Serbian officials immediately dismissed the assertion.

Speaking to reporters in Brussels, the prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, said she had
''received just last week information from a credible source that even Karadzic
is now in Belgrade.'' She added that cooperation between the Serbian government
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in tracking
down fugitives was ''frozen.''

It was the first time a senior tribunal official has said that Dr. Karadzic was
in Belgrade. The former Bosnian Serb leader has been charged by the tribunal in
The Hague with committing genocide and crimes against humanity during the
1992-95 conflict in Bosnia. But despite the presence of thousands of NATO-led
peacekeepers in Bosnia, he has eluded arrest.

Officials from the tribunal have long maintained that another leading war crimes
suspect, Ratko Mladic, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb Army, was hiding
in Serbia. Dr. Karadzic's whereabouts have proved more elusive. Tribunal
officials have suggested that he has moved between southern Bosnia and
neighboring Montenegro in order to avoid arrest.

Last week, Ms. Del Ponte said that an operation by NATO-led troops on Jan. 10 to
capture Dr. Karadzic in the town of Pale, near Sarajevo, had missed the fugitive
''by two hours.''

At the news conference on Wednesday, she charged that Belgrade ''is now a safe
haven for our fugitives.''

''We have around 15 fugitives who are in Serbia,'' she added.

At a meeting later in the day, Ms. Del Ponte repeated her comments to NATO's
secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, a NATO spokesman said. The spokesman,
James Appathurai, said increased activity by the alliance in Bosnia could have
prompted Dr. Karadzic to seek refuge elsewhere.

With NATO ''intensifying its efforts to track down people indicted for war
crimes, Bosnia is becoming an inhospitable environment,'' he said by telephone
from Brussels.

Serbia's prime minister, Zoran Zivkovic, said, ''Her statements are nothing new
or unexpected,'' the state news agency Beta reported. ''She has been saying the
same or similar things for years, but so far she has not provided any
information that could help arrest the indictees.''

Ms. Del Ponte's assertion comes as Congress is scheduled to consider annual
United States aid worth about $100 million to Serbia, which is conditional on
the government's cooperation with the tribunal. A decision is expected next
month.

Serbia cooperated with the tribunal after the fall of the former Yugoslav
president, Slobodan Milosevic, in 2000, handing him over to the tribunal for
trial the next year. Since then, however, relations with the tribunal have
soured, and Serbia's government has refused to hand over other war crimes
suspects.

Many Serbian politicians accuse tribunal officials of stirring up nationalist
sentiment and complicating parliamentary elections by charging four leading
police and military officers last year with having committed war crimes in
Kosovo in 1999, just ahead of the polls.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 2004



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about assertions by the chief United Nations
prosecutor for war crimes that the leading Bosnian Serb suspect, Dr. Radovan
Karadzic, was hiding in Belgrade referred incorrectly to Beta, the news agency
that reported the Serbian government's denial. The agency is private, not
state-owned.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (96%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); ARMIES (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); PRIME MINISTERS
(76%); ARMED FORCES (72%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%)
United Nations; International Criminal Tribunal

PERSON: JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER (52%) Nicholas Wood; Carla Del Ponte; Radovan
Karadzic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (96%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (99%); SERBIA (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%);
BELGIUM (88%); NETHERLANDS (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             932 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 51 words


An article yesterday about assertions by the chief United Nations prosecutor for
war crimes that the leading Bosnian Serb suspect, Dr. Radovan Karadzic, was
hiding in Belgrade referred incorrectly to Beta, the news agency that reported
the Serbian government's denial. The agency is private, not state-owned.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (85%) Correction Stories; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) International Criminal Tribunal; United
Nations

PERSON: Radovan Karadzic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             942 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Open Arms, Closed Doors and Racism

BYLINE: By VIVIAN S. TOY

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2074 words


BLACKS and Hispanics in Nassau County are often discriminated against when
searching for apartments to rent, while whites generally receive much better
treatment from real estate agents, according to a housing study released earlier
this month by a local community group.

The report compiled by the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now
-- an advocacy group for low-income families known by its acronym Acorn -- found
that while white testers sent into real estate agencies were told there were
apartments available 93 percent of the time, black and Hispanic testers were
told the same thing only 53 percent of the time. And while nearly a third of the
minority testers were steered to different, usually less affluent areas, only 2
percent of the white testers were referred elsewhere.

''This kind of thing is done under the cover of darkness and people don't talk
about it even though they know it goes on,'' said Bertha Lewis, executive
director of New York Acorn. ''We're never looking for people to treat us badly,
but now we have documented it and we have the data to prove it.''

Acorn's report is the first to detail housing discrimination on Long Island
since a 2002 study comparing rates of integration ranked Long Island as the
nation's most segregated suburban area. Acorn officials said they decided to
send testers out in the spring and fall of 2003 in part because of that dubious
distinction, but also because their members had long shared tales of housing
discrimination on the Island.

Several of the brokers named in the study denied that they ever discriminated
against minorities and questioned Acorn's methods and its objectivity. But state
officials promised to evaluate Acorn's findings and take any appropriate action.
Fair housing and civil rights advocates praised the study, saying it provides
clear evidence of a reality that has long existed on Long Island.

''The study reinforces what people in the African-American and Hispanic
communities have been aware of and spoken about for a long time, but what many
other people have turned a deaf ear to,'' said Frederick K. Brewington, a civil
rights lawyer who has tried many housing discrimination cases on Long Island.

Acorn surveyed 16 real estate agencies in Nassau County and found that 11
''exhibited persistent discriminatory behavior.'' Acorn chose agencies that had
rental listings and that operated in predominantly white areas. White testers
made 79 visits and minority testers made 85 visits for a total of 164 visits.

Each Acorn tester recorded whether they met with an agent, whether they were
told about or shown an apartment, and whether they were referred to a different
neighborhood. Minority and white testers were paired and sent to the same agency
either on the same day or within eight days of their partner's visit.

Brendan Wheeler is a white Brooklyn resident who said he made ''between six and
eight'' visits for the study. One of them, he said, was to Garden City
Properties, where he asked for a one-bedroom apartment for up to $2,000 a month
and was shown two apartments, one for $1,850 and another for $1,950.

A few days later, Alan Conner, a black Freeport resident, was sent to the same
agency, also seeking a one-bedroom under $2,000 a month. He was told nothing was
available in Garden City and instead was shown a one-bedroom in West Hempstead
for $1,100. Mr. Wheeler was then told by Acorn to call the agency and find out
if the Garden City apartments he saw were still available and he was told three
days after his visit that the $1,950 apartment was still available.

Mr. Conner said that when he left the agency, ''I didn't feel I was
discriminated against blatantly, but the fact that the agent didn't offer me
anything other than West Hempstead made me wonder.'' When he later learned that
the white tester had been treated differently, he said, ''You don't want to
really believe it, but I'm not a fool. I know discrimination exists and it was
totally blatant here.''

Acorn's results mirror those found in 2000 by Long Island Housing Services, a
fair housing association based in Bohemia, when it tested real estate agencies
across Long Island as part of a national survey on housing discrimination for
the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. In the 2000 study
involving 180 visits, 90 by whites and 90 by non-whites, minorities encountered
discrimination between 22 and 26 percent of the time nationally. But Michelle
Santantonio, the executive director of Long Island Housing Services, said its
research found that the rate on Long Island was closer to 50 percent.

Ms. Santantonio said she was pleased that another organization had tested for
housing discrimination. ''Depending on the strength of the evidence and how
carefully it was documented, they should be able to use it to prove some
complaints,'' she said. HUD rules prohibit her organization from using the
evidence it gathered in 2000 because it was to be used only for research, she
said.

Acorn officials said they would pursue the discrimination they uncovered through
state and county agencies, and Ms. Lewis added that if necessary they would also
file discrimination lawsuits against the real estate agencies. ''The real estate
industry on Long Island is powerful and no one has challenged them about their
practices,'' she said. ''But if we have to, we will litigate and take these
people to court.''

Officials from a number of state and county agencies, including the attorney
general's office, the state Division of Human Rights, the Department of State
and the county's housing and homeless programs, said last week that they would
carefully review Acorn's results. ''This is alarming if it's true, and it's
definitely something we'd be interested in looking into,'' said Juanita
Scarlett, a spokeswoman for Eliot Spitzer, the state attorney general.

At the Department of State, which oversees the licensing of real estate brokers,
Peter Constantakes, a spokesman, said: ''The department will not tolerate
discrimination by any licensed real estate agent. If the allegations are proven
to be true, it will take appropriate action.''

Connie Lassandro, director of the county's Section 8 housing and homeless
intervention programs, said that while the county has no enforcement power over
federal or state fair-housing laws, she would review Acorn's report and make
recommendations for possible change in the county's housing discrimination law.
''Racial discrimination is not something we want to hear is happening in our
county, so to the extent we have the capability, we will address it,'' she said.

Representatives of the Long Island Board of Realtors, an industry association,
and of several of the real estate agencies named in Acorn's report expressed
dismay at the results. ''It comes as a surprise to me,'' said Howard Goldson,
legal counsel to the industry group. ''If you would have asked me 15 years ago,
you would have had a different answer, but today realtors generally offer
housing on an equal basis to all people.''

He added that information on what must be done to avoid housing discrimination
is part of real estate agents' licensing courses. ''We have a code of ethics
that we subscribe to and we have been against this type of housing
discrimination for as long as I can remember,'' he said.

Several of the agencies that performed poorly in the study reacted angrily and
accused Acorn of using unfair tactics.

''To me, it's all a lie,'' said Silvana Bosco, owner of Bosco Realty in Franklin
Square, which registered a 100 percent rate of discrimination in the study. ''I
don't discriminate and I have no reason to believe they were ever in my
office.''

Acorn said it sent five black or Hispanic testers and four white testers to
Bosco and reported that all the whites were told about available apartments and
were shown apartments, while none of the minorities were told about or shown
apartments.

Anne Hagen, the owner of Anne Hagen's Village Realty in Garden City, said she
believed Acorn had distorted facts. The study found that her agency offered to
show apartments to whites 55 percent more often than to non-whites and that
whites were told about apartments 36 percent more often than non-whites.

Ms. Hagen said she recalled telling a Caucasian couple about an available
one-bedroom rental for $1,500 a month and then telling a black couple that there
were no apartments available because the black couple had asked for a
two-bedroom for $1,200.

''But that was only because the Caucasian couple had the price spending power
and the blacks didn't,'' she said. ''Everybody is purple as far as I'm
concerned. If you have the money to pay the rents I have available, I'll rent it
to you. I think they set me up.''

But Ann Sullivan, the director of the Long Island chapter of Acorn, which
oversaw the study, said its minority and non-minority testers were careful to
roughly match their incomes and requests and that the couples Ms. Hagen recalled
were probably not Acorn testers. To prevent agents from becoming suspicious that
they were being tested, paired testers might not have reported identical incomes
or said they were able to afford the same amount in rent, she said, but the
figures would always be close. She also said that testers, particularly minority
testers, were told to be flexible about what they could afford, so if a broker
said nothing was available at their original limit, testers were told to say
they could afford to pay a little more.

''We would never send people into Garden City asking for a $1,200 apartment,''
Ms. Sullivan said. ''And we usually erred on the side of safety and had
African-American testers be able to afford to pay more.''

Bert Donley, a partner at Garden City Properties, said he believed Acorn's study
was flawed because it clearly set out to prove a long-held stereotype that
Garden City is racist. ''It was a hatchet job on Garden City and they were
trying to make Garden City realtors to be big offenders when we're not, and
that's not honest,'' he said.

The report was skewed, he said, because it also mentioned discrimination at
Garden City schools and at a village park that borders with Hempstead and has a
sign declaring it is open only for residents' use. In the case of the schools,
black and white testers went to schools asking for school registration papers,
and the report cites an incident in which a black man was told he could not pick
up forms for his own grandchildren, but a white tester was given forms for her
''cousins by marriage.''

The Garden City schools superintendent, Stephen Leitman, declined to comment on
the report.

In the case of the village park, the report said that the Garden City police
asked black preschool children to leave a park because they clearly were not
Garden City residents, while white parkgoers were not even approached to
determine their residency. ''This incident is frighteningly reminiscent of the
Jim Crow South,'' the report states.

Robert Schoelle, the village manager, said he was not aware of the incident but
added that ''most if not all villages have signs restricting parks and
playgrounds to residents only.''

Mr. Donley, whose agency was found to have apprised whites about available
apartments 18 percent more often than non-whites, said his agency has never
before been cited for discrimination. He also said he would be more inclined to
believe a HUD-sponsored study, ''where they send in testers who are trained, not
volunteers with an ax to grind.''

Mr. Brewington, the civil rights lawyer, said he had reviewed Acorn's procedures
and believed they were sound. ''Whether they're an advocacy group or not has
nothing to do with the facts,'' he said. ''What you find is what you find.''

Ms. Santantonio of Long Island Housing Services said her agency dealt with 65 to
150 allegations of housing discrimination from across the Island every year,
many of them with circumstances similar to those encountered by Mr. Wheeler and
Mr. Conner.

She added, though, that discrimination is probably grossly underreported because
even if a minority renter feels discriminated against, he or she may be more
concerned with finding a place to live than with the need to document the
discrimination and pursue a complaint. ''People also may rather self-segregate
and look only in areas where they wouldn't be made to feel unwelcome just to
avoid the possibility of discrimination,'' she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawings (Drawing by David Suter)(pg. 1)
 (Drawing by David Suter)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS
(89%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%);
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); POOR POPULATION
(77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); FAMILY (72%); SUBURBS (65%); ISLANDS & REEFS
(65%); LAWYERS (64%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (56%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS FOR REFORM NOW (84%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             943 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Collateral Damage

BYLINE: By Ethan Bronner.

Ethan Bronner is the deputy foreign editor of The Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 2986 words



CASUALTY OF WAR
The Bush Administration's Assault
on a Free Press.
By David Dadge.
330 pp. Amherst, N.Y.:
Prometheus Books. $26.

THE NAKED CROWD
Reclaiming Security and Freedom
in an Anxious Age.
By Jeffrey Rosen
260 pp. New York:
Random House. $24.95.

THE SOFT CAGE
Surveillance in America
From Slavery to the War on Terror.
By Christian Parenti.
Illustrated. 273 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $24.95.

LOST LIBERTIES
Ashcroft and the Assault
on Personal Freedom.
Edited by Cynthia Brown.
324 pp. New York:
The New Press. Paper, $17.95.

THE WAR ON
THE BILL OF RIGHTS
And the Gathering Resistance.
By Nat Hentoff.
176 pp. New York:
Seven Stories Press. $18.

ENEMY ALIENS
Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the War on Terrorism.
By David Cole.
315 pp. New York:
The New Press. $24.95.

THE WAR ON
OUR FREEDOMS
Civil Liberties in an Age of Terrorism.
Edited by Richard C. Leone
and Greg Anrig Jr.
317 pp. New York:
A Century Foundation Book/
PublicAffairs. Paper, $15.

TERRORISM, FREEDOM, and SECURITY
Winning Without War.
By Philip B. Heymann.
210 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The MIT Press. $24.95.
  When I have computer trouble at the office, I call the systems support
department on the fifth floor. It used to be that if we couldn't fix the problem
over the phone, I would have to wait until a nice young technician came by.
Sitting at my desk, he (or she) would plunge into program files that mean
nothing to me and readjust my machine. Lately, the waiting has been eliminated.
When phone advice fails, the technician doesn't move from his workstation.
Instead, I sit back and from another floor he commandeers my computer, pushing
my cursor around, opening and closing programs until the problem is solved.

It is remarkable to witness, and profoundly eerie. If you were to ask me whether
I had privacy on my work computer, I would know to answer no. But it is one
thing to understand in the abstract that nearly every word I have ever typed at
The New York Times can be retrieved by my employer and quite another to watch my
files being opened and closed by someone not touching my keyboard. If the nice
New York Times technician can do it, after all, how hard would it be for the
nice F.B.I. agent?

That question haunts a number of books that began appearing last year and are
still coming out, lamenting the state of individual privacy and liberty,
especially after Sept. 11, 2001. The books raise two sets of related concerns.
Most of them focus on changes to laws and regulations made by the Bush
administration and Congress in the name of stopping the next terrorist attack.
The authors say the changes do little if anything to improve security and amount
to a power grab by a paranoid, power-hungry government. These are serious and
increasingly familiar charges, and it is helpful to have them spelled out in
some detail and measured against history, as the best of these books do. Many of
the steps taken by the administration are wrong, even abhorrent. A few others,
however, seem to me less harmful than portrayed, and some of these books examine
the difference.

The second set of issues goes beyond civil liberties to the essence of what we
mean today by privacy. Every time we use a cell phone, strike a computer key or
do business with a bank, we leave retrievable digital marks. Most of us rarely
give it a second thought. This is partly because it happens so noiselessly but
also, I suspect, because privacy itself has changed. Between the ubiquity of
television and the Internet -- and the utterly uninhibited manner in which
people speak on their cellphones in public -- we live in an era of unprecedented
exhibitionism. Several of the authors under review can barely breathe, they are
so outraged by the way we are allowing ourselves to be tracked. They are
consumed by visions of Bentham's panopticon, a prison where inmates are under
constant surveillance. And they argue, intelligently but to my mind
unconvincingly, that by allowing companies and the state to capture and record
us in this way, we are not only opening ourselves up to government snoops, we
are permitting the corrosion of what it means to be human.

(There is, by the way, a third set of complaints, that of David Dadge, the
editor of the World Press Freedom Review, who in ''Casualty of War'' asserts
that following 9/11 the Bush administration launched a campaign that muzzled the
news media both here and abroad by insisting that national security concerns
trump those of the exchange of information. He quite rightly points to
harassment of Al Jazeera and the Voice of America. But Dadge's most persuasive
allegations involve the way countries like Benin, Egypt and Uganda use the war
on terror as an excuse to suppress their media.)

Most of the books under review are about civil liberties as traditionally
defined. Nat Hentoff in ''The War on the Bill of Rights,'' Cynthia Brown in a
collection of essays she edited called ''Lost Liberties,'' Richard C. Leone and
Greg Anrig Jr., editors of ''The War on Our Freedoms'' and David Cole in his
''Enemy Aliens'' are focused on government abuse under such things as the USA
Patriot Act, passed in a panic weeks after the terror attacks. The books focus
on Attorney General John Ashcroft, the shameful continuing detention of hundreds
of foreigners at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba after the war in Afghanistan, and new
F.B.I. and Justice Department regulations.

Jeffrey Rosen in ''The Naked Crowd'' and Christian Parenti in ''The Soft Cage''
are concerned with how we have allowed ourselves to be monitored, photographed
and tracked. If the government is investigating you, the amount of information
about your interests, actions and whereabouts it can gather is staggering. In
effect, Parenti notes, routine digital surveillance is everywhere -- credit
cards, workplace ID's, gym memberships, health insurance records and Internet
accounts.

At the same time -- and this is the issue that most exercises Rosen -- cameras
that can scan facial structure and retinal patterns are recording our movements.
As Rosen puts it: ''Before 9/11, the idea that Americans would voluntarily agree
to live their lives under the gaze of a network of biometric surveillance
cameras, peering at them in government buildings, shopping malls, subways and
stadiums, would have seemed unthinkable, a dystopian fantasy. . . . More
concerned about feeling safe than actually being safe, they demanded the
construction of vast technological architectures of surveillance even though the
most reliable empirical studies suggested that the proliferation of surveillance
cameras had 'no effect on violent crime' or terrorism.''

Of course, keeping terror suspects imprisoned for years without access to
lawyers may seem like a more serious problem than online companies tracking your
purchases (''Corsets! Corsets! Corsets!'' screamed an Amazon welcome message to
a colleague who had been researching 19th-century clothing). But like the
complaints about the muzzling of the media, both smack of Big Brother. And, in
the end, that is what ties all these books together -- the concern that under
the threat of militant Islamic terrorism, we are handing over the keys of our
souls to the state and corporations, and we don't even realize it. As Kathleen
M. Sullivan, dean of the Stanford Law School, puts it in her contribution to
''The War on Our Freedoms'': ''We would surely object if the government required
us to live in glass houses, carry all of our personal belongings in clear
plastic bags, send our mail in glassine envelopes and leave our houses and
drawers unlocked -- even if such measures made law enforcement easier. Would the
same objections apply to government efforts to gather personal data in digital
form on a national ID card?'' The message of all these books can be summed up in
five simple words: be worried, be very worried.

Here is what there is to worry about: We are engaged in a ''war on terrorism''
but it turns out that this phrase is not, like the war on drugs or crime, a
marketing slogan aimed at connoting seriousness of purpose. It is a legal term
of art. The long-term struggle against Al Qaeda and other radical Muslim groups
has been cast in military terms -- war -- for a specific reason. The enemy has
made the entire world the ''battleground,'' the administration says, so anyone
we capture in ''battle'' can be labeled (by the commander in chief) an ''enemy
combatant,'' meaning someone with few rights under our Constitution. This is
true even if that captive is an American citizen caught in the United States --
like Jose Padilla, the man detained at Chicago's O'Hare Airport and accused of
being part of a Qaeda plot to explode a ''dirty bomb.'' As Ashcroft said, ''The
last time I looked at Sept. 11, an American street was a war zone.'' As nearly
all of these books point out, Padilla may indeed be a terrorist but that does
not excuse holding him in solitary confinement in a Navy brig since June 2002
without charge.

Here is something else to worry about: Six weeks after Sept. 11, when the
Capitol was sealed off because of an anthrax scare and legislators were working
in temporary quarters, they rushed to pass a 342-page bill with the almost
comically Orwellian name of ''Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001'' --
or the USA Patriot Act. It allows F.B.I. agents to obtain individual business
and educational records without certifying that the target is considered a
foreign agent or suspect of any kind.

If you believe these changes are eroding the liberties that make this nation
great, these books are for you. They will give texture and sharpness to your
rage. You can pick from among them based on your level of concern. If you are
incensed, go for the Brown essay collection, ''Lost Liberties.'' In it, Aryeh
Neier says, ''We are at risk of entering another of those dark periods of
American history when the country abandons its proud tradition of respect for
civil liberties.'' And Nancy Chang of the Center for Constitutional Rights says
that executive measures taken in the wake of the Patriot Act ''are responsible
for some of the most egregious civil liberties violations in the history of our
nation.'' Given the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus during the Civil
War, the Palmer raids in World War I and the internment of Japanese-Americans in
World War II, both of these statements seem to me hard to defend.

For a similar level of outrage, along with a smart, readable history of
government infringements in previous times of crisis, pick up Nat Hentoff's
''War on the Bill of Rights.'' In it he argues that overcoming the Patriot Act
''will be one of our severest tests yet to rescue the Constitution from our
government.'' While such statements also strike me as exaggerated, I found the
book helpful. Hentoff has been a civil liberties fiend for half a century and he
brings together his fury at Ashcroft with illustrative anecdotes and quotes from
the likes of Justice Louis Brandeis to make a strong case.

In ''Enemy Aliens,'' David Cole, a professor at Georgetown University Law
Center, and an active civil liberties lawyer, focuses on the most egregious
outrages of 9/11 -- the way in which thousands of foreigners have been rounded
up, held without charge or on minor immigration violations, and simply
forgotten. It is a powerful work and amply documented, but I do not accept
Cole's thesis that there should be no distinction between the constitutional
rights of Americans and those of foreigners. It's a noble thought but
impractical. I am horrified that the prisoners at Guantanamo have not been
charged or given access to some judicial forum to make their case. But it is far
from clear to me that they should be treated precisely as American citizens
should be. Nonetheless, Cole's indictment of the way we have handled foreign
captives is accurate and sears the conscience.

More measured complaints come in ''The War on Our Freedoms,'' a distinguished
collection published for the Century Foundation by PublicAffairs. Stephen J.
Schulhofer, for example, has plenty of criticism for new foreign intelligence
surveillance tactics but first tells us, rightly, I believe, that some of the
provisions in the Patriot Act ''simply correct oversights in prior law or adapt
technically worded statutes to new technologies and practices.'' He also reminds
us of the horror of 9/11 (which many of these authors seem to forget) and points
out that President Bush has preached respect for Muslims and ''has not sought to
prosecute dissenters for political speech.'' Nonetheless, he laments that ''we
have seen inexcusable opportunism on the part of the law enforcement
establishment, which has exploited the momentum of 9/11 to expand government
power to intrude on privacy in pursuit of wholly unrelated goals.''

The breathtaking ur-Ashcroft dismissal of such concerns is reproduced in many of
these books. In December 2001, at a Senate hearing, he said, ''To those who
scare peace-loving people with phantoms of lost liberty, my message is this:
Your tactics only aid terrorists, for they erode our national unity and diminish
our resolve.''

Of course, one legitimate complaint that Ashcroft and many others could lodge
against nearly all these books is that they fail to spend any time on the threat
to liberty not from Ashcroft but from Al Qaeda. Liberty is meaningless without
security, as Viet Dinh, the former assistant attorney general who wrote much of
the Patriot Act, has often said. Stuart Taylor Jr., a legal journalist, put it
this way in The National Journal in December 2002: ''Should we eschew fishing
expeditions through Ryder truck rental records and fertilizer purchases? Not if
we want to prevent terrorist mass murders. And I, for one, am a lot less worried
about the government snooping through my credit card bills and psychiatric
records than about being anthraxed in the subway or killed by a nuclear
explosion in my downtown Washington office.'' While this strikes me as too far
in the other direction, such words are useful to keep in mind while reading of
Ashcroft's sins.

One book in this group does thoughtfully balance safety and freedom --
Terrorism, Freedom, and Security,'' by Philip B. Heymann, a Harvard law
professor who served as deputy attorney general under President Clinton. His
prose is not the most stirring. But Heymann gets something that most of the
other authors here do not acknowledge -- that whatever Big Brother motives may
be at work in the Ashcroft Justice Department (and they are certainly there), a
threat from terror organizations exists and the government has a responsibility
to confront it.

Heymann is frank about the difficulties such a confrontation poses. Under the
changed regulations, F.B.I. agents are permitted to attend public meetings and
surf the Internet to the extent that any member of the public can do so, without
needing a basis of suspicion. Heymann calls those changes defensible and I
agree, especially because the previous rules were largely ignored. While agents,
in theory, needed to justify an initial investigation, it was a pro forma rule
-- they needed only to justify it in their own minds, not to a superior.

Heymann is as critical of this administration as some of those who refuse to
face the fact that balancing liberty and security involves making hard choices.
But the result, at least for me, is that Heymann's critique ends up being more
powerful. Whether it is the decision to set up military tribunals, hold
deportation hearings in secret, send suspects to foreign countries where torture
is routine or hold hundreds without charge at Guantanamo, Heymann says these are
techniques ''whose promise does not warrant their cost in lost values of a
democratic society.'' Precisely so. Moreover, by refusing to consult Congress,
the courts or our allies on so much of what it does, the administration is
increasing the danger of terrorism rather than decreasing it. As Heymann says,
we face a vicious cycle: ''The more we sense a hostility to, or disdain for, our
plans, the more we will feel we have to rely on our own capacities, to meet our
own needs, and not trust our welfare to cooperative international relations. But
the more we disparage cooperative relations, the greater the actual hostility we
will encounter.'' In the end, Heymann makes a persuasive argument for just the
kind of multilateral approach to fighting terrorism for which the Bush
administration has shown utter disdain.

We are at an odd moment in our political debate. Liberals, who favor big
government, oppose the one we have now because of who controls it.
Conservatives, who shun big government, have discovered the pleasures of having
one at their disposal. And in this election year, every debate feeds into a
partisan struggle for victory. The truth is that even most liberals would not be
so upset about tightening border controls and easing F.B.I. restrictions if this
administration showed some understanding of how to confront militant Islam with
something other than force. It acts unilaterally and calls it leadership. That
only makes one suspicious of everything it does. But liberals must realize that
some things are correct and legitimate even if George Bush believes them.

The struggle over liberty and security often feels like the one over abortion,
with neither side willing to concede an inch to the other and most Americans
caught somewhere in between. The result is a cheapening of public discourse
through a suggestion that the other side is so off base that there is nothing to
debate. But as all these books make alarmingly clear, there is a great deal to
think through for a society that needs to protect itself from a new kind of
enemy -- a stateless terrorist consortium -- while keeping in check an old one:
a zealous government with an enormous amount of power at its disposal.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14, 2004



CORRECTION: A review on Feb. 22 about eight books on the domestic effects of the
war on terrorism misstated the timing of detentions and expulsions of suspected
subversive aliens now known as the Palmer raids. They took place in 1919-20, not
during World War I.


GRAPHIC: Drawings (Drawings by Mirko Ilic)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); LITERATURE (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); WRITERS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (77%); SLAVERY (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); TECHNICAL SUPPORT (71%) Books and
Literature; Reviews; Books and Literature

PERSON: Ethan Bronner; David Dadge; Jeffrey Rosen; Christian Parenti; Cynthia
Brown; Nat Hentoff; David Cole; Richard C Leone; Philip B Heymann; Greg Jr Anrig

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             945 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Judge Resigns Owing To Poor Health

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 22


Richard May, the British judge who has led the war crimes trial of Slobodan
Milosevic for the past two years, has resigned because of health problems, a
move likely to bring new complications to the drawn-out proceedings against the
former Yugoslav president.

The United Nations tribunal announced the judge's resignation unexpectedly on
Sunday, although word of the gravity of his illness had already circulated and
caused consternation. Judge May, 65, one of the tribunal's most experienced
justices, had gained wide respect for his low-key skill in coping with the often
unruly Mr. Milosevic since the trial started 24 months ago. The judge last
appeared in court in late January and is not expected to return.

The tribunal president, Theodor Meron, said the United Nations secretary
general, Kofi Annan, would appoint a successor soon. Following tradition, he
said, he expected the new judge to be from the same country, that is, Britain.

Judge Meron also said he hoped the disruption would be minimal. But legal
experts said they feared that a new judge coming into a trial that has been
under way for two years would face a daunting task.

He or she must be given time to read the transcripts of close to 300 court
sessions involving as many witnesses and, if necessary, review videotapes to see
their demeanor on the witness stand. In addition, there is the enormous volume
of exhibits tendered into evidence.

This weekend, legal specialists grappled with issues of fairness.

''The question is if someone coming in at this stage can make proper findings
without relying on the other two judges,'' said a former senior official of the
court. ''If he must rely on the others, he risks not being an independent
judge.''

The two who will continue on the three-judge panel are Patrick Robinson of
Jamaica and O Gon Kwon of South Korea. The tribunal has no jury trials.

Another crucial question will be the response of Mr. Milosevic, who stands
accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity for the conflicts in Bosnia,
Croatia and Kosovo of the 1990's. He also faces genocide charges for the war in
Bosnia.

Under the rules, if a sitting judge steps down, the court can either stop the
trial and start anew, or order the proceedings to continue. But Mr. Milosevic
must give his consent for the latter. If he objects, the judges may overrule
him, but even then he would have a right to appeal.

The former Serbian leader, who acts as his own defense counsel, is expected to
try to make things as difficult as possible for a court that he has often
denounced as illegal.

An appeals court, lawyers said, is highly unlikely to order a retrial for Mr.
Milosevic, whose health is faltering. Proceedings have been suspended more than
a dozen times because of his chronic heart disease and high blood pressure.

Court officials are therefore expected to press hard for the proceedings to
continue. The prosecution is scheduled to close its case this week. Mr.
Milosevic will then have a three-month break to prepare his defense.

At the tribunal in recent days, news of Judge May's illness clearly upset
members of the staff.

''He has been slowly broken by the case -- you could see him aging,'' said one
colleague, recalling that the judge had been eager to take on the Milosevic
case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); JUDGES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAWYERS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); TRANSCRIPTS (77%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); APPEALS COURTS (74%); HEART DISEASE (71%);
HYPERTENSION (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; Appointments and Executive Changes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Richard May; Slobodan Milosevic; Theodor (Judge) Meron;
Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: SERBIA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); SERBIA
& MONTENEGRO (89%); CROATIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             946 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 37 words


An article yesterday about the illness of the judge who has presided over the
war crimes trial of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader, misstated
the year he joined the tribunal at The Hague. It was 1997, not 1967.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); GENOCIDE (84%) Correction Stories; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (59%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             951 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 25, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. CHARGES TWO AT GUANTANAMO WITH CONSPIRACY

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1123 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Pentagon officials said Tuesday that they were bringing charges for the first
time against detainees at the Guantanamo Bay naval base, formally accusing two
detainees of conspiracy to commit both terrorism and war crimes against
civilians.

The detainees, who thus become the first candidates there to face a military
tribunal, were identified as Ali Hamza Ahmed Sulayman al-Bahlul of Yemen and
Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al-Qosi of Sudan. They were described in charge sheets,
the equivalent of indictments, as senior members of Al Qaeda who had served in a
variety of capacities for its leader, Osama bin Laden.

The action of bringing charges against named detainees means that the military
commission process that was first announced within weeks of the terrorist
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, is, after many delays, about to be put into
operation. No date was set for what would be the first United States military
tribunals since the end of World War II.

Some Pentagon officials said they expected that pretrial proceedings would last
a few months, after which the actual trials before a panel of up to seven
military officers might start, perhaps in the late spring or early summer.

But a military defense lawyer assigned to one of those charged cautioned against
predicting anything about the proceedings. Lt. Cmdr. Philip Sundel of the Navy,
one of Mr. Bahlul's two lawyers, said in an interview that he and his co-counsel
might not deal with the case solely on the merits of the charges but might
challenge the entire foundation of the proceeding. Commander Sundel said the
scope of the pretrial period might be widened because ''we have concerns about
virtually every aspect of the military commission process as it relates to our
client getting a fair trial.''

Under the process adopted by the Bush administration, the military tribunal
proceedings are reviewable by a special appeals panel and ultimately by the
secretary of defense and the president. There is no provision for review by
civilian courts.

''This does not have the checks and balances built into it that guarantee a
fair, impartial and independent process,'' Commander Sundel said.

He also said that he did not know whether the tribunal would allow such issues
to be raised and that therefore he could not predict how long it would be before
any tribunal actually began.

According to the charge sheets, the two men have been part of a criminal
conspiracy with Mr. bin Laden and several of his top aides that committed the
offenses of ''attacking civilians, attacking civilian objects'' and other acts
attributed in the documents to Al Qaeda. Mr. Bahlul is described as a Qaeda
propagandist who made a recruiting video that celebrated the bombing of the
American destroyer Cole in 2000 in the Yemeni port of Aden. Mr. Qosi was
described as a Qaeda senior accountant who served as the deputy to the
organization's chief financial officer. Both were described as part of an elite
cadre of Qaeda associates who served as close associates of and bodyguards for
Mr. bin Laden.

Prof. Detlev Vagts of the Harvard University Law School, an authority on the
laws of war, said the conspiracy charge appeared to be an effort to fashion a
new military offense along the lines of the civilian crime of conspiracy.
Officials, Professor Vagts said, appear to have taken care not to charge that
membership in Al Qaeda alone constitutes a crime.

Although the tribunal rules allow for the death penalty, the two defendants will
not face it. Maj. John Smith, a lawyer with the Pentagon's office of military
tribunals, said Tuesday that the chief prosecutor, Col. Fred Borch, had already
decided that it would not be appropriate given the details of the accusations.

The trial is supposed to take place in a secure courtroom at Guantanamo that was
readied more than a year ago. Bush administration planners had initially hoped
to have military tribunals functioning within a year of the attacks to
demonstrate swift retribution, but their strategy shifted to one of detaining
suspects at the naval base at Guantanamo and other undisclosed locations in
order to gain intelligence through a prolonged interrogation.

Commander Sundel and his co-counsel, Maj. Mark Bridges, have not yet met with
their client, nor has Lt. Col. Sharon Shaffer met with hers, Mr. Qosi. They are
expected to travel soon to Guantanamo to do so.

The two defendants are among the 650 or so detainees being held at Guantanamo by
the American military. Most were captured in Afghanistan or Pakistan after the
defeat of the Taliban government in Kabul. Bush administration officials have
declared the detainees at Guantanamo illegal enemy combatants, saying that
because they did not comply with the rules of war in the Geneva conventions,
like wearing proper uniforms or insignia, they were not entitled to be treated
as prisoners of war.

The officials have said the detainees have been treated humanely and in accord
with the standards of the Geneva conventions. Nonetheless, the administration
has faced strong criticism, especially from abroad, over holding the detainees
without bringing charges until now.

On Tuesday, the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, said the critics of
the detentions at Guantanamo were ill informed. Mr. Gonzales, in a speech to a
meeting in Washington of the American Bar Association section on national
security issues, said the critics had failed to understand that the detentions
should not be viewed as a civilian law-enforcement situation in which people
were entitled to be charged and tried or released. Under the laws of war, he
said, they could be detained, ''and they need not be guilty of anything.''

Mr. Gonzales's speech was part of a recent campaign by the administration to
counter what it contends is unfair criticism of the detentions. Recently, the
military has begun winnowing down the numbers at Guantanamo, releasing more than
90 detainees to their home countries.

Pentagon officials said last week that some detainees could be held for years or
even indefinitely if they were judged to remain a danger. That means that even
after a detainee had served a sentence, he might still not be released.

Last week, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the military would
establish a special panel as a kind of parole board to evaluate annually whether
long-term detainees were still a danger.

At one time, administration officials said they hoped that the first batch of
Guantanamo detaineescharged would be those with whom a plea bargain could be
reached. It was unclear whether the two defendants charged Tuesday would be
willing to plead guilty to any charges; there was no indication whether the
accusations came from their admissions or were gathered elsewhere.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
CONSPIRACY (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); NAVIES (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (79%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (79%); INDICTMENTS (78%); MILITARY VESSELS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); LAWYERS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
BOMBINGS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); INTERVIEWS
(75%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); WORLD WAR II (73%);
GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%) Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism; Bombs
and Explosives; Cole (USS)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US NAVY (55%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%) Neil A Lewis; Ali Hamza Ahmed Sulayman al- Bahlul;
Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al- Qosi; Osama Bin Laden; Philip (Lt Cmdr) Sundel

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); YEMEN (94%); CUBA (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Aden (Yemen); Yemen

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             953 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Says Election in Iran Dealt Blow to Reform

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


With the victory of religious hard-liners in this week's parliamentary elections
in Iran, the Central Intelligence Agency is warning of a new era of repression
and inflexibility.

A new C.I.A. assessment, shared with members of Congress this week and described
by intelligence officials, says the election has dealt a severe blow to Iranian
reformers and will strengthen the authoritarian rule of the country's clerical
government. The assessment says the ascendancy of the hard-liners will make it
unlikely that Iran will moderate its foreign policies.

The State Department has condemned the election as unfair, because some 2,000
candidates were prevented from running, including 87 reformists standing for
re-election. But the assessment also blames Iran's president, Mohammad Khatami,
and his reformist allies within the government for squandering their political
capital through ''their refusal to back bold promises with equally bold
actions.''

The assessment describes the government of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, as ''secure for now,'' but it says the election results will
ultimately ''only further deepen the discontent with clerical rule, which is now
discredited and publicly criticized as never before.''

The detailed written assessment was reflected in public testimony by George J.
Tenet, the director of central intelligence, to the Senate intelligence
committee on Tuesday. It comes at a time when the Bush administration and the
International Atomic Energy Agency are pressing Iran for more information about
its covert nuclear program, and suggests that Iran is not likely to reconsider
its resistance to that effort.

While Iran has agreed to open itself to more inspections from the international
agency, and has acknowledged producing low-enriched uranium for use in a
civilian nuclear power program, it is also ''trying to preserve its W.M.D.
options,'' Mr. Tenet said, referring to unconventional arms known as ''weapons
of mass destruction.''

Iran also continues to support terrorist groups, including Hezbollah, the
assessment says, and is seeking to counter American influence in Iraq through a
number of means, including clandestine activity.

''The strengthening of authoritarian rule will make breaking out of old foreign
policy patterns more difficult,'' Mr. Tenet told the committee. Still, he added,
''Because Khamanei and his allies have kept a close rein on foreign policy, we
do not expect the defeat of the reformists to lead to a sudden change in Iranian
policy.''

Based on the election results, the religious hard-liners are expected to hold at
least a 146-seat majority in Iran's 290-seat Parliament when it convenes in
June. The majority includes factions that support the absolute rule of Ayatollah
Khamenei, but disagree on issues like social freedom, economic policy and
relations with the United States.

Mr. Tenet told the Senate committee that the C.I.A. expected Ayatollah
Khamenei's government to shut down many outlets for political dissent, and
possibly to ''resort to new heavy-handedness that produces public outrage and
protest.'' At least eight people were killed and 30 injured in election-related
violence last weekend.

In the last year, critics of Ayatollah Khamenei's government took bold new steps
in proclaiming their opposition, including publishing open letters calling for
an end to absolute clerical rule.

Even so, the C.I.A. assessment describes the prevailing mood among the Iranian
public as apathetic rather than confrontational, and Mr. Tenet said in his
testimony that ''regime intimidation has cowed the populace.''

In the months after the American invasion of Iraq, some Bush administration
officials warned loudly about efforts by Iran's Shiite Muslim government to
influence events in Iraq through proxies including the Badr Organization, an
Iranian-trained militia affiliated with a major Iraqi Shiite opposition group,
the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); ELECTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); RELIGION (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); FOREIGN
POLICY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); POLITICS (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(75%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (75%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (69%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (69%);
HEZBOLLAH (66%); TERRORISM (66%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%) United States
International Relations; Elections; Islam; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY
AGENCY (54%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (58%) Douglas Jehl

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             955 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 894 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

France Wants U.N. Force To Intervene in Haiti
France called for the immediate creation of a United Nations-backed security
force to go to Haiti and stabilize the country, which is in the third week of a
rebel uprising.   A1

Israel Raids Arab Banks
Israeli forces raided Arab banks in the West Bank city of Ramallah, seizing
millions of dollars representing hundreds of institutional and personal accounts
that Israel said were financing Palestinian terrorism.   A1

China Questions Hong Kong
China accused Hong Kong's main opposition party of being unpatriotic and seeking
to overthrow the central government, raising questions about whether the
Communist Party is willing to tolerate political freedom in Hong Kong.   A5

Libya Restrictions to Ease
President Bush is expected to remove American travel restrictions to Libya now
that Libya has dismantled most of its nuclear infrastructure and reaffirmed its
responsibility for the bombing of Pan Am 103.   A9

A Push for Cooperation
The Bush administration, pressed by Israel to endorse its plan to withdraw from
parts of Gaza and the West Bank, is urging Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to work
with Palestinian leaders in carrying out the pullout.   A10

Iran to Face Repression
The Central Intelligence Agency is warning of a new era of repression and
inflexibility in Iran after the victory of religious hard-liners in this week's
parliamentary elections.   A10

Britain Drops Leak Case
Britain said that it would not prosecute Katharine Gun, a young government
linguist who admitted leaking a secret American request for assistance in
bugging diplomats during the debate before the Iraq war.   A13

NATIONAL   A16-25

Ruling Against Subsidies For Ministry Students
The Supreme Court ruled that states that subsidize secular study at the college
level may withhold the scholarships from students preparing for the ministry.
The 7-to-2 decision was a setback for advocates of using publicly financed
vouchers to pay for religious school tuition.   A1

Servicewomen Report Rapes
Dozens of servicewomen in the Persian Gulf area are saying they had been
sexually assaulted or raped by fellow troops.   A1

Delay Sought in Gay Licenses
Opponents of gay marriage asked the California Supreme Court to order an
immediate end to the issuing of marriage licenses to same-sex couples in San
Francisco.   A22

A significant number of Congressional Republicans are cool to the idea of a
constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage, despite President Bush's
endorsement.   A22

Bill on Guns Moves Ahead
The Senate voted to take up a White House-backed bill that would provide legal
immunity to gun manufacturers and dealers.   A23

FASHION   B9

CIRCUITS   G1-8

SCIENCE/HEALTH

New Clue in Fight Against AIDS
Scientists have found that monkey cells have innate protection against the human
AIDS virus, a clue that may help explain why some people are susceptible to
certain viral infections while others are not.   A22

Finding on Sickle Cell
High blood pressure in the lungs is a risk factor for death in adults with
sickle-cell disease, a study said.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Agents Accused of Theft Of Sept. 11 Valuables
Thirteen F.B.I. agents took mementos, debris or valuables from the Staten Island
landfill that housed the rubble of the World Trade Center, an investigation has
found.   B1

'93 Victims Memorial Plan
Relatives of the victims of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing will be shown a
Port Authority proposal for an interim marker that would stand until a permanent
memorial is built. The original memorial was destroyed in the 2001 attack.   B3

Plea for Higher Utility Rates
Con Ed will ask for permission to raise its electricity rates for the first time
in nearly a decade, utility analysts and state lawmakers say.   B1

EDUCATION

Low Minority Graduation Rate
Black and Latino students in New York State are less likely to finish high
school than their counterparts elsewhere in the nation, according to an analysis
of graduation rates.   B2

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-8

Running Back Is Charged
Baltimore Ravens running back Jamal Lewis was caught in a drug trafficking sting
and has been charged with conspiracy and possession with the intent to
distribute cocaine, according to a federal indictment.   D1

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

ARTS   E1-10

Gibson May Have Hurt Career
Mel Gibson's provocative new film, ''The Passion of the Christ,'' is making some
of Hollywood's most prominent executives uncomfortable in ways that may damage
his career.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

Fed Chairman Urges Cuts
Alan Greenspan told lawmakers that Congress should rein in the federal deficit
through spending cuts rather than through tax increases. He touched off a furor
by calling on Congress to trim back Social Security and Medicare benefits.   A1

Defense Rests in Stewart Trial
Lawyers for Martha Stewart, gambling that prosecutors failed to make a
compelling case, concluded their defense after questioning just one witness.
C1

Merger of Large Unions
The nation's leading unions for apparel workers and for hotel and restaurant
workers have voted to merge, union officials said.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   B10

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: A primary endorsement; separating church and state; Latin America's
half-term presidents.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Bridge   E5
TV Listings   E9
Crossword   E7
Weather   C14
Public Lives   B2


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); POLITICS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%);
GAYS & LESBIANS (88%); SUPREME COURTS (86%); MARRIAGE (84%); MARRIAGE LAW (84%);
SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (84%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); SEX OFFENSES (75%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%);
PRIME MINISTERS (74%); SCIENCE NEWS (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (73%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); ELECTIONS (71%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (70%);
TERRORISM (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (70%); RELIGION (70%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS
(70%); BOMBINGS (70%); IRAQ WAR (70%); AIDS & HIV (69%); LEGISLATION (69%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (69%); IMMUNITY (69%); TUITION FEES (68%); SAME SEX
MARRIAGE LAWS (65%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (65%); FIREARMS (64%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (63%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (61%); VIRUSES (60%); LICENSES &
PERMITS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (70%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); INDIAN OCEAN (52%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); HAITI (94%); LIBYA
(93%); HONG KONG (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (92%); GULF STATES (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             956 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Surprise Move In Prosecution Of Milosevic

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 25


Prosecutors unexpectedly rested their case on Wednesday against Slobodan
Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, relinquishing their final two days in
the war crimes trial that opened two years ago.

It was a low-key end to a marathon that included 300 witnesses and tens of
thousands of documents. Prosecutors merely filed a motion asking to close their
case. Their decision came in part because Mr. Milosevic had again been ill, for
two weeks, forcing them to cancel hearings. But they made it clear that they
also moved because the leading judge in the case suddenly had to step down after
falling seriously ill.

Lawyers said that the abrupt halt also helped the court deal with the often
difficult defendant at a turning point in the trial when a new judge still had
to be named. Prosecutors had planned to present four more witnesses in the time
allotted to them.

Mr. Milosevic will now have three months to prepare his defense in the enormous
trial at the United Nations tribunal where he stands accused of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide during the three wars of the 1990's that tore
up Yugoslavia.

The judge in charge of the trial, Richard May of Britain, last appeared in court
in late January but will be unable to return. He will probably be replaced by
another British judge, to be named by Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary
general.

On Wednesday both prosecutors and judges moved uncommonly swiftly. Only hours
after the prosecution said it was closing its case, judges announced that the
trial will resume on June 8. They gave Mr. Milosevic, who is acting as his own
defense counsel, 150 days to set out his arguments and present his witnesses in
court. Lawyers said that amounts to the same time, or slightly more, than the
prosecution used.

Although the trial began in February 2002, it was suspended for 65 days because
of Mr. Milosevic's illness and often ran on a part-time schedule on orders of
the doctors treating Mr. Milosevic for heart disease and high blood pressure.

A member of Mr. Milosevic's defense team said that the team had not decided on
its strategy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (85%); GENOCIDE (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (78%); HEART DISEASE (62%); HYPERTENSION (61%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic; Richard (Judge) May; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Marlise
Simons

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Great Britain; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             957 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 27, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

International Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 436 words


The resignation of Richard May, the chief judge in Slobodan Milosevic's trial,
has added a serious complication to proceedings that, after two years and 300
witnesses, are a long way from finished. One of three judges at the special
tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Judge May, of Britain, retired for health
reasons just as the prosecution rested its case a full year later than expected.
The delay was caused by the volume of the accusations, and Mr. Milosevic's
defiant tactics and repeated illnesses. Even if the judge had not stepped down,
Mr. Milosevic was expected to use his defense for maximum theatrics and
propaganda. Now Mr. Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, has grounds to
demand an entirely new trial, or even a mistrial.

How this plays out is critical, not only in the interest of bringing him to
justice, but also for any future prosecution of dictators -- like Saddam Hussein
-- by international courts. One function of the tribunal is to serve notice on
all mass murderers that they will not escape justice, even if their own people
are unable or unwilling to serve it.

That is why it is imperative to examine why this trial has run into such
problems, and why international justice has proved so elusive. The courts for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda have been ad hoc affairs, set up to judge
specific atrocities. Stalin, Idi Amin and Pol Pot died without answering for
their crimes. Mr. Milosevic has played heavily on such moral ambiguity,
denouncing the Hague proceedings as a victor's trial.

The problem is compounded by the hostility of the Bush administration to the new
International Criminal Court, set up to step in as a last resort if a country
fails to try its own major miscreants.

Another problem revealed by the Milosevic trial is the discrepancy between the
horror of mass murder and the dispassionate proceedings of a courtroom. When
there are thousands upon thousands of tortured corpses, it seems almost obscene
for a dictator to be in the dock in a business suit, wrangling over
technicalities. To be sure, there is merit in setting the calm majesty of the
law against the violent tawdriness of evil. But when mocked or exploited, as it
has been by Mr. Milosevic, the law can seem helpless and inadequate.

Serious as they are, these problems must not become an argument against
international justice. With Mr. Hussein awaiting trial, and Osama bin Laden, Kim
Jong Il and Charles Taylor of Liberia still out there, the world must believe
that global justice is at least possible, if not likely.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MISTRIAL (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%)
Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); KIM JONG IL (50%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%) Richard
(Judge) May; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
LIBERIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Great Britain; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             965 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 29, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone and Connecticut: The Connection Continues to Grow

BYLINE: By JOE WOJTAS

SECTION: Section 14CN; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1253 words


THE construction several years ago of a replica of the schooner Amistad by
Mystic Seaport shipbuilders has led to a connection between several Connecticut
groups and the people of Sierra Leone aimed at improving life in the West
African nation.

In December nine people from groups including Amistad America and the Amistad
Committee of New Haven, Mystic Seaport, the First Church of Christ
Congregational in Farmington and the Connecticut Woodturners, made their fifth
trip to Sierra Leone. They met with President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, his government
ministers and villagers to discuss the various efforts, most of which are
already under way.

These include the planting of 100 trees for each of the 53 -- symbolizing the
number of slaves aboard the original Amistad -- cut down to build the replica
boat. The projects also include the development of fish farms adjacent to the
tree grove, the creation of an Amistad exhibition for the country and finding
markets in the United States for the works of local craftsmen.

The group's major initiative is an effort to preserve the overgrown, crumbling
ruins at Bunce Island, a major 18th-century slave trading outpost, and making it
an international destination for cultural tourism.

''These are very, very important efforts for my country,'' said Ibrahim Kamara,
Sierra Leone's ambassador to the United Nations. ''These people have been
tremendous and done much good for my country and my people. They've been warmly
received by my people when they have traveled to Sierra Leone, and they deserve
it.''

The slaves aboard the original Amistad were from what is now Sierra Leone. While
being transported along the coast of Cuba in 1839, one of them, Sengbe Pieh, led
an uprising in which the slaves killed the captain and cook and captured the
ship. They tried to force the Spanish slave owners on board to sail them back to
Africa but the men changed course at night and the ship wandered up the East
Coast as rumors spread about a ship of black pirates.

While the ship was anchored off Montauk, N.Y., a government revenue cutter
captured it and towed it into New London Harbor. The slaves were jailed in New
Haven as both blacks and whites came to their aid. Trials followed and the case
ended up before the United States Supreme Court where former President John
Quincy Adams argued for the slaves' freedom. The court ruled they had been
illegally kidnapped and granted them their freedom more than two decades before
the end of the Civil War.

Those who survived the ordeal returned to Sierra Leone in 1842, and Sengbe Pieh
remains a national hero. Before they returned, however, they lived and were
educated in Farmington by the Congregational church. That effort, along with
those of the abolitionists, led to the founding of hundreds of schools for
blacks including the country's traditional black colleges.

Mystic Seaport built a replica of the Amistad that was launched during a
ceremony in 2000 that attracted government officials from Sierra Leone. The ship
is now based out of New Haven and sails to ports around the country telling the
Amistad's story of freedom and cooperation among those of different races.

The connection between the people of the United States and Sierra Leone, though,
goes much deeper than the Amistad. While the majority of the millions of African
slaves shipped to the Americas from African slave castles went to the Caribbean
and South America, most of those who went through Bunce Island were taken to
Georgia and South Carolina because of their ability to cultivate rice. Today
much of their culture and tradition survive among descendants who can trace
their roots to what is now Sierra Leone.

''In many ways Sierra Leone is almost a sister country to us,'' Peter Glankoff,
the Seaport's director of communications, said after making the most recent
trip.

The man most responsible for the relationship is Alfred Marder , who heads the
Amistad Committee. When the group dedicated a statue of Sengbe Pieh in 1992,
officials from Sierra Leone traveled to New Haven for the ceremony.

Mr. Marder has made all five trips. On the first trip, he and the Seaport's
Quentin Snediker, who headed construction of the replica Amistad, helped secure
wood from the iroko and kola trees to create a symbolic connection with the
homeland of the Amistad captives. On the second trip, Mr. Marder initiated the
idea of planting trees to create the Amistad Friendship Grove, which was done in
2001. Because the need for charcoal has caused a deforestation problem in Sierra
Leone, the 5,300 fast-growing trees will now provide fuel and jobs while
protecting the forest.

On the third trip, Mr. Marder said, he noticed a nearby stream and suggested
creating a fish farm that could provide a source of protein for the impoverished
villagers. The groups raised $20,000 to start the fish farm. On the latest trip,
Mr. Marder said they pledged to raise the additional money needed for a second
farm.

Mr. Snediker and John Lorch, the head of the Connecticut Woodturners group, also
talked with government officials about gaining access to United States markets
for those who create indigenous crafts such as baskets, carvings and textiles.
He said the effort would help preserve the craftsmen's skills, provide them with
income and support a environmentally sensitive business.

There was also much discussion about the effort to preserve the ruins of the
so-called slave castles at Bunce Island and make them a tourist destination. The
site could become a popular one for black Americans because most of the slaves
who passed through its fort-like stone walls came to the United States. More
well-known slave castles, such as Goree Island in Senegal, sent slaves to the
Caribbean and South America.

The plan is for the groups to start a nonprofit organization to raise the money
needed to update a preservation plan for the slave castle. Sierra Leone would
then petition to become a member of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and go to the international community for funding.

''For people of African descent in the United States there is so little direct
connection with their past. But this is one of them,'' said Mr. Snediker, who
discussed the Bunce Island project with Sierra Leonean officials on the December
trip.

''It's a treasure, a jewel,'' said Mr. Snediker. ''We're seeking ways to develop
it and bring it to the world.''

Mr. Marder said the connection between the two countries is important because of
the historical significance of the Amistad story.

''It was the first human rights case to come before the Supreme Court,'' he
said. ''It was the first time blacks and whites came to together to struggle
against slavery.''

Because so many people from what is now Sierra Leone were brought here as
slaves, he said, they made a vast contribution to the economic growth of the
United States.

''We owe a tremendous debt to the people of Sierra Leone,'' he said. ''In a way,
we're doing this because we owe it to them as a country. These people helped
build our country and history has tied the two of us together.''

Mr. Glankoff said the projects are not a typical humanitarian effort in which
people bring money and supplies and then go home. The projects begun by the
groups will be owned and run by the people of Sierra Leone.

''A real friend is someone who will help you help yourself,'' he said. ''We saw
so much of our country in their country. We all have the same hopes, dreams and
aspirations.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A fish farm, bottom, a grove of 5,300 trees and plans to
restore Bunce Island, left and right, which is home to an African slave castle,
are among projects that groups in Connecticut have helped start in Sierra Leone.
Alfred Marder, above left, head of the Amistad Committee, has played a big role
in instigating the projects and has visited the country five times. (Photographs
by Mystic Seaport)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HARBORS & PORTS (90%); SHIPBUILDING (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(88%); SLAVERY (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); RELIGION (76%); DESTINATIONS &
ATTRACTIONS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); LITIGATION (64%); COASTAL
AREAS (63%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (62%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (62%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (61%); SUPREME COURTS (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (88%); NEW LONDON, CT, USA (79%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); AFRICA
(79%); CUBA (75%)

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             966 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 1, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Halfway Point of Milosevic Trial, Prosecutor Is Confident

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 29


The familiar morning mantra ''Case No. 0254, the Prosecutor vs. Slobodan
Milosevic'' will not ring through Courtroom I at the United Nations war crimes
tribunal for a few months.

The prosecution has just rested its case, and Mr. Milosevic, the first modern
head of state who has to answer for atrocities before international judges, has
until June 8 to prepare his defense.

In her spacious corner office, Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor, took
stock. Looking weary, she said she was relieved that after 24 months, this
portion of the trial was finally closed. She said she was certain of a
conviction on all charges, but conceded that she had presented only
circumstantial evidence, ''no simple smoking gun,'' -- no written order or
letter signed by Mr. Milosevic -- to support the gravest charge, genocide.

But then, few may have expected such proof from the former Serbian leader and
Yugoslav president. He wrote down very little and went to extraordinary lengths
to hide his hand in the three wars in Yugoslavia in the 1990's that killed more
than 200,000 people and uprooted several million.

Last week, court officials said Belgrade authorities have sanitized and cut
crucial portions from the minutes of wartime meetings of the Supreme Defense
Council, which Mr. Milosevic attended.

Officials in Belgrade, the Serbian capital, recently handed over the incomplete
records after much international pressure. There was credible information, the
officials said, that the complete records had contained instructions providing a
link to killings and even genocide.

All the same, prosecutors have compiled the most detailed record known of the
Milosevic era, reconstructing the methods and secret machinery they say Mr.
Milosevic used for his plan to seize more land for ethnic Serbs in a collapsing
Yugoslavia.

Mrs. Del Ponte said there was abundant evidence of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia's Kosovo Province. ''I believe we have
proved genocide with many pieces of the puzzle,'' she said.

Legal experts agree that the evidence of war crimes is ample. Some, however,
dispute whether the prosecution has proved that Mr. Milosevic was guilty of
genocide in Bosnia. A finding of genocide requires proof that the accused
intended to destroy a people or group, not just to kill many of its members.
''Intention of course is a subjective element, a difficult element,'' she said.
''We will fully demonstrate this intent at the end of the trial.''

It has now become known that since well before the trial, a debate has raged
among prosecutors over whether the Serbian-led campaign to expel and often kill
non-Serbs would meet the legal definition of genocide.

Some argued that there was enough evidence to secure a conviction for war crimes
and crimes against humanity and no need to take on the burden of demonstrating
genocide. ''We had more than enough to prove that Milosevic created, instigated,
aided and abetted great conflict and bloodshed and upheaval to stay in power,''
said one lawyer involved in the discussions. ''Enough for a life sentence.''

But Ms. Del Ponte and others on her team decided to charge Mr. Milosevic with
two counts of genocide or complicity in genocide in Bosnia. ''I could not leave
out the charges of genocide, based on what we knew,'' she said. But many
questions still surround the issue of genocide.

The judges must decide whether the large-scale persecution and killing of
Bosnian Muslims, called ''ethnic cleansing'' by many, was a deliberate genocidal
campaign.

''Ethnic cleansing can lead to genocide, but did it in Bosnia? -- I'm not
sure,'' said Antoine Garapon, director of the Institute for Advanced Legal
Studies in Paris, a research group that monitors the trial. ''I am sure of the
proof that Milosevic ordered ethnic cleansing.''

Some lawyers note that the crime of genocide is often misunderstood and defined
in political or humanitarian terms. ''One group threatening or killing another
is not automatically genocide,'' said Heikelina Verrijn-Stuart, a Dutch
specialist in international law, following the tribunal. ''As a crime, it
requires very specific proof and it does not depend on the number of victims.''

The tribunal's 16 judges still appear divided. The court has ruled three times
on genocide but convicted only one person, Radislav Krstic, a Bosnian Serb
general, for his role in the 1995 massacre of 7,000 Muslim men at Srebrenica.
His case, under appeal, is expected to set a standard that may affect the
Milosevic case.

Tribunal staff and those monitoring the trial say that getting to this halfway
point has been an ordeal. The scope of the indictment, linking allegations in
three very different wars over nine years, was enormous. Progress was hampered
by Mr. Milosevic who, acting as his own lawyer, engaged in filibustering and
frequently fell ill. A week ago, the presiding judge, Richard May, unexpectedly
resigned because of illness.

Evaluating the strength and weaknesses of the prosecution case has its pitfalls,
trial watchers say. There was an impressive array of about 300 witnesses, and
the evidence includes thousands of documents, private diaries, telephone
intercepts and films.

But numerous witnesses testified in closed sessions, reportedly for their own
protection, and many electronic intercepts and documents are only available to
the judges.

The prosecution set out to prove that the crimes occurred, to show how the chain
of command worked, thus linking them to Mr. Milosevic. But the trial has been
hard to follow, because testimony has zigzagged, not following chronological
order.

Mr. Garapon believes the chain of command has been difficult to reconstruct
because the military, the police and the militias often operated under different
guises. ''This is crucial to convince judges that massacres in Bosnia and
Milosevic in Serbia are connected,'' he said.

Lawyers at the court say there is another reason why the Belgrade authorities
still withhold important documents: to protect the country from Bosnia's lawsuit
against Belgrade at the International Court of Justice, seeking enormous damages
for aggression and genocide.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Carla Del Ponte, chief prosecutor in the trial of Slobodan
Milosevic. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(89%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Carla Del Ponte; Slobodan Milosevic; Marlise Simons

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%);
CROATIA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             967 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel May Ask Egypt to Help Secure Gaza After a Pullout

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


A senior Israeli official said Monday that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon wanted
Egypt to help secure the Gaza Strip after a proposed withdrawal of Israeli
forces and settlers from the area and that there should be no concern that such
a pullout would lead to a takeover by the militant group Hamas.

''Our intention is to withdraw completely from Gaza,'' said the Israeli
official. He added that Egypt could help with security, especially in the area
near its border. About 7,500 Israeli settlers now live in the strip.

Israel is also talking about a withdrawal from the West Bank, but the official
said plans for that area were less certain. He said Israel planned to withdraw
military forces from large parts of the area west of the Jordan River and
relocate them to a buffer zone in the western part of the West Bank, where they
would protect Israeli settlements.

In addition, he said, Israel was considering dismantling ''a few rather remote
settlements'' in the West Bank and relocating them, leaving ''a very large
Palestinian area'' free of Israeli presence, providing residents with ''better
contiguity, better transportation mobility and so on.''

The official said Israel's plans to withdraw could be likened to the country's
finding ''a convenient parking place'' while it waited for the Palestinians to
negotiate the final boundaries of a Palestinian state.

''We are preparing to park conveniently for the next hundred years or for the
next few months -- I don't know,'' the official said. It is up to the
Palestinians, he added, to decide if it is time to negotiate with Israel and
take actions themselves to dismantle militant groups in their midst.

The official's comments came as a group of top Israelis led by Mr. Sharon's
chief of staff, Dov Weisglass, briefed Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and
Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, on Mr. Sharon's latest thinking
regarding a pullout from the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank.

Bush administration officials say they are receptive to the Sharon plan, which
has never been fully outlined in detail. But American officials say many
questions remain.

Mr. Sharon wants President Bush's blessing for the plan, to help him rebut
criticsm among Israelis, in the Arab world and among Europeans, Israeli
officials say. Preventing Hamas, which has carried out suicide bombings and
other lethal attacks, from effectively taking over Gaza after an Israeli
withdrawal is foremost among the concerns of the administration, the American
officials say. But the Israeli official said such a concern was unwarranted.

''The best evaluation of our experts, intelligence and otherwise, is that there
is no danger that Hamas will take over,'' the Israeli official said. ''Hamas has
no intention of taking over the responsibility of meeting the daily needs of
almost two million people in Gaza.''

An administration official said that there was still a fear that Hamas could
fill a vacuum left by an Israeli withdrawal and that it was highly doubtful that
Egypt would want to go along in policing any part of Gaza, including the tiny
area near the Egyptian border that is a conduit for arms smuggling.

There was no immediate reaction from Egypt, but it has played an on-again,
off-again role in helping the Palestinian Authority control militant groups in
the last few years.

The Israeli official denied that a negotiation was under way between the two
countries on the pullout plan. But he said it would be unthinkable for Israel to
carry out any such bold plan without presenting it first to the United States.

The overall vision of the Israeli official, he acknowledged, is to carve out a
predominantly Palestinian area free of Israel's presence and to complete the
Israeli separation barrier on the western side of the West Bank, along a route
closer to where the border between Israel and Jordan ran before the 1967 war.

                             --------------------


Arafat Adviser Killed in Gaza

 GAZA, Tuesday, March 2, (Reuters) -- Gunmen killed an adviser to the
Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, outside his office in Gaza City on Tuesday,
witnesses and medics said.

They said unknown assailants fatally shot Khalil al-Zebin, 59, who advised Mr.
Arafat on human rights and media issues and ran a magazine financed by the
Palestinian Authority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TERRORISM (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (60%) United States
International Relations; Palestinians

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%) Hamas (Palestinian Group)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (53%) Ariel (Prime Min) Sharon;
Ariel (Prime Min) Sharon; Colin L (Sec) Powell; Condoleezza Rice; Steven R
Weisman

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (99%); EGYPT (96%);
UNITED STATES (94%); JORDAN (79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank; Egypt; Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             975 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Proposes Same-Sex-School Option

BYLINE: By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


The Bush administration has proposed regulations giving public school districts
new freedom to create same-sex classes and schools, as long as ''substantially
equal'' opportunities are also provided for the excluded sex.

Supporters and critics alike said the proposed changes represented a major
reinterpretation of antidiscrimination laws, some 50 years after the Supreme
Court discredited racial segregation in ''separate but equal'' schools as
inherently unequal, and 30 years after Title IX extended the concept to sex.

Under the new rules, educators could create new schools or classes exclusively
for students of one sex, and no longer have to demonstrate that they were doing
so to remedy past discrimination. In addition, rather than having to ensure that
students of the other sex were receiving the same opportunities in a single-sex
setting, the new rules would allow them to provide those opportunities in a
co-ed setting.

Federal officials said the changes would allow schools to offer a greater
variety of educational options to parents, and said that under no circumstances
would children be required to attend same-sex schools or classes. The
regulations would take effect after a 45-day comment period.

''We are not advocating single-sex schools and we are not advocating single-sex
classrooms,'' said Kenneth Marcus, who oversees the Office for Civil Rights in
the federal Education Department. ''We understand that co-ed remains the norm.
We are simply trying to ensure that educators have flexibility to provide more
options.''

The new regulations drew immediate fire from some women's and civil liberties
groups, who said they were in violation of Title IX, the landmark law that
prohibits sex-based discrimination in schools. Even some supporters of the new
rule suggested it stood on shaky ground.

''This is not an evolutionary position that they've taken. It's revolutionary,''
said Randy Tucker, vice president of the board of the National Coalition of
Girls Schools. ''It's a longstanding position that separate but equal was not a
valid standard for education, whether it was by race or gender.''

Mr. Tucker said the new rules were certain to face legal challenges.

Susan Aspey, a spokeswoman for the Education Department, said the proposed
changes ''include ample safeguards to ensure nondiscrimination,'' and could
withstand legal challenges.

For the moment, the changes affect but a single small thread in the tapestry of
public education. There are currently 24 same-sex public schools across the
country, many opened in the last two years, and 93,000 co-ed public schools. The
issue gained new momentum with the passage of the No Child Left Behind law, when
women senators from both parties came out in support of same-sex education, and
asked the Education Department to draft guidelines to permit their growth by
last May.

Research on the gains of children in same-sex vs. co-ed classrooms has been
inconclusive. A 1998 survey of research by the American Association of
University Women found no overall benefit to same-sex classrooms or schools, but
some research since then has suggested that girls learn differently than boys,
and that some students learn better when separated from the opposite sex.

The Bush administration has earmarked $297 million each year for ''innovative
programs'' in education, including single-sex schools. Ms. Aspey said the
department did not track how much of the money was going to same-sex
instruction.

In recent years, the attitude toward same-sex education has undergone major
change, said Tom Carroll, the founder and chairman of Brighter Choice Charter
School for Boys and Brighter Choice Charter School for Girls in Albany. ''Before
the department was trying to stamp out single-sex instruction, and now they've
thrown the door wide open for schools and districts to offer it.''

That is precisely what has alarmed women's rights advocates like Marcia
Greenberger, co-president of the National Women's Law Center, which spent much
of last year battling the Education Department's proposals to rewrite Title IX
regulations that protect women's sports programs. In the end, the regulations
remained intact.

Ms. Greenberger said her organization would consider challenging the new
guidelines in court. She called the changes ''a very serious attack on the most
fundamental principles underlying protections against sex discrimination under
Title IX and under our Constitution,'' and said they would ''set back progress
that women and girls have made for over 30 years.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AGENCY RULEMAKING (91%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS
(90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS
& INSTITUTIONS (90%); ACADEMIC STANDARDS (89%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL
TEACHERS (89%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); EDUCATION
DEPARTMENTS (89%); CHILDREN (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US NO CHILD
LEFT BEHIND ACT (78%); EDUCATION LAW (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); SCHOOL
PERFORMANCE (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); RACE & RACISM (71%) Education and
Schools; Discrimination; Men  ; Women; Equal Educational Opportunities;
Coeducation; Education and Schools

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (71%) Education Department (US)

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush; Diana Jean Schemo; Kenneth Marcus

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             992 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Pain in Madrid, and the Echoes Beyond

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 100 words



To the Editor:

While measures taken by the United States have protected our citizens since the
dreadful days after Sept. 11, the bombings of March 11 in Spain serve as a
reminder that we must continue to fight this crime against humanity (''Ground
Zero, Madrid,'' editorial, March 12).

Terrorism is a cowardly act that has no face, and it is up to the civilized
world to collaborate and fight back.

An ETA bomb in Madrid ripped my father's life away from me on Sept. 11, 1985; it
also removed my ignorance, and triggered my own intolerance for such evil.

MICHAEL A. BROWN
Hoboken, N.J., March 12, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
BASQUE HOMELAND & FREEDOM (88%); TERRORISM (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (57%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (94%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             998 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1475 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Spanish Voters' Anger Spurs Opposition Victory
Spain's opposition Socialists swept to an upset victory in general elections,
ousting the center-right party of Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar in a
groundswell of voter anger and grief over the handling of terrorist attacks in
Madrid. Many voters suspected Al Qaeda plotted the attacks to punish Mr. Aznar
for supporting the war in Iraq.   A1

The opposition victory in Spain is the first electoral rebuke of one of
President Bush's most steadfast allies in the war on Iraq.   A1

At least one of the five suspects being held by the police in connection with
the Madrid terror attacks had been linked more than two years ago to an
important cell of Al Qaeda that operated in Spain, according to documents and
government officials. The suspect, Jamal Zougan, is a Moroccan immigrant.   A12

Many Europeans, after the attacks in Spain, are suddenly confronting the
prospect that Islamic terrorism is no longer somebody else's problem, as they
might have thought, but an immediate and mortal threat.   A13

Putin Wins Election in Russia
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia won a second term in an election that had
never been in doubt and that consolidated his centralized control of power. With
most ballots counted, he had won more than 70 percent of the vote, but many
Russian stayed away either because of apathy or out of protest.   A3

Iraqi Rebels Sharpen Skills
Insurgent bombmakers in Iraq, whose roadside explosives claimed the lives of six
more American soldiers over the weekend, have adopted new and grimly devious
tactics. Military officers described vast improvements in the lethality and
effectiveness of those weapons over recent weeks.   A1

In a surprising turnabout, several Iraqi leaders on the Governing Council are
balking at allowing the United Nations to return to the country. They say they
are reluctant to give the organization a big role either in helping to prepare
the Iraqi government to stand on its own or in readying the country for
nationwide elections.   A10

Bombing in Israeli Port
Two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up minutes apart at the
industrial port of Ashdod in Israel, killing 10 others and prompting Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon to cancel a first meeting with his Palestinian
counterpart.   A1

Constitutional Change in China
China's Parliament formally approved constitutional amendments that address
private property and human rights. At the same time, the country's new prime
minister, Wen Jiabao, promised to rein in the overheated economy.   A6

NATIONAL   A14-19

Government-Produced TV Is Under Federal Scrutiny
Federal investigators are scrutinizing television segments in which the Bush
administration paid people to pose as journalists praising the benefits of the
new Medicare law, which helps elderly Americans with the costs of their
prescriptions.   A1

Comments by Senator John Kerry diverted attention from his themes of creating
jobs and providing health insurance. He is being asked: Which foreign leaders
told you they support your campaign?   A16

New Death Penalty Debate
The struggle over the death penalty is returning to Illinois. Legislators and
prosecutors say the landmark reforms that state lawmakers have adopted mean it
is time to begin executions again. Critics of capital punishment praise the
reforms but say many more must be made.   A14

A Legal Thriller in Mississippi
A federal indictment is pending against a sitting Mississippi Supreme Court
justice, his former wife, two former judges and one of the state's most
prominent lawyers. Mississippi justice, the indictment suggests, is built on
cozy relationships and fueled by bribes.   A14

Theory in Murder Investigation
A day after Marcus Wesson, 57, was booked on nine counts of murder, after the
bodies of family members were discovered in his home, details are emerging about
the crime. Police Chief Jerry Dyer of Fresno, Calif., said investigators had a
theory of what happened. He said he would wait until the completion of autopsies
before disclosing the causes of the deaths.   A14

2 Firefighters Die in Pittsburgh
A fire destroyed a historic black church in Pittsburgh. Two firefighters were
killed and 28 others injured when the steeple collapsed and the debris broke
through the floor into the basement.   A19

An Actuary Amid Controversy
Richard S. Foster, Medicare's chief actuary, has created a political controversy
with charges that Bush administration officials threatened to fire him if he
shared data with Congress on the higher costs of new Medicare legislation.   A18


SCIENCE/HEALTH

Is Good Cholesterol So Good?
New research has called into question whether high levels of the good
cholesterol are always good and, when they are beneficial, how much. Doctors are
calling researchers and asking what to do about patients with high H.D.L.
levels, and patients are left with conflicting advice.   A1

OBITUARIES   B7

Keith Hopkins
A professor at the University of Cambridge who was one of the first historians
to use sociological methods to study the ancient Roman world, he was 69.   B7

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Use of Midwives Wanes As New Pressures Emerge
Midwifery was booming just a few years ago, as women sought to avoid the
aggressive medical techniques often used by doctors. But the popularity of the
practice has begun to decline in New York City and around the nation. Midwives,
doctors, hospital executives and patients all point to the same reasons:
insurance pressures and, at least indirectly, the threat of lawsuits.   B1

Pollution's Effects Linger
In Endicott, N.Y., best known as the birthplace of I.B.M., industrial toxins
that contaminated the soil and leached into groundwater continue to produce
vapors, pollution that is in part traceable to I.B.M. And residents say they
feel trapped in virtually unsellable homes and are fearful of the prolonged
effects on their health.   B1

Mock Terror Drill at Shea
With the specter of coordinated terrorist bombings on Madrid trains looming in
the background, New York City staged one of the largest mock terrorist attacks
in the nation at Shea Stadium.   B4

EDUCATION

School Promotion Vote Nears
As a vote on a plan to hold back the lowest performing third graders nears, a
high-ranking official in the Department of Education said it was very unlikely
that Chancellor Joel I. Klein would endorse a compromise that would delay for at
least a year Mayor Bloomberg's tough new promotion requirements.   B3

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-9

NCAA Tournament Field
The National Collegiate Athletic Association set its 65-team national
championship tournament field. St. Joseph's and Stanford both garnered No. 1
seeds, but it is a pair of perennial powers that the N.C.A.A. selection
committee designated as the favorites to win its men's basketball tournament:
Kentucky and Duke.   D1

ARTS   E1-8

Religious Movies Revisited
As the overwhelming success of ''The Passion of the Christ'' reverberates
through Hollywood, producers and studio executives are asking whether the movie
industry has been neglecting large segments of the American audience eager for
more openly religious fare.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

On Air Standards Changing
As Congress and the Federal Communications Commission ratchet up their criticism
and the financial penalties for indecency on the airwaves, television and radio
broadcasters are already making significant changes to their practices and
standards.   C1

Anticrime Network Withers
Matrix, a controversial multistate program that officials hoped would find
criminals or terrorists by sifting through databases of public and private
information, has lost more than two-thirds of its member states and appears to
be withering under its critics' attacks.   C1

The Growth of Nanotech
Nanotechnology, a catch-all label for products and processes that operate on the
molecular scale, will have a $1 trillion economic impact by 2015, according to
estimates by the federal government. It has already attracted investment not
only from privately held start-ups, but also from giants like I.B.M., General
Electric and DuPont.   C1

Shell Scrutiny Rises in Britain
Britain's top market regulator has begun an informal investigation into the
Royal Dutch/Shell Group's restatement of its proven reserves in January, joining
Dutch regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission.   C1

Importing a Lifestyle Diva
Kelly Hoppen, an English lifestyle entrepreneur in the process of expanding her
empire to the colonies, is in the midst of negotiations with the chief executive
of the Neiman Marcus Group to have Kelly Hoppen boutiques in 15 Neiman-owned
stores.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: Beyond the duck blind; New York's real budget crisis; Francis X.
Clines on Senator Moynihan.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Autos   D10
Metro Diary   B2
Bridge   E7
TV Listings   E8
Crossword   E7
Weather   B8


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PRIME MINISTERS
(89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); IRAQ
WAR (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%); IMMIGRATION
(74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); MEDICARE (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (64%);
PUBLIC HEALTH & WELFARE LAW (64%); ARMED FORCES (64%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(62%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%); INVESTIGATIONS (60%); SENIOR CITIZENS
(60%); RELIGION (53%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%)

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (72%); WEN JIABAO (57%); GEORGE W BUSH
(57%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (93%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (96%); IRAQ (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES (93%);
CHINA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL (92%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1000 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Privacy Fears Erode Support For a Network To Fight Crime

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1598 words


Matrix, a controversial multistate program that hoped to find criminals or
terrorists by sifting through databases of public and private information, has
lost more than two-thirds of its member states and appears to be withering under
its critics' attacks.

The Matrix program -- the name is derived from Multistate Anti-Terrorism
Information Exchange -- was originally developed for the state of Florida by
Seisint, a Florida company, in response to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. At
its peak, 16 states were members, and the program received pledges of $12
million from the federal Department of Homeland Security and the Department of
Justice.

Supporters of Matrix envisioned it as a powerful computer-driven program that
could integrate information from disparate sources -- like vehicle
registrations, driver's license data, criminal history and real estate records
-- and analyze it for patterns of activity that could help law enforcement
investigations. Promotional materials for the company put it this way: ''When
enough seemingly insignificant data is analyzed against billions of data
elements, the invisible becomes visible.''

This kind of system has long been the stuff of dreams for high-technology
companies, which saw in it both a valuable service to society and a chance to
recapture profits after a long technology downturn. But it also drew strong
opposition from civil liberties organizations, which found Orwellian overtones
in the collection and analysis of database information that would include people
who have committed no crime. The American Civil Liberties Union filed Freedom of
Information Act requests to uncover the inner workings of the system, and other
high-tech policy groups, including the Electronic Privacy Information Center and
the Electronic Frontier Foundation, have voiced concerns.

The announcements made last week by New York and Wisconsin that they were
withdrawing from Matrix means that only five states remain actively involved--
Florida, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Connecticut and Ohio.

Utah has suspended its participation, and in January Gov. Olene S. Walker
appointed an oversight committee to evaluate security and privacy issues.

Supporters of Matrix, including the Florida officials who have worked with it
from the beginning, say that it merely gives law enforcement agencies quicker
access to data that they already have the legal authority to see. ''It's an
extremely valuable tool,'' said Mark Zadra, the chief of investigations for the
Florida Department of Law Enforcement.

States provide information like arrests and convictions, Social Security
numbers, driver's license data and birth and marriage records. Seisint, the
company that created Matrix, then adds what the company has described as ''in
excess of 7 billion public records from thousands of locations on U.S.
individuals and businesses, including information about neighbors, relatives and
associates.''

Matrix officials have declined to describe all the data that goes into the
system, but they insist that nothing goes into Matrix that police would need a
subpoena or other judicial order to obtain, like full credit reports or library
lending records.

Officials in Florida point to success stories like a hit-and-run accident
involving a white, 2000-2002 Chevrolet Avalanche that left the scene. The system
was able to provide a list of all the vehicles fitting that description within a
10-mile radius of the accident. Investigators were able to find the Chevrolet,
according to Florida officials.

But opponents of the program say the ability of computer networks to combine and
sift mountains of data greatly amplifies police surveillance power, putting
innocent people at greater risk of being entangled in data dragnets. The problem
is compounded, they say, in a world where many aspects of daily life leave
online traces.

In a recent report on the program, the A.C.L.U. called Matrix ''a body blow to
the core American principle that the government will leave people alone unless
it has good reason to suspect them of wrongdoing.''

The same critics have called Matrix a state-run version of Total Information
Awareness, a program that was being developed in the Pentagon to search an even
broader array of databases for patterns of terrorist activity. Congress froze
financing for that program last year in response to a public outcry over the
privacy implications of the system.

Opponents of the Pentagon program regarded the development of Matrix as a sign
that the bubble was simply moving under the wallpaper: with the federal program
blocked, some surveillance functions were being shifted to the states. And as
Matrix started to draw attention, member states began to drop out.

''When these programs get exposed to the light of day, they get shut down,''
said Barry Steinhardt, director of the technology and liberty program at the
A.C.L.U.

Mr. Steinhardt said that his organization was worried that other, similar
programs might be operating more stealthily. ''While we're gratified by the
demise of T.I.A. and the continuing collapse of Matrix, there's a much larger
phenomenon of widespread surveillance that still occurs out there,'' he said.
''What we're not sure about is what's still operating underground.''

In leaving the program, New York said the network's shrinking size was a
deciding factor. A March 9 letter from Steven F. Cumoletti, the assistant deputy
superintendent of the New York State Police, to Commissioner Guy Tunnell of the
Florida Department of Law Enforcement and chairman of the Matrix executive
committee, said, ''Unfortunately, instead of increasing the number of
participating states over time to improve the potential benefits of the pilot,
to date nearly two-thirds of the initial states have opted out of the project.''

James W. McMahon, director of the New York State Office of Public Security, said
in an interview that the program ''seemed to be going backwards instead of going
forward.'' New York, he said, had never provided information on its own citizens
to the program.

Matrix has been especially controversial because its technology was developed by
Seisint, a private company in Florida whose founder, Hank Asher, was involved in
the 1980's with a group of cocaine smugglers, according to court records. He was
not charged, and became an informant. Mr. Asher resigned from the company last
year.

Most of the states have cited tight budgets in their withdrawal from the
program. ''Money is always an issue, regardless of who you deal with, even in
the most noble of causes,'' said Clay Jester, the Matrix coordinator for the
Institute for Intergovernmental Research, the nonprofit organization that
administers the program.

''If you see there's a significant investment you're going to have to make down
the road, you may choose not to see the potential benefits,'' he said. ''When it
comes down to new cars or this great new database application, it's easier to
show somebody a car.''

But Liz Krueger, a New York state senator from Manhattan, who opposed Matrix,
said that the real issue was privacy. ''Even in a time of increased security, we
have to be perhaps even more vigilant to make sure that fundamental rights to
privacy are protected,'' said Ms. Krueger, a Democrat. ''The more people knew
about it and thought about it, the more dangerous they thought this exercise
was.''

Mr. Zadra, the Florida investigator, said that the program was intended for
fighting crime, not surveillance, and that its creators had included privacy
safeguards. ''We've gone overboard to put in security, and put in privacy
controls,'' he said. He acknowledged that the system could be abused by some law
enforcement officers, but said that every profession had bad actors. Matrix, he
said, was too valuable to abandon because of such concerns.

He said that the program was ''not quite as effective'' if states do not provide
their data, but said that there was enough information to be gleaned from other
publicly available databases to make the powerful search capabilities of Matrix
valuable. He said, for example, that even if a state refused to provide driver's
license information to Matrix, that information is often available from private
databases.

''If there was no other state data but Florida's, we would want to be continuing
the project with no other data but Florida's,'' he said.

Mr. Zadra said proponents of the program were ''moving forward, and meeting with
other states that have expressed interest.'' But he acknowledged that no
announcements of new states coming into the program were imminent.

Mr. McMahon, the New York law enforcement official, said the importance of a
program like Matrix could best be shown in the case of a child's kidnapping,
when ''you've got minutes instead of hours'' to prevent a tragedy.

''You might be able to save somebody's life in producing the information you
need,'' he suggested, as in, for instance, quickly finding the names of
convicted sex offenders who own a specific model of car.

Mr. Zadra also used kidnapping as an example of database use, citing the
possibility of a law enforcement official's having to tell the parents of a
kidnapped child that '''we did have a tool, but we can't use that tool any more,
and I can't find your daughter.' How sad would that be?''

Others can worry about hypothetical threats to privacy, he said. ''Meanwhile,
I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to solve crimes with the best technology
available.''

Ultimately, he said, ''It really comes down to trust. Do you trust law
enforcement to do what is right?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barry Steinhardt of the A.C.L.U., an opponent of the Matrix
program. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. C5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERNET PRIVACY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (74%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(72%) Terrorism; Computers and the Internet; Privacy; Surveillance of Citizens
by Government; Crime and Criminals; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (82%); ELECTRONIC FRONTIER
FOUNDATION (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (57%) Matrix (Multistate Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange); Seisint;
American Civil Liberties Union; Electronic Privacy Information Center;
Electronic Frontier Foundation

PERSON: John Schwartz

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (97%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Florida; New York State; Wisconsin

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1002 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Liberia: Ex-President Sues Tribunal

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 86 words


A Liberian criminal court took up a lawsuit brought by former President Charles
Taylor against the United Nations-based war crimes tribunal in Sierra Leone for
what he alleged was an illegal search of his former residences. Mr. Taylor was
indicted by the Sierra Leone tribunal in March 2003 on 17 counts of crimes
against humanity for his suspected role in arming and training rebels in a
decade-long conflict in Sierra Leone that left as many as 200,000 dead. He has
been in exile in Nigeria since August.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INDICTMENTS
(88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (95%); LIBERIA (94%); AFRICA (90%); NIGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1004 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

President, Marking Anniversary of War, Urges World to Unite to Combat Terrorism

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
DIPLOMACY

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


President Bush sought to rally support on Friday for what he called an
inescapable battle with terrorism, telling representatives of 83 nations that
they can afford no concession, no sign of weakness and no division.

On the first anniversary of the start of the war in Iraq -- a conflict that his
critics say weakened the alliances the United States now needs more than ever --
Mr. Bush said the quarrels over how to handle Saddam Hussein should be put in
the past. The world might better focus its efforts on bringing peace and
democracy to the Middle East and choking off the forces that breed fanaticism,
he said.

''There is no neutral ground -- no neutral ground -- in the fight between
civilization and terror, because there is no neutral ground between good and
evil, freedom and slavery and life and death,'' Mr. Bush said.

Among those attending were the ambassadors from France and Germany, which
opposed the invasion of Iraq, and from Spain, which suffered a terrorist bombing
last week.

Spanish voters subsequently elected a new government that said it would withdraw
its 1,300 troops from Iraq unless the mission there was put under United Nations
auspices, raising alarms in political circles here and in Europe.

But Mr. Bush was also addressing a domestic audience, as his re-election
campaign seeks to paint his Democratic rival, Senator John Kerry, as weak on
defense.

''The war on terror is not a figure of speech,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It is an
inescapable calling of our generation. The terrorists are offended not merely by
our policies -- they are offended by our existence as free nations. No
concession will appease their hatred. No accommodation will satisfy their
endless demands.''

A year after giving the go-ahead for the invasion of Iraq, Mr. Bush made only a
fleeting reference to the primary justification he had used -- Mr. Hussein's
supposed possession of chemical and biological weapons and his efforts to
acquire a nuclear bomb. No banned weapons have been found in Iraq since the war.

Mr. Bush instead emphasized on Friday that success in stabilizing Iraq and
nursing it toward democracy was an integral part of the broader effort to defeat
militant Islam. He also sought to head off any further defections from the
coalition he assembled to provide military, humanitarian and financial support
there.

''Whatever their past views, every nation now has an interest in a free,
successful, stable Iraq,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And the terrorists understand their
own interest in the fate of that country. For them, the connection between
Iraq's future and the course of the war on terror is very clear: They understand
that a free Iraq will be a devastating setback to their ambitions of tyranny
over the Middle East.''

To try to withdraw from the battle, in Iraq or anywhere else, Mr. Bush
suggested, would be futile and counterproductive.

''Any sign of weakness or retreat simply validates terrorist violence, and
invites more violence for all nations,'' he said. ''The only certain way to
protect our people is by early, united and decisive action.''

The speech was delivered in somber tones, a sharp contrast to the campaign-style
events this year in which Mr. Bush has addressed the war and national security.
At this gathering of diplomats, even his most forceful lines were met with
silence. Applause came only after he completed the address.

The subdued atmosphere reflected lingering diplomatic and political tensions and
the backdrop of continued killing in Iraq. The Pentagon has identified 571
American service members who have died since the start of the war, and bombings
and other attacks by insurgents have claimed a mounting toll of Iraqis and
military personnel and civilians from other nations.

Before delivering the speech, Mr. Bush spoke by telephone to President Alexander
Kwasniewski of Poland and President Jacques Chirac of France.

Mr. Kwasniewski was quoted on Thursday as saying he had been ''misled'' over the
presence of banned weapons in Iraq. He assured Mr. Bush that Poland would
maintain its military presence in Iraq as long as necessary to achieve
stability, said Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman. Mr. McClellan also
pointed to a subsequent statement from the Polish government saying Mr.
Kwasniewski had been referring to Mr. Hussein when he said the world had been
misled over Iraq's banned weapons.

Mr. Bush told Mr. Chirac that he would visit France on June 6 to commemorate the
60th anniversary of D-Day, Mr. McClellan said.

The invasion of Iraq and its implications for the broader effort to combat
terrorism remain one of the main points of division between Mr. Bush and Senator
Kerry, whom the president did not mention in his speech.

Mr. Kerry issued a statement summarizing his differences on the issue with Mr.
Bush. He said the president had not done enough to build an international
coalition, had failed to plan for what would happen after the combat ended,
misled the American people about the presence of banned weapons and refused to
make clear how expensive the war and its aftermath would be.

From the beginning, Mr. Kerry said, ''this president didn't tell the truth about
the war.''

In a conference call with reporters after Mr. Bush's speech, Samuel R. Berger,
who was President Bill Clinton's national security adviser and is advising Mr.
Kerry on foreign policy, said the senator ''has made it absolutely clear that we
cannot fail'' in stabilizing Iraq because ''the stakes are simply too high.''

But he added that the positive development of removing Mr. Hussein from power
had ''come at a very high price'' and that the world was not necessarily safer.

''It is true that the war on terrorism and the war in Iraq have converged as the
external and internal forces seek to drive us out, and they can't be permitted
to do that,'' Mr. Berger said. ''But it's increasingly clear that how we
conducted the war in Iraq -- hurried, alone and not prepared for the day after
-- made the terrorism problem more difficult.''

After the speech, Mr. Bush went to Walter Reed Army Medical Center to visit
troops wounded in Iraq and Afghanistan. He saw about 20 soldiers, Mr. McClellan
said, and awarded eight Purple Hearts.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The president and Laura Bush arriving yesterday at the East Room
of the White House, where Mr. Bush addressed foreign diplomats. (Photo by Doug
Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); ANNIVERSARIES (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); ELECTIONS (79%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (74%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); SLAVERY (70%); ARMED FORCES (66%); ILLEGAL
WEAPONS (61%); RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (86%); JOHN KERRY (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (59%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); SPAIN (79%);
GERMANY (79%); EUROPE (79%); FRANCE (75%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1008 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

One Year in Iraq: A War That Divides America

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 170 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Bush Says Thank You in Visit to the Troops'' (news article, March 19):

Our struggle in Afghanistan was the first battle in the war on terrorism. Iraq
is the second because the combatants there are terrorists in every sense of the
word, and anyone who may think otherwise should come to grips with the fact that
Saddam Hussein is not coming back. It's as simple as that.

The United States was attacked, it took the initiative, and it made the
sacrifice. Now it's up to the United Nations to assume responsibility in
stabilizing Iraq with a government in which basic human rights will be
guaranteed and respected. The United States should then reduce its presence
because there are more battles to be fought in the war on terrorism.

We must take the initiative wherever and whenever we can, and the time and place
may not always be fashionable. But in the end it's results that will count,
because winning or losing will determine the future of civilization.

FRED BILELLO
Scottsdale, Ariz., March 19, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1010 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Military Describes Findings at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba, March 19


Military officials say prisoners at the detention center here have provided a
stream of intelligence to interrogators during the past two years, including
detailed information about Al Qaeda's recruitment of Muslim men in Europe.

Military and intelligence officials also said those detainees who were
cooperative had provided information about Al Qaeda's chemical and biological
weapons efforts, had spoken about the training of suicide bombers, and had
described Al Qaeda's use of charities to raise money for its aims.

''We have been able as a result of information gained here to take operational
actions, even military campaigns,'' said Steve Rodriguez, a veteran intelligence
officer who oversees the interrogation teams. ''There are instances of learning
about active cells, and we have taken action to see that the cell was broken,''
he said, in one of a series of interviews given to a reporter on an arranged
tour.

Another American official said analysts had been able to understand a kind of
network in Europe that selected young Muslims, who were later drawn into Al
Qaeda by imams and Islamic cultural centers and eventually sent to Afghanistan.
He said this information has been sent on in recent months to European
counterparts.

The sweeping assertions about the value of the detention center at Guantanamo
respond to criticism of the operation, in the United States and abroad. Released
detainees have also made allegations of mistreatment.

Apparently in an effort to counter the criticism, officials offered to talk in
far greater detail than before about their interrogation techniques and what
they say are important intelligence harvests from the detainees.

The officials denied the specific allegations of mistreatment made by prisoners
recently returned to Britain whose accounts appeared in British newspapers and
from Afghans who spoke to The New York Times in Kabul. Their accounts detail
enforced privation, petty cruelty, beatings and planned humiliations.

There is no way so far to verify the situation of the detainees as described by
the American officials, nor the charges of mistreatment.

The first military tribunals for some prisoners at Guantanamo may begin this
summer, an event that is expected to draw new criticism. Many groups have
challenged the legal basis the United States has cited to justify the
detentions.

Speaking of the intelligence gleaned, Mr. Rodriguez contended that it was still
useful, despite the fact that some of the detainees had been at Guantanamo for
nearly two years. ''I thought that when I first came here, there would be little
to gain,'' he said. ''But when they talk about what happens in certain
operational theaters, the locations of certain pathways, that information
doesn't perish.''

He said a large number of the 610 detainees had not been cooperative with
interrogators. At least 50, he said, were ''ardent jihadists and have no qualms
about telling you that if they got out, they would go and kill more Americans.''

Mr. Rodriguez's emphasis on the dozens of the most hard-core detainees raises a
significant question about Guantanamo: Does the prison camp also house many
innocents who were swept up in the chaotic aftermath of the Afghanistan war?

Human rights groups and relatives of those detained have said the United States
has committed a gross injustice by imprisoning many people who were in
Afghanistan or Pakistan for reasons other than joining the Taliban or fighting
for Al Qaeda. More than 100 prisoners from Guantanamo have been released so far.

Three former British prisoners who are friends from the city of Tipton said in
interviews published last week in The Sunday Observer that they were arrested
after they went to the region to arrange a marriage for one of the men. One of
the others was to serve as best man. They spoke of beatings and abuse by
American soldiers, charging that the Americans had stood on their kneeling legs
and had held guns to their heads during questioning at Guantanamo.

Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, the departing commander of the Joint Task Force,
which runs the prison camp at Guantanamo, categorically denied the allegations.

He said he was confident that all the men there had been properly screened and
fit the definition of an enemy combatant. ''These people have a number of cover
stories,'' he said. ''I can say with certainty that the British detainees were
here for an appropriate reason.''

Mr. Rodriguez said, ''If I were to believe the stories they tell me at first,
then 90 percent of them are innocent rug merchants.''

The released detainees said some prisoners had been treated brutally by soldiers
from the Immediate Reaction Force, a group of seven members called to prison
cells when an inmates refused to obey an order. One carries a plexiglass shield,
and the rest have elbow and knee pads.

Such actions, officials said, occur three times a week on average and are always
videotaped.

General Miller acknowledged a handful of occasions when the handling was judged
to have been too rough, but said no one was left seriously injured. He said one
military policeman had been court-martialed for overreacting when an inmate
threw excrement on him. The soldier was acquitted.

The detention system at Guantanamo is intended to make the prisoners as
compliant as possible. The detainees are schooled in a system of rewards and
penalties calibrated to their behavior, including potential access to books and
puzzles or being deprived of towels and a toothbrush.

For instance, most prisoners are not allowed to exercise in their 6-by-8-foot
cells, but get twice-weekly 20-minute periods for exercising and showering. But
if the camp authorities decide that detainees are becoming cooperative, they are
given more time out of their cells.

The International Committee of the Red Cross, the only outside group that visits
the detainees, has not publicly complained about physical mistreatment. But it
has said the prolonged detention without any certainty for the inmates about
their future is inhumane and psychologically debilitating.

The detainees may be summoned for questioning at any time of day or night for as
many as two daily sessions of up to five hours.

One senior intelligence officer, a reservist who is a homicide detective in
civilian life, described using hamburgers from the base's McDonald's and games
of chess to gain intimacy with a detainee he said had been Al Qaeda's chief
explosives instructor.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In a Guantanamo interrogation room, upper left, the ring on the
floor is for attaching shackles worn by detainees during questioning. At center
left, the room where the military tribunals for some detainees will be conducted
and a closed-circuit television that will show the proceedings as they occur.
Above, a soldier spoke with a detainee through one of the levels of wire fencing
strung throughout the camp. At left, a cell with bedding, towels, an orange
jumpsuit, a chess board and a Koran hanging from a strap
the arrow points toward Mecca.
 Detainees who cooperate with interrogators can wear traditional clothes rather
than prison uniforms and have more freedom and better housing. (Photographs by
ANGEL FRANCO/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (78%); RELIGION (77%); FUNDRAISING (76%); BIOLOGY (76%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (74%); MILITARY COURTS (74%); CHARITIES (73%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); EUROPE (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1011 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Creeping Democracy

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE.

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


''Democratic creep'' is not a derogation of a liberal candidate. On the
contrary, it is the process -- now well under way -- by which free nations will
win the world war on terror.

In Afghanistan, once a hotbed of Qaeda training and Taliban tyranny, nobody can
deny we helped bring forth the beginnings of democratic government. Afghans,
including newly liberated women, are helping track down fugitive killers.

In Iraq, we mourn our losses this past year, which now approach 2 percent of
U.S. casualties in the Korean conflict. Many Iraqis died, too, but literally
tens of thousands are alive today because Saddam did not have the power to
torture and execute them -- as mass graves tell us he did every year of his
savage misrule.

Nobody can be certain that Iraq will remain whole and free after we turn over
sovereignty on June 30. But prospects look far better than predicted by
defeatists who claimed a year ago that political freedom had no chance of taking
root in hostile Arab soil.

Free electricity keeps TV sets and air-conditioners humming, oil is flowing,
schools and businesses have come to life. Unemployment, now over 30 percent,
will surely drop as the $18 billion appropriated by the U.S. Congress -- part of
the $87 billion for Iraq and Afghanistan -- begins to flow heavily next month
into reconstruction by Iraqi workers. (The W.P.A. lives.)

We are training a civilian defense corps, twice the size of a joint
Shiite-Sunni-Kurdish army, to take over free Iraq's battle against the
Ansar-Qaeda terrorists and Baathist diehards. With the transfer of political
power to a transitional Iraqi government, public fury at the mortar and rocket
attacks on ''soft target'' civilians will be a nationalizing, not a
destabilizing, force -- directed not at occupiers but against the terrorist
invaders.

Next year, a trio of local politicians will emerge to lead the country. ''Three
John Edwardses are out there awaiting their chance,'' says one observer.

Optimistic? In the grand design to uproot the causes of the rise of radical
Islamic terrorism, defeat is no option. We have to believe in the popular
success of a combination of democracy and prosperity. In this generation, the
world has seen the power of the human desire for freedom.

From Kuwait to Qatar, the coalition's overthrow of Saddam has been a political
tonic. Libya's dictator is making weaponry concessions lest his economy be
wrecked and he be ousted. Repressive Iran is ripening for revolution. Egypt's
boss and Saudi Arabia's princes are nervous because an arc of democracy bids
fair to extend from Turkey through Iraq to Israel, with literate, enterprising
populations blazing a path to liberating prosperity in the greater Middle East.

Syria's sullen Bashar al-Assad is feeling the heat. He benefited most from
Saddam's corruption, probably provided a hiding place for Iraqi weapons and a
route of entry into Iraq for Qaeda killers. His troops illegally occupy Lebanon;
he supports Hezbollah and Hamas terrorists in rocket attacks and suicide
bombings. His so-called intelligence sharing has been singularly unproductive.

A million and a half Kurds live in Syria, despised by the rulers in Damascus.
After Syrian Kurds saw the blessings of freedom flow to their ethnic comrades in
Iraq, some were emboldened to respond to Arab taunting at a soccer game.
Bashar's goons, remembering his father's bloody ''Hamas rules,'' shot a score of
the unarmed protesters as a warning to the quarter-million Kurds the dictator
keeps stateless.

Congress, more hawkish than President Bush on this state sponsor of terror,
passed the Syria Accountability Act four months ago with large majorities; this
week, he is expected to put some of its authorized economic squeeze on Bashar.
He should consider that Step One.

This unified American message -- substantial largess for free Iraq contrasted
with the start of serious sanctions for despotic Syria -- will not be lost on
the Arab League meeting in Tunisia.

Success of democracy in Iraq is the key to democratic reform throughout the
greater Middle East. When that reform dawns in Ramallah, there can be an
independent, contiguous Palestine. When creeping democracy gradually brings a
better life to people of the region, the basis for hatred and terror will erode
and the suicide bomber will pass from the scene.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); POLITICS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
TALIBAN (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); NATIONALIZATION (76%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); KOREAN WAR (72%); RELIGION (64%) Terrorism; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Politics and
Government

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (51%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (51%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (51%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (55%) William Safire

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
LIBYA (79%); TURKEY (79%); QATAR (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); EGYPT
(79%); KUWAIT (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Middle East

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1012 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 23, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The 1,776-Foot-Tall Target

BYLINE: By Daniel Benjamin.

Daniel Benjamin, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies, is the co-author of ''The Age of Sacred Terror.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Now that jihadists have carried out an attack that shook a Western European
democracy, it should be clear that these terrorists still think big and possess
a ghastly ingenuity, even after two and a half years of progress in dismantling
Al Qaeda and its affiliates. The carnage in Madrid -- and the public hearings
this week on the 9/11 attacks -- ought to remind us of the need to limit our own
vulnerabilities. Yet on the site of America's greatest terrorist tragedy, where
no reminder should be necessary, such thinking is virtually nonexistent.

The 1,776-foot-tall Freedom Tower, designed to be the world's tallest and to
stand where the World Trade Center did, will become a top target for Islamic
terrorists as soon as it is occupied. In the three months since the building's
design was unveiled, we have experienced not only the Madrid attacks but also,
for nearly three weeks in December and January, a national alert level of
orange, or high risk, during which intelligence and law enforcement agencies
labored to prevent another terrorist attack involving aircraft. Well after the
level was reduced to yellow, or elevated, flights from Europe to the United
States continued to be canceled.

The architects and engineers of Freedom Tower are working to devise ways to
increase the security of the building's future occupants, pondering additional
stairwells for escape, new supports that would prevent structural failure and
better flame retardants. ''Of high-rise buildings, I believe this is one of the
safest,'' said David Childs, one of its principal architects.

But when one compares these engineering revisions to the continued proof of
radical Islamists' determination to carry out high-casualty attacks, it's hard
not to reach the conclusion that the plans for ground zero are profoundly
irresponsible.

Why would terrorists choose to attack the same place again? Actually, they have
left us a large body of evidence about how much those blocks in Lower Manhattan
mean to them. When radical Islamists first began to plot violence against
America, the World Trade Center was central to their thinking. No later than
1990, El Sayyid Nosair -- the assassin of the radical Jewish leader Meir Kahane
-- had written down a call for destroying ''the structure of civilized pillars
such as their touristic infrastructure which they are proud of and their high
world buildings which they are proud of.'' Federal prosecutors have asserted
that this was a reference to the World Trade Center, and that his interest in
the site was likely stirred by the sermons of Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind sheik
who has long been one of the radicals' most revered clerics.

Mr. Nosair and Mr. Abdel Rahman were members of the jihadist set in Brooklyn and
New Jersey that Ramzi Yousef -- the architect of the 1993 bombing of the trade
center -- joined when he arrived in the United States. Mr. Yousef would later
admit to the F.B.I. that he had hoped to topple one tower into the other and
kill 250,000 people. His attack killed only six and was viewed by fellow
radicals as a failure.

The determination to redress that failure prompted Osama bin Laden and his
followers to work for years on the plan that culminated in 9/11. The importance
of the towers was clear in Mr. bin Laden's first video message after the attack:
''Those awesome symbolic towers that speak of liberty, human rights and humanity
have been destroyed. They have gone up in smoke.''

An even taller structure at ground zero, with its message of heroic resolve,
will be an even more powerful symbol of American might and values -- and thus
irresistible for terrorists. Last month Robert Mueller, director of the F.B.I.,
testified before Congress that ''there are strong indications that Al Qaeda will
revisit missed targets until they succeed.'' Mr. Mueller was suggesting that the
White House and Capitol now fall in the category of such targets. But wouldn't
Freedom Tower, with vastly more inhabitants and the ghosts of 9/11 hovering over
it, be at least as attractive?

One can appreciate New Yorkers' determination to show their spirit. But does it
make sense to erect such a symbol if we are not sure we can defend it? Recent
intelligence has confirmed that Al Qaeda continues to want to use airplanes as
weapons. Such a strategy will remain attractive for terrorists because of the
destructive force an airplane can pack. It is difficult to imagine that any
engineering fixes short of putting the building inside a vast cage can truly
protect it from the impact of a wide-body jet filled with fuel.

The total amount of energy released by the two 767's that struck the Twin Towers
equaled that of a tactical nuclear weapon -- almost a quarter of a kiloton. In
2006, two years before Freedom Tower is scheduled to open, a new generation of
aircraft, led by the Airbus A380, will begin entering service in the world's
airlines. The A380 will carry almost 82,000 gallons of fuel, more than three
times as much as a 767. One hardly needs to do the math.

Although there have been great strides in improving security in commercial
aviation, perfect safety is unattainable. Intelligence gathering has also
improved, but no one can promise that all future conspiracies will be discovered
and disrupted. Will Air Force fighters constantly patrol, at astronomical cost,
the approaches to the Freedom Tower? If they do, are we certain that the
government will be prepared to shoot down a suspicious plane on a second's
notice?

Many will consider an objection to the Freedom Tower on safety grounds to be bad
manners. After all, the resolve to overcome disaster is in our bones and in our
history. Some will argue that building a more modest structure will not lower
the likelihood of attack against America, which is true but beside the point.
Others will say that to scrap Freedom Tower is to hand terrorists a victory.

This ignores the difference between heroic resolve and foolishness. Dangling an
iconic and indefensible target in front of terrorists is inconsistent with a
strategy of reducing our vulnerabilities wherever possible. It could also lead
to terrorists scoring an enormous victory that would further energize their
cause. The United States has acted to protect vulnerable embassies and
consulates abroad, even though that has often meant putting more distance
between our diplomats and the countries they serve in. Last November, our
consulate in downtown Istanbul, rather than Britain's, might have been bombed
had we not moved it to a secure site outside town. The same kind of calculations
-- not reflexive bravado -- ought to govern planning for ground zero.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Nancy Stahl)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(88%); ENGINEERING (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); RELIGION (74%); BOMBINGS (73%); CONSTRUCTION (73%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (71%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (67%); AIRLINES (66%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (50%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; Area Planning
and Renewal; Freedom Tower (NYC)  ; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%) Center for Strategic and International Studies; Al
Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Daniel Benjamin

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA
(75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (92%); SPAIN (90%); WESTERN EUROPE (73%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 24, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Middle East: Libya: U.S. Envoy Meets Qaddafi

BYLINE: By Steven R. Weisman (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 154 words


William J. Burns, an assistant secretary of state, arrived and met for three
hours with President Muammar el-Qaddafi to discuss dismantling its chemical,
biological and weapons programs, the State Department announced. It was the
highest-level American diplomatic contact with Libya in 24 years. The Bush
administration has said that if Libya complies with its pledge to dismantle its
weapons, improves human rights and takes other steps to curb terrorism, the
United States is prepared over time to lift sanctions and remove Libya from the
state-sponsored terrorism list. The process ''is based on the very significant
and dramatic steps that Libya has taken'' so far, said Richard A. Boucher, the
State Department spokesman. ''As we proceed on that basis, we do believe we can
and should take up the other issues that we have to discuss with the Libyans.
Assistant Secretary Burns is doing that.''   Steven R. Weisman (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (88%); US PRESIDENTS
(88%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (85%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); TERRORISM (69%) United
States International Relations; Atomic Weapons; Biological and Chemical Warfare

PERSON: William J (Asst Sec) Burns; Steven R Weisman; Muammar El- (Col) Qaddafi

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); LIBYA (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Libya

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1017 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 24, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ethnic Cleansing, Again

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE SUDAN-CHAD BORDER


The most vicious ethnic cleansing you've never heard of is unfolding here in the
southeastern fringes of the Sahara Desert. It's a campaign of murder, rape and
pillage by Sudan's Arab rulers that has forced 700,000 black African Sudanese to
flee their villages.

The desert is strewn with the carcasses of cattle and goats, as well as fresh
refugee graves that are covered with brush so wild animals will not dig them up.
Refugees crowd around overused wells, which now run dry, and they mourn loved
ones whose bodies they cannot recover.

Western and African countries need to intervene urgently. Sudan's leaders should
not be able to get away with mass murder just because they are shrewd enough to
choose victims who inhabit a poor region without airports, electricity or paved
roads.

The culprit is the Sudanese government, one of the world's nastiest. Its Arab
leaders have been fighting a civil war for more than 20 years against its
rebellious black African south. Lately it has armed lighter-skinned Arab
raiders, the Janjaweed, who are killing or driving out blacks in the Darfur
region near Chad.

''They came at 4 a.m. on horseback, on camels, in vehicles, with two helicopters
overhead,'' recalled Idris Abu Moussa, a 26-year-old Sudanese farmer. ''They
killed 50 people in my village. My father, grandmother, uncle and two brothers
were all killed.''

''They don't want any blacks left,'' he added.

Most refugees have stories like that. ''They took the cattle and horses, killed
the men, raped the women, and then they burned the village,'' said Abubakr Ahmed
Abdallah, a 60-year-old refugee who escaped to Toukoultoukouli in Chad.

''They want to exterminate us blacks,'' said Halime Ali Souf. Her husband was
killed, and she fled into Chad with her infant.

Once refugees like Ms. Halime have fled into Chad, their troubles are not over.
The only source of water for many border villages is the riverbed, or wadi,
marking the boundary between the two countries, and the Janjaweed regularly
shoot men who go there to get water or gather wood.

Zakaria Ibrahim was shot dead a few days ago. ''He went to get sticks to build a
hut,'' said his haggard widow, Hawai Abdulyaya, who is left with five children.

The Janjaweed regularly invade Chad to seize cattle and attack Sudanese
refugees. In addition, the Sudanese Army has dropped bombs on Chadian villages
like Tine and Besa.

These skirmishes are taking place in a sparsely populated land of sand, shrubs
and occasional oases. The only roads are dirt tracks barely navigable by
four-wheel-drive vehicles -- except when the rainy season makes the area
completely impassible. (Join me for a multimedia tour of Africa at
www.nytimes.com/kristof.)

The U.N.'s Sudan coordinator, Mukesh Kapila, described the situation in a BBC
interview on Friday as similar in character, if not scale, to the Rwanda
genocide of 1994. ''This is ethnic cleansing,'' he said. ''This is the world's
greatest humanitarian crisis, and I don't know why the world isn't doing more
about it.''

Countless thousands of black Sudanese have been murdered, and 600,000 victims of
this ethnic cleansing have fled to other parts of Sudan and are suffering from
malnutrition and disease. The 110,000 who have fled into Chad are better off
because of the magnificent response of the Chadian peasants. Chadians are
desperately poor themselves, but they share what little food and water is
available with the Sudanese refugees.

''If we have food or water, we'll share it with them,'' said a Chadian peasant,
Adam Isak Abubakr. ''We can't leave them like this.''

Let's hope that we Americans will show the same gumption and compassion. We
should call Sudan before the U.N. Security Council and the world community and
insist that it stop these pogroms. To his credit, President Bush has already led
the drive for peace in Sudan, doing far more to achieve a peace than all his
predecessors put together. Now he should show the same resolve in confronting
this latest menace.

In the 21st century, no government should be allowed to carry out ethnic
cleansing, driving 700,000 people from their homes. If we turn away simply
because the victims are African tribespeople who have the misfortune to speak no
English, have no phones and live in one of the most remote parts of the globe,
then shame on us.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MAMMALS (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); DESERTS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (77%); SEX OFFENSES (77%);
SHOOTINGS (77%); CIVIL WAR (72%); ANIMALS (71%); HELICOPTERS (68%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (67%) Murders and Attempted Murders; Sex Crimes

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: SAHARA DESERT (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (93%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1021 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

An African Tragedy

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 110 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Ethnic Cleansing, Again,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, March 24): At
the 10th anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, the international community,
including the United States, is reflecting on what more we could have done to
prevent or stop that atrocity.

One lesson that should be drawn is that if it is true that the current Sudan
resembles 1994 Rwanda, then the United States government should join with others
to initiate a humanitarian intervention, assist victims and hold perpetrators
accountable.

If not, our demands for and promises of ''never again!'' will have failed yet
again.

ZACHARY D. KAUFMAN
Oxford, England, March 24, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); ANNIVERSARIES (85%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

CITY: OXFORD, ENGLAND (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (90%); RWANDA (90%); UNITED STATES (90%); ENGLAND (50%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1022 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Will We Say 'Never Again' Yet Again?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE CHAD-SUDAN BORDER


For decades, whenever the topic of genocide has come up, the refrain has been,
''Never again.''

Yet right now, the government of Sudan is engaging in genocide against three
large African tribes in its Darfur region here. Some 1,000 people are being
killed a week, tribeswomen are being systematically raped, 700,000 people have
been driven from their homes, and Sudan's Army is even bombing the survivors.

And the world yawns.

So what do we tell refugees like Muhammad Yakob Hussein, who lives in the open
desert here because his home was burned and his family members killed in Sudan?
He now risks being shot whenever he goes to a well to fetch water. Do we advise
such refugees that ''never again'' meant nothing more than that a Fuhrer named
Hitler will never again construct death camps in Germany?

Interviews with refugees like Mr. Hussein -- as well as with aid workers and
U.N. officials -- leave no doubt that attacks in Darfur are not simply random
atrocities. Rather, as a senior U.N. official, Mukesh Kapila, put it, ''It is an
organized attempt to do away with a group of people.''

''All I have left is this jalabiya,'' or cloak, said Mr. Hussein, who claimed to
be 70 but looked younger (ages here tend to be vague aspirations, and they
usually emerge in multiples of 10). Mr. Hussein said he'd fled three days
earlier after an attack in which his three brothers were killed and all his
livestock stolen: ''Everything is lost. They burned everything.''

Another man, Khamis Muhammad Issa, a strapping 21-year-old, was left with
something more than his clothes -- a bullet in the back. He showed me the bulge
of the bullet under the skin. The bullet wiggled under my touch.

''They came in the night and burned my village,'' he said. ''I was running away
and they fired. I fell, and they thought I was dead.''

In my last column, I called these actions ''ethnic cleansing.'' But let's be
blunt: Sudan's behavior also easily meets the definition of genocide in Article
2 of the 1948 convention against genocide. That convention not only authorizes
but also obligates the nations ratifying it -- including the U.S. -- to stand up
to genocide.

The killings are being orchestrated by the Arab-dominated Sudanese government,
partly through the Janjaweed militia, made up of Arab raiders armed by the
government. The victims are non-Arabs: blacks in the Zaghawa, Massaliet and Fur
tribes. ''The Arabs want to get rid of anyone with black skin,'' Youssef Yakob
Abdullah said. In the area of Darfur that he fled, ''there are no blacks left,''
he said.

In Darfur, the fighting is not over religion, for the victims as well as the
killers are Muslims. It is more ethnic and racial, reflecting some of the
ancient tension between herdsmen (the Arabs in Darfur) and farmers (the black
Africans, although they herd as well). The Arabs and non-Arabs compete for water
and forage, made scarce by environmental degradation and the spread of the
desert.

In her superb book on the history of genocide, ''A Problem from Hell,'' Samantha
Power focuses on the astonishing fact that U.S. leaders always denounce
massacres in the abstract or after they are over -- but, until Kosovo, never
intervened in the 20th century to stop genocide and ''rarely even made a point
of condemning it as it occurred.'' The U.S. excuses now are the same ones we
used when Armenians were killed in 1915 and Bosnians and Rwandans died in the
1990's: the bloodshed is in a remote area; we have other priorities; standing up
for the victims may compromise other foreign policy interests.

I'm not arguing that we should invade Sudan. But one of the lessons of history
is that very modest efforts can save large numbers of lives. Nothing is so
effective in curbing ethnic cleansing as calling attention to it.

President Bush could mention Darfur or meet a refugee. The deputy secretary of
state could visit the border areas here in Chad. We could raise the issue before
the U.N. And the onus is not just on the U.S.: it's shameful that African and
Muslim countries don't offer at least a whisper of protest at the slaughter of
fellow Africans and Muslims.

Are the world's pledges of ''never again'' really going to ring hollow one more
time?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SHOOTINGS
(77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); BOMBINGS (72%); DESERTS (55%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); CHAD (79%); GERMANY (56%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1027 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Police Arrest 8 Suspected of Plotting Terrorist Attack

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 30


Hundreds of British police officers swept through London and parts of
southeastern England on Tuesday arresting eight men suspected of preparing a
terrorist attack. Officers also seized 1,000 pounds of ammonium nitrate
fertilizer, which can be used to make explosives, from a commercial storage
locker near central London, the police said.

At a news conference, Peter Clarke, chief of the antiterrorist branch of the
London police and national antiterrorism coordinator, said the eight had been
arrested ''on suspicion of being concerned in the commission, preparation or
instigation of acts of terrorism.''

But a number of critical questions remained unanswered: exactly what the men
might have been planning, how they were connected to one another and to the
storage locker, and whether they were acting alone or in concert with some
terrorist group.

The eldest among them was 32, Mr. Clarke said, and the seven others were between
17 and 22. The BBC quoted an unidentified police official as saying that all
were British citizens of Pakistani origin and that some had been under
surveillance for months.

The chemical was found in a large white bag in the storage locker. The police
would not say whether there were any items with it, like detonators, that would
indicate whether the fertilizer was in fact intended for use as an explosive. No
descriptions were given of the arrested men's occupations, so it was not
possible to ascertain whether any of them were involved in farming.

Mr. Clarke said the raids were ''part of continuing and extensive inquiries by
police and the security service into alleged international terrorist activity,
and I must stress that the threat from terrorism remains very real.''

''The public,'' he said, ''must remain watchful and alert.''

The police made no statements about any affiliation the men might have with
known terrorist organizations or networks. Mr. Clarke said the operation was
''not linked to either Irish Republican terrorism or to the recent attack in
Madrid.''

Perhaps because of the lack of details, the immediate public response was muted,
even though the arrests come on the heels of public warnings of the
inevitability of a major terrorist attack in Britain.

Police officers from five jurisdictions took part in the dawn raids, and the
arrests and searches were made in towns and villages on the commuter lines that
radiate out from the city. They were Uxbridge, Colindale, Ilford, Crawley,
Slough, Luton, Horley and Reading.

Seeking to pre-empt criticism from Britain's large Muslim population, Mr. Clarke
said, ''We in the police service know that the overwhelming majority of the
Muslim community are law abiding and completely reject all forms of violence.''
But, he added, ''we have a responsibility to all communities to investigate
suspected terrorist activity.''

Mr. Clarke added that police officials were holding discussions with leaders of
the Muslim community to address their concerns.

Ghayasuddin Siddiqui, the leader of a Muslim community group in London, said in
a telephone interview that there was not yet enough information to judge whether
the eight arrests were justified, but that police sweeps and arrests in Britain
over the last three years had angered and alienated thousands of young Muslims.
''They are stopped and searched and arrested, but if you keep the figures on how
many are convicted, you can see that few of them are,'' he said.

He accused Prime Minister Tony Blair of seeking to create a domestic security
crisis to divert attention from the failure of the United States and Britain to
find unconventional weapons in Iraq.

''They are now going around arresting people to keep that fear alive,'' he said.

Massoud Shadjareh, chairman of the Islamic Human Rights Commission, asserted in
an interview with the BBC that the Muslim community was being ''demonized'' as a
result of such raids.

Appearing before Parliament on Tuesday, the home secretary, David Blunkett,
said, ''While it is for the appropriate authorities to decide what action is
taken against those individuals arrested today, the fact that such action was
felt necessary is a timely reminder that the U.K. and its interests abroad
remain a target.''

In recent weeks, Eliza Manningham-Buller, the head of the MI5 domestic
intelligence agency, and Sir John Stevens, head of the London police force, have
warned that a major terrorist attack in Britain is inevitable. The initial
efforts to thwart such an attack have been to beef up security on subways and
trains and at stations and airports. The BBC reported that one of the men
arrested Tuesday was staying at a Holiday Inn at Gatwick Airport.

Last month, MI5 announced that it was going to increase its ranks by 50 percent,
adding 1,000 intelligence officers. Moreover, security in London has been
stepped up since the attacks on commuter trains in Madrid on March 11 that
killed 191 people and injured about 1,400.

Last week, police officers carrying machine guns appeared around key buildings
in central London. An advertising campaign to alert subway riders to suspicious
bags left on trains or in stations has also begun.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of England highlighting London: The men were arrested in towns and
villages around London.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); FERTILIZERS (92%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (92%); ARRESTS
(91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); EXPLOSIVES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); RELIGION (62%) Terrorism; Islam; Bombs and Explosives;
Ammonium Nitrate

PERSON: PETER CLARKE (89%) Peter Clarke; Patrick E Tyler

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); ENGLAND (93%)

REGION: Great Britain; London (Eng); Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1028 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

10-Year Term For a Serb In War Crimes Called Light

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 30


Miroslav Deronjic, a confessed war criminal and an important prosecution witness
in the trial of Slobodan Milosevic at the United Nations tribunal here, received
a modest 10-year sentence on Tuesday. The sentence, suggested by the prosecution
and accepted by two judges, seemed so light that it openly angered the leading
judge in the case.

Mr. Deronjic, 49, once a high Bosnian Serb official, painted many powerful
pictures in court. He described how weapons, advice and plans flowed into Bosnia
from Belgrade in the early 1990's while Serbs and Bosnian Serbs prepared for
war.

He spoke with eloquence and detail of the strategy to drive Bosnian Muslims from
lands wanted for Serbs. He took responsibility for ordering the burning and
razing of Glogova, a Muslim village where at least 64 people were killed.

For Mr. Deronjic, his guilty plea and the evidence he subsequently provided in
five different trials appear to have paid off. But Judge Wolfgang Schomburg, in
a strongly worded dissent, wrote that Mr. Deronjic's 10-year sentence was not
proportional to the ''heinous and long-planned crimes,'' and violated the spirit
and the mandate of the tribunal.

Instead, he wrote, the crimes deserved a sentence of ''no less than twenty
years.''

The judge's reaction is the latest example of the discomfort felt by a number of
court officials since the tribunal has embarked on its new strategy to encourage
plea bargaining as a way to speed up cases and clear its backlog.

The tribunal is under intense pressure, from the United States among others, to
prepare itself for closing down, which means ending all investigations this year
and completing trials by 2008.

As part of that exit strategy, the court is aiming to focus on the most senior
suspects of war crimes from the 1990's wars and to send lower-level cases back
to special courts now starting up in the Balkans.

But several judges have complained that the haste and the recent series of plea
bargains is leading to sloppy work and to sentences that are too lenient.

In his dissent Tuesday, Judge Schomburg also criticized the prosecution for
focusing only on the crimes of one day, in one village, Glogova, when the
accused had far wider responsibilities.

He noted that there had been three different indictments, and that the last one
selected only limited and arbitrary facts from one small village that was part
of ''a larger criminal plan.''

Glogova was a small, almost entirely Muslim village of 1,913 people in eastern
Bosnia that the Crisis Staff, or local war command, wanted for ethnic Serbs,
according to the indictment of Mr. Deronjic.

In 1992, he ordered the police to disarm the people of Glogova, while a Serbian
police chief from Belgrade assured them they would be safe because they had
turned over their weapons.

But on May 9, 1992, Mr. Deronjic ordered an attack in which, he admitted in
court, the village was razed and burned by members of the Yugoslav Army and the
local police.

At least 64 men, women and children were killed on the spot, terrorizing the
others. He said that survivors were forced on to buses and deported to
Muslim-held territory.

Mr. Deronjic confessed that he was present during the operation. No appeal is
expected.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Miroslav Deronjic, a confessed war criminal, was sentenced to 10
years in prison yesterday. (Pool photo by Govert Coebergh)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); RELIGION (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); WITNESSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%);
POLICE FORCES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Islam; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Miroslav Deronjic; Slobodan Milosevic; Marlise Simons

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%);
UNITED STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1029 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Votes to Pay Milosevic During His War Crimes Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 474 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 30


Serbian lawmakers on Tuesday awarded salaries, legal fees and other financial
perks to former President Slobodan Milosevic and other Serbian war crimes
suspects who are being tried by a United Nations tribunal in the Netherlands.

The new law will also cover travel and mailing expenses incurred by families of
the two dozen Serbian war crimes suspects who are imprisoned in The Hague.

It was adopted by a 141-to-35 vote in Parliament and illustrates the surge of
nationalism in the Balkan republic.

''Serbia is finally defending itself against the fabricated charges in The
Hague,'' said Zarko Obradovic, a lawmaker who is a member of Mr. Milosevic's
Socialist Party. ''We will never forget how Milosevic was kidnapped and
illegally sent there.''

The law was opposed by the pro-Western Democratic Party, which led the rebellion
in 2000 against Mr. Milosevic and extradited him to the United Nations tribunal
in 2001 to face charges stemming from the Balkan wars of the 1990's.

''The law is basically intended to help Slobodan Milosevic,'' Foreign Minister
Goran Svilanovic told Parliament, calling him ''the one who impoverished this
country.''

''The poor country will be financing its rich citizens,'' Mr. Svilanovic said.

The Democrats lost the elections in December and the nationalists, who consider
the United Nations tribunal anti-Serb, took over Serbia's government.

The new law was drafted by the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party, whose
leader, Vojislav Seselj, is awaiting trial in The Hague. It was approved by Mr.
Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia and the ruling conservative coalition.

The law, government officials say, is intended to give Serbian suspects a better
defense at the United Nations tribunal. The defendants' telephone calls and
other legal expenses would be covered, and families would be able to mail
packages to the prisoners at government expense.

Until now, the United Nations tribunal paid basic fees for the lawyers and
covered some family visits.

Because Mr. Milosevic is defending himself, the law will pay the fees of his
numerous legal advisers. Prison visits by his wife, one of the toughest critics
of the previous Democratic-led government, and his two children will be paid for
by Serbia's taxpayers.

Serbian government officials fear that if Mr. Milosevic and other top Serbian
suspects are convicted and sentenced on war crimes charges, Croatia and Bosnia
-- where Mr. Milosevic led his war campaigns -- could win multibillion-dollar
lawsuits against Serbia in the World Court, a separate United Nations
institution also based in The Hague.

''If the genocide charges against Milosevic are dropped by The Hague tribunal,
so will be the genocide charges against Serbia'' in the World Court, said the
hard-line nationalist leader Tomislav Nikolic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); POLITICS
(90%); EXTRADITION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); LITIGATION (89%); FAMILY (89%); COSTS &
ATTORNEY FEES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
PRISONS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (74%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (72%);
APPROVALS (64%) Law and Legislation; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Prices (Fares, Fees and Rates); Wages and Salaries; Legal Profession;
Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (84%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic; Vojislav Seselj

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (95%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); NETHERLANDS (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); CROATIA
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: Serbia

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1031 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 54 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Sebastien Nzapali, a
former military officer from Congo on trial in the Netherlands on charges of
torture and rape committed in his home country, referred incorrectly to the
prosecutor who read the list of accusations against him. The prosecutor, T.
Polescuk, is a woman.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); SEX OFFENSES (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); GENOCIDE (84%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (84%) Correction Stories; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Sex Crimes; Torture

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: P Polescuk; Sebastien Nzapali

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (87%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1032 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Balkans Flare Up

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 449 words


As if the world needs a reminder of how hard it is for occupying outsiders to
build a nation, Kosovo exploded this month. Five years after a NATO bombing
campaign put an end to atrocities by ethnic Serbs against ethnic Albanians
there, Albanian mobs burned Serb-owned houses to the ground. It's yet another
distressing instance in which victims of ethnic cleansing have resorted to the
same horrific type of violence.

Kosovo, a province of Serbia that has been under international protection since
the war, is a tinderbox even by the exacting standards of the Balkans. For
years, Serbia's dictator, Slobodan Milosevic, crushed the region, which is
largely ethnic Albanian. Now Kosovo is a ward of the international community,
governed by a United Nations mission alongside local administrators and policed
by NATO. The Albanian majority is increasingly eager to take full control.
Ethnic Serbs, about 10 percent of the population, and Gypsies are vulnerable to
the whims of the Albanian majority.

The violence began earlier this month after three Albanian boys drowned in a
river. A boy who survived said his friends had been chased to their deaths by a
gang of Serbs. The story has not been confirmed, but it set off riots in Kosovo.
Albanian mobs looted and burned Serbian villages, burned Orthodox churches and
monasteries, and attacked property belonging to NATO and U.N. troops. About two
dozen people died, and around 850 were hurt.

Everyone reacted badly. Kosovo's government was late and equivocal in condemning
the violence, although it has since offered to pay for the damage. In Serbia,
crowds have burned mosques. The NATO peacekeepers seemed unprepared or unwilling
to stop the violence. They did eventually evacuate besieged Serbs, saving their
lives while perversely aiding the mobs in their ethnic cleansing.

NATO has since added 2,000 new soldiers to the roughly 18,000 it has in Kosovo.
But the damage from the violence will linger. Many Serbs will never go back to
their villages. Hard-line ethnic Albanians -- who want to drive out the Serbs to
strengthen their case for Kosovo's independence -- have been emboldened. They
will probably attack Serbs again, or NATO's forces. NATO has to be far more
aggressive in preventing outbursts or containing them quickly.

Kosovo's government claims that Albanians are frustrated in part by uncertainty
over the province's eventual status, but the recent violence will only put off
any final determination. Whether Kosovo ultimately gains its independence or is
reintegrated into Serbia with some measure of autonomy is not a question for mob
rule to decide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); PEACEKEEPING
(78%); RIOTS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); ARSON (77%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (67%); RELIGION (65%)
Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Arson

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); ALBANIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1033 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Starved For Safety

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: ADRE, Chad


So why is Africa such a mess?

To answer that question, let me tell you about a 34-year-old man who limped over
to me at this oasis in eastern Chad. ''My name is Moussa Tamadji Yodi,'' he said
in elegant French, ''and I'm a teacher. . . . I just crossed the border
yesterday from Sudan. I was beaten up and lost everything.''

Mr. Yodi, a college graduate, speaks French, Arabic, English and two African
languages. During the decades of Chad's civil war, he fled across the border
into the Darfur region of Sudan to seek refuge.

Now Darfur has erupted into its own civil war and genocide. Mr. Yodi told how a
government-backed Arab militia had stopped his truck -- the equivalent of a
public bus -- and forced everyone off. The troops let some people go, robbed and
beat others, and shot one young man in the head, probably because he was from
the Zaghawa tribe, which the Arab militias are trying to wipe out.

''Nobody reacted,'' Mr. Yodi said. ''We were all afraid.''

So now Mr. Yodi is a refugee for a second time, fleeing another civil war. And
that is a window into Africa's central problem: insecurity.

There is no formula for economic development. But three factors seem crucial:
security, market-oriented policies and good governance. Botswana is the only
African country that has enjoyed all three in the last 40 years, and it has been
one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. And when these conditions
applied, Uganda, Ghana, Mozambique and Rwanda boomed.

But the African leaders who cared the most about their people, like Julius
Nyerere of Tanzania or Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, tended to adopt quasi-socialist
policies that hurt their people. In recent decades, Africans did much better
ruled with capitalism than with compassion.

These days, African economic policies are more market-oriented, and governance
is improving. The big civil wars are winding down. All this leaves me guardedly
optimistic.

Yet Africa's biggest problem is still security. The end of the cold war has seen
a surge in civil conflict, partly because great powers no longer stabilize
client states. One-fifth of Africans live in nations shaken by recent wars. My
Times colleague Howard French forcefully scolds the West in his new book, ''A
Continent for the Taking,'' for deliberately looking away from eruptions of
unspeakable violence.

One lesson of the last dozen years is that instead of being purely reactive,
helpfully bulldozing mass graves after massacres, African and Western leaders
should try much harder to stop civil wars as they start. The world is now facing
a critical test of that principle in the Darfur region of Sudan, where Arab
militias are killing and driving out darker-skinned African tribespeople. While
the world now marks the 10th anniversary of the Rwandan genocide and solemnly
asserts that this must never happen again, it is.

Some 1,000 people are dying each week in Sudan, and 110,000 refugees, like Mr.
Yodi, have poured into Chad. Worse off are the 600,000 refugees within Sudan,
who face hunger and disease after being driven away from their villages by the
Arab militias.

''They come with camels, with guns, and they ask for the men,'' Mr. Yodi said.
''Then they kill the men and rape the women and steal everything.'' One of their
objectives, he added, ''is to wipe out blacks.''

This is not a case when we can claim, as the world did after the Armenian,
Jewish and Cambodian genocides, that we didn't know how bad it was. Sudan's
refugees tell of mass killings and rapes, of women branded, of children killed,
of villages burned -- yet Sudan's government just stiffed new peace talks that
began last night in Chad.

So far the U.N. Security Council hasn't even gotten around to discussing the
genocide. And while President Bush, to his credit, raised the issue privately in
a telephone conversation last week with the president of Sudan, he has not said
a peep about it publicly. It's time for Mr. Bush to speak out forcefully against
the slaughter.

This is not just a moral test of whether the world will tolerate another
genocide. It's also a practical test of the ability of African and Western
governments alike to respond to incipient civil wars while they can still be
suppressed. Africa's future depends on the outcome, and for now it's a test
we're all failing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); GENOCIDE (88%); REFUGEES (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); PUBLIC
POLICY (74%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (72%); TRENDS (71%); ECONOMIC POLICY (70%);
ECONOMIC NEWS (70%); COLD WAR (70%) Economic Conditions and Trends; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: AFRICA (98%); SUDAN (94%); CHAD (93%); GHANA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (92%); MOZAMBIQUE (79%); RWANDA (79%); UGANDA (79%); BOTSWANA (79%)

REGION: Africa; Sudan; Chad

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1037 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 931 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-7

U.S. Enlisting Asian Allies In Missile-Defense Plan
The United States, racing to erect a controversial ballistic missile defense
system by the end of the year, is quietly enlisting Japan and other allies in
Asia to participate in a missile-defense network that could reshape the balance
of power in the region.   A1

Iraqi Religious Edict Issued
Religious leaders in Falluja issued a religious edict condemning the mutilation
of the bodies of four American civilians, but they remained silent about the
attack itself. The message was well received by townspeople, many of whom
expressed satisfaction in the deadly ambush but shame in its aftermath.   A6

The killing of four American civilians in Falluja was the latest in a series of
attacks on foreigners in Iraq that have changed the way they live there, and
officials expect attacks to increase in the prelude to the planned transfer of
sovereignty.   A6

Ethnic Cleansing in Sudan
The United Nations relief chief in Sudan said that Arab militias were conducting
a campaign of ethnic cleansing to drive black Africans out of a border region of
the country with the apparent tolerance of the Sudanese government.   A5

New Bomb Found in Spain
A bomb discovered on a high speed rail line linking the Spanish capital to
Seville was diffused without injury. The explosives were thought to be the same
type used in the March 11 terror attacks.   A3

NATO Adds Seven Members
NATO formally welcomed seven new members, stretching its security umbrella to
the borders of Russia and prompting Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to
reassure Moscow that it should not feel threatened. The new members expressed
enthusiastic support for deeper NATO involvement in Iraq.   A3

NATIONAL   A8-11

U.S. to Tighten Screening Of Many Foreign Travelers
The Department of Homeland Security plans to require travelers from 27
industrialized nations -- including longtime allies like Britain, France,
Germany, Spain, Japan and Australia -- to be photographed and electronically
fingerprinted when they arrive in the United States.   A1

Federal officials are warning police nationwide that terrorists might try to
bomb buses or trains in American cities this summer.   A10

Documents to Be Released
The White House has agreed to allow the commission investigating the Sept. 11
attacks to review thousands of Clinton administration national-security
documents that the White House had been withholding.   A10

Federal Judge Takes Own Case
A federal judge in Louisiana has taken control of his own accident case
involving his car and issued an order transferring evidence about his medical
condition to a sealed federal court file.   A8

Kerry Raises $50 Million
Senator John Kerry's campaign said it raised $50 million in the last three
months, drawing on support from Democrats eager to defeat President Bush.   A11

House Approves Highway Bill
The House overwhelmingly approved a highway and transit measure that exceeds
spending limits set by President Bush, raising the prospect of a veto showdown
between Mr. Bush and the Republican-led Congress.   A8

SCIENCE/HEALTH

White House Issues Rebuttal
The White House issued a detailed rebuttal to accusations that the Bush
administration had distorted or suppressed scientific information to suit its
politics.   A9

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

City Agencies Disagree On Disaster Protocol
A dispute between the Police Department, Fire Department and the Office of
Emergency Management over which agency will lead the response at the scene of a
terrorist strike remains profound, documents and interviews show.   A1

Disputes Over Border Change
A satellite-imaging map has cast doubt on the precision of 19th century surveys
and has prompted a border dispute between Connecticut and Rhode Island.   B1

Decaying Market to Be Reborn
A developer plans to build a multilevel retail complex and garage on the
dilapidated 31-acre Bronx Terminal Market near Yankee Stadium.   B1

Setback for Power Plant Plan
State examiners have recommended rejecting a developer's efforts to build an
electrical power plant on the Brooklyn waterfront.   B3

Skyscraper Museum Opens
The Skyscraper Museum opened to the public in a dedicated space on the downtown
Manhattan waterfront.   B3

Religion Journal   B6

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

OBITUARIES   A13

ARTS & IDEAS   B9-19

EDUCATION

Harlem School to Remain Open
Mount Carmel/Holy Rosary School in East Harlem will remain open for one more
year after a month of cookie sales and box-top drives.   B2

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Mistrial Declared in Tyco Case
The judge in the six-month trial of two former Tyco International executives
declared a mistrial after one juror said she had received a threatening letter.
The Manhattan district attorney's office said it would move to retry the case.
A1

The mistrial declaration was a frustrating result for the jurors, who after 11
days of sometimes acrimonious deliberations had come very close to a verdict.
Several jurors said the panel probably would have found the defendants guilty of
at least some of the 32 charges against them.   A1

Job Growth Surges
The economy added 308,000 jobs in March, the Labor Department estimated, pulling
out of a pattern of tepid employment growth.   A1

Interest rates rose in the wake of the report, and stocks prices climbed as
well. The dollar moved higher against the euro and the yen.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: The mystery deepens; juror No. 13; beholding Byzantium; Serge
Schmemann on a Russian oligarch's letter from prison.

Columns: David Brooks, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Bridge   B17
TV Listings   B19
Crossword   B16
Weather   B20

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (91%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); INTERNATIONAL
TOURISM (79%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); RELIGION (76%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (75%); CITY LIFE (75%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (75%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (74%); APPROVALS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(72%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); TRAINS (70%);
FINGERPRINTING (69%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%); TRAVELER SAFETY &
SECURITY (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); HIGH SPEED TRAINS (65%);
TRANSPORTATION REGULATION (65%); INVESTIGATIONS (64%); JUDGES (63%); HIGHWAY
FUNDING (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (60%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (82%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (73%)

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (79%); ANDALUSIA, SPAIN (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); ASIA (94%); SUDAN (93%); JAPAN (93%);
SPAIN (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); AFRICA (79%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1038 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Aide Says Sudan Is Tolerating Ethnic Cleansing

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 2


The United Nations director for relief in Sudan said Friday that Arab militias
were conducting a campaign of ethnic cleansing to drive black Africans out of a
border region of the country with the apparent tolerance of the Sudanese
government.

Jan Egeland, the under secretary general for humanitarian affairs, said the
armed groups were using ''scorched earth tactics,'' deliberately destroying food
and humanitarian supplies and attacking refugee centers in a program of
''systematic depopulation.''

''I consider this ethnic cleansing,'' he said, estimating that 750,000 people
had been forced from their homes and villages, tens of thousands had fled into
neighboring Chad and 10,000 might have died.

Speaking to reporters after briefing the Security Council on the situation, he
said he was sounding the alarm because it was ''one of the most forgotten and
neglected humanitarian crises in the world.''

Mr. Egeland said that relief workers had witnessed beatings, killings and gang
rapes, but that alerting Sudanese authorities had gotten no response. He said he
personally knew of a number of occasions where the government refused to
intervene in ''ongoing massacres.''

''We can tell they tolerate them,'' he said of the mass killings.

''I have no reason to believe that the government is actively planning it, but I
have reason to say that little is done to stop it, and therefore it seems as if
it is being condoned.''

The United Nations had received most of the $23 million in emergency assistance
it asked for in a September plea, he said, but with the increase in violence it
now needed $115 million more and an added $30 million to care for refugees.

He said the virtual civil war was being waged by rebel groups, militias and
criminal gangs, as well as by Arab groups attacking black Africans. The fighting
began a year ago over local protests that the oil-rich Sudanese government was
ignoring the needs of Darfur, which borders Chad.

The most important step now, he said, was to get a cease-fire declared. But
reports from Ndjamena, the Chadian capital, where talks were under way,
indicated that the combatants' representatives would not even enter the same
room. The negotiations had descended into ''talks about talks'' while people
continued to die, Mr. Egeland said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); GENOCIDE (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); POPULATION DECLINE (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

CITY: NDJAMENA, CHAD (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); AFRICA (93%); CHAD (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1039 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

After 4 Days of Violence, Uzbekistan Wonders Whom to Blame

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: TASHKENT, Uzbekistan, April 2


It was a terrifying little army of men and women, ready to die and take others
with them. But at the end of four days of violence that killed 47 people here,
it was still not clear just who they were and what they wanted.

Tashkent was quiet on Friday under a soft rain as policemen in their capes
stopped cars at checkpoints all around the city. With news carefully controlled
here nobody knew exactly what had happened, but everybody seemed to have a
theory.

At a news conference, the prosecutor general, Rashid Kadyrov, who is the
country's top law enforcement officer, presented uncertainties and theories.

He displayed a tabletop of passports and identification cards but said they were
probably forgeries. He said it seemed clear that these were Islamic militants
with links abroad, but that the government was still trying to determine which
group they represented.

The questions were unsettling to officials trying to assess security in this
central Asian ally of the United States, which borders Afghanistan and is the
site of an American military base.

The radical group most often mentioned here is the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, which is blamed for the last major bombings, which killed at least
16 people here in 1999. But that group has been dormant for years, and it was
not known whether this week's attacks could be directly connected to it.

The attacks were too ambitious and broad to have been the work of residents
acting alone and had clearly been planned far in advance, Mr. Kadyrov said.
''Investigators have obtained reliable evidence that the series of terrorist
attacks were committed by the same criminal group and were organized and
controlled by a single center,'' he said, although the identity of that center
was not known.

''Most of its members underwent training outside the country,'' he said. ''This
suggests that the terrorist attacks committed in Uzbekistan were orchestrated by
international terrorist organizations.''

The terror equipment that Mr. Kadyrov said had been found during searches was
impressive: 55 corsets for carrying suicide bombs; 72 plastic half-liter bottles
filled with an explosive cocktail; hundreds of detonators, microchips and
switches along with about 300 yards of cable; about 60 pounds of bolts, nuts,
washers and other metal items; and more than two tons of aluminum powder and
ammonium nitrate, along with a cache of weapons and weapons parts.

This was an unusual terror attack, though, a running miscellany of bombings,
failed bombings and accidental bombings that showed some signs of haphazardness
and miscues.

Mr. Kadyrov said that more than twice as many attackers died as victims, 33
compared with 14.

If there is an international dimension to the attacks, their targets were purely
domestic. Of the victims listed by Mr. Kadyrov, 10 were police officers --
symbols of authority who are widely unpopular because of their imperious
behavior and their bribe taking. Of the 35 wounded in the attacks, 24 were
police officers.

Asked what she thought of these killings, a tour guide who was afraid to have
her name printed said: ''People hate the police. They are always taking bribes,
and they can take your documents and question you whenever they want.''

She stopped short of saying there was any public support for the attacks on
police officers, but she said, ''People are really angry at the government''
because of low pay and high prices.

The government has put itself on alert after the violence, pasting up wanted
posters and distributing fliers calling for vigilance.

Mr. Kadyrov said 19 people, including four women, were being held in connection
with the violence. Human rights groups have documented many arrests, but so far
it appears that the government is not engaging in the mass arrests that followed
the bombings in 1999.

The past week's violence began Sunday with an explosion that killed 10 people at
what the police said was a bomb-making factory.

During the next two days, two women set off suicide bombs in Tashkent's old
quarter, other bombers attacked police officers and, Mr. Kadyrov said, 14
terrorists, including 5 women, were killed during a gun battle at a building
where they were hiding.

The latest explosion was reported Thursday night, when, Mr. Kadyrov said, a
woman set off a bomb inside her home, seriously injuring herself and killing a
10-year-old girl.

He said one of the people killed in the first blast, at the bomb-making
operation, had been the husband of the woman and the brother of the girl. It was
not known whether the woman had detonated her bomb intentionally or by accident.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Part of the cache of weapons, ammunition, explosives and
bomb-making material that was recovered by the Uzbek prosecutor general. (Photo
by European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ARMIES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); EXPLOSIVES (87%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (86%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%);
BRIBERY (71%); RELIGION (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); COUNTERFEITING (69%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (55%)

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (88%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1045 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 7, 2004 Wednesday
                                National Edition

Peril in Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 439 words


The worsening humanitarian disaster in western Sudan, where thousands of people
have been killed and almost a million driven from their homes and farms by
government-backed forces, will test whether the world has learned anything from
its failure to stop the genocide in Rwanda 10 years ago. The United Nations, the
United States, the European Union and African states must press the Sudanese
government to halt attacks on civilians and to let aid agencies in. Absent swift
and determined international action, Sudan could be another case of outside
neglect allowing famine and disease to consume a nation.

For two decades, the Muslim Arab elite in Khartoum, the capital, has responded
ruthlessly to political, economic and social demands from Sudan's ethnically and
religiously diverse regions. After a cease-fire was declared in 2002 in the
long-running civil war between the government and rebels in the south, Khartoum
turned its forces on black African rebels in the Darfur region in the west.
Instead of aiming solely at the rebels, however, the government, helped by Arab
militias, has also taken aim at civilians.

Throughout Darfur -- a huge region the size of France -- villages have been
bombed and their inhabitants killed, raped and forced into government-run
concentration camps, where they are preyed upon further by militia fighters. Aid
agencies have been denied access to most of the displaced. Some people, though
near starvation, are refusing aid for fear of retribution. The few international
monitors in the area estimate that more than 1,000 people are dying each week
from violence and disease. With no planting having been done in this
agricultural region, the prospect of a devastating famine looms.

Peace talks between Khartoum and the rebels began this week in neighboring Chad,
but are faltering for want of sufficient pressure from the United States, the
European Union and African states. The United States should use its leverage
with Khartoum -- which sheltered Osama bin Laden for six years but now wants to
improve ties with Washington -- to demand that aid agencies and humanitarian
monitors have unhindered access to the displaced. If they need military
protection, then the international community should be willing to provide it.

Khartoum's actions in Darfur amount to crimes against humanity, and should be
recognized as such by the U.N. Security Council. It is a bleak paradox that
Sudan's president, Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, is scheduled to attend
commemorations in Rwanda this week of the genocide there 10 years ago while his
forces back home are engaged in such appalling atrocities.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); DISASTER RELIEF (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FAMINE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION
(89%); DISPLACED PERSONS (89%); STARVATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); PEACE PROCESS (70%) Editorials; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States International Relations; Famine; Medicine and Health; Foreign Aid

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%) United Nations;
European Union

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (94%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (94%); EUROPE
(94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Rwanda; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1048 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Uzbeks' Anger at Rulers Boils Over

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: TASHKENT, Uzbekistan, April 5


After 10 minutes, the police officers drove off, having decided that it was not
forbidden after all to photograph a propaganda poster that said: ''The
government expresses the will of the people.''

But that did not satisfy a woman at a bus stop nearby. ''Why are you taking
ridiculous pictures like that?'' she asked. ''Why aren't you taking pictures of
all the things that are wrong?''

The terrorist attacks of the past week told the real story, she said. ''These
were poor people, desperate people, driven to act.'' she said.

Both the government and foreign analysts say the suicide bombings and shootings,
which that killed 42 people here in this strategic Central Asian nation, were
the work of Islamic militants, probably with ties to international terror
groups.

Foreign Minister Sadyk Safayev called them part of ''the global activities of
terrorism'' that seeks to create chaos and instability.

But in interviews here in the capital and in the surrounding countryside over
the past few days, questions about the attacks set off furious outbursts about
ruinous economic conditions and government repression.

''Everyone hates him,'' said a saleswoman, speaking of President Islam Karimov,
who has led Uzbekistan, an important American ally on the border of Afghanistan,
since it became independent from the Soviet Union in 1991. ''Everyone is afraid
of him.''

The vehemence and ubiquity of the complaints was striking.

The United States has been urging the government to revamp its closed economy
and relax its repressive grip as a means of maintaining stability.

Hundreds of American troops have been stationed at a base at Khanabad since it
became a staging point for the war in Afghanistan in 2001.

Mr. Karimov, 66, secured a constitutional amendment two years ago extending his
term until 2007. There are murmurings that he could leave office before then,
but as in most other post-Soviet states, no provision has been made for a
peaceful transfer of power.

Asked about the widespread expressions of discontent, Foreign Minister Safayev
declined to address the substance of the complaints. ''Of course there's a range
of opinions,'' he said at a meeting with foreign reporters. ''If the people you
interviewed think in this way, they have a right to think in this way. What can
I say?''

Often the complaints began even before any questions had been asked.

''Go talk to the people at the tile factory -- they haven't been paid in
years,'' said a hotel employee before walking quickly away.

From hair dresser to nurse to schoolteacher to farmer to ice cream seller, the
grievances repeated themselves -- rising prices, unpaid wages, inadequate
pensions and salaries, unemployment, corruption and a climate of fear.

''Things are terrible here, terrible,'' said a welder in a small town outside
Tashkent, the capital. ''And all the time Karimov is telling us that everything
is fine, fine, fine, fine. Sure, it's fine for him. But people here are
starving. Children go from house to house begging for bread.''

Many people who spoke like this were willing to give their names. Others
declined, like the factory worker, who said, ''They'll come at night and take me
away and I won't even know the reason.''

Martha Brill Olcott, an expert on Central Asia at the Carnegie Endowment, said
these forthright complaints could be signs of what she called a ''decaying
regime, a dictatorship that has lost a lot of its punch.''

''People are not as scared of the regime as they were,'' she said in a telephone
interview from Washington. ''People argue with the police now. That's been a big
change over the past year. When they cordon off the streets so some high-ranking
car can pass, people get out of their cars and begin yelling at the policemen.''

Unlike some recent terror attacks elsewhere, the bombings in Uzbekistan did not
seem indiscriminate in their choice of targets. They were aimed mostly at police
officers -- unpopular symbols of government control who have become increasingly
harsh since a terrorist attack here in 1999 killed at least 16 people.

If the bombings last week were part of an international terror network, they
were also neatly devised to tap into national resentments over government
abuses.

There has been a deluge of criticism recently from human rights groups about
widespread arrests, torture and repression. The press here is muzzled, genuine
political opposition is barred and independent civil society groups are severely
restricted.

Uzbekistan has also mostly failed to make the economic reforms called for by the
United States and international lenders and has strangled trade by closing its
borders for what the government says are security reasons.

With 80 percent of the population living in poverty and with the economy
steadily contracting, signs of social discontent have emerged. Last year factory
workers staged strikes over unpaid wages and pensioners demonstrated in the
streets demanding their payments.

But without a free press or legal political opposition, many people have turned
to underground Islamic groups, some of which preach violence.

''By destroying any normal lay political parties in the country, the only
opposition groups which have structures and know how to behave underground are
these fundamentalist parties,'' said Alain Deletroz, a vice president of the
International Crisis Group, an international monitoring agency.

Abdulkarim Abdullayev, the imam of a legal mosque in the old city at the center
of Tashkent, acknowledged that economic problems had driven some young people to
radicalism.

''They say on television that it's Muslim extremists,'' he said. ''But you've
got to clarify that there are a lot of economic problems here, not enough
work.''

He suggested that a more democratic system could provide an outlet. ''Even
though there are economic problems, they have to be dealt with the way they are
in developed democracies in Europe,'' he said. ''In Europe people go into the
streets with slogans and demand things.''

That kind of thing would be unthinkable here, said a driver who gave his first
name as Sasha.

''People speak quietly,'' he said. ''Even on a bus you can't talk. Who could be
listening? You are afraid to say what you think.''

He punched the buttons on his car radio. ''One, two, three, four, five,'' he
said. ''Look, nothing but music. Everything here is happy and good.''

Or it could be that there was more on the radio than he realized. The last
station he reached was playing a calypso song -- by chance, perhaps -- with an
interesting refrain.

''So you better get up, stand up, stand up for your rights,'' went the song.
''Stand up for your rights. Don't give up the fight.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A poster praising President Islam Karimov, left, says, ''The
government expresses the will of the people.'' (Photo by Yola Monakhov for The
New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (88%); WAGES & SALARIES (83%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); BOMBINGS
(70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); NURSES & NURSING (65%); BACK PAY (62%); PRICE
INCREASES (50%)

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Islam (Pres) Karimov

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (69%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CENTRAL ASIA
(79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Uzbekistan; Tashkent (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1057 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Group Claims It Made Attacks

BYLINE: By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 80 words


Militant Islamic Web sites published a claim of responsibility for an outbreak
of violence since March 29 that has taken the lives of 47 people. The statement
was signed Jihad Islamic Group -- a previously unknown name -- and claimed that
the bombings and shootings were a response to repression of Muslims who
worshiped outside officially approved congregations. Rights groups say that
7,000 people are in prison for their beliefs and that torture is systematic.
Seth Mydans (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); RELIGION (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%);
BOMBINGS (86%); APPROVALS (52%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (89%); ASIA (74%)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1060 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Milosevic Wants 1,631 Witnesses

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 81 words


Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president who stands accused of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide at the United Nations tribunal,
submitted a list of witnesses he hoped to summon for his defense. Zdenko
Tomanovic, a lawyer assisting Mr. Milosevic, said the list included Bill Clinton
and Tony Blair. The judges in his trial, scheduled to resume in June, will
decide which witnesses may be called. Mr. Milosevic has been given 150 court
days to complete his defense.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (73%); TONY BLAIR (53%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (91%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1064 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 14, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Race and Sex Bias Suit Is Filed Against a New Jersey Utility

BYLINE: By MATTHEW C. McCUE and RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, April 13


Citing inappropriate and offensive behavior at the state's largest electric
utility, Public Service Electric and Gas Company, 11 current and former
employees filed a racial and sex discrimination lawsuit Tuesday in state court.

The plaintiffs, who include plant floor workers, secretaries and executives
whose employment with the company ranges from 2 to 36 years, maintain that only
white male employees are able to advance into high-level supervisory roles.

''We demand a change in PSE&G culture, starting from the top down,'' said John
R. Smith, 57, the regional public affairs manager for the utility. Mr. Smith,
who is black, is one of two prominent plaintiffs in the lawsuit. ''This company
has long refused to pay minority employees a salary equal to their white
counterparts.''

In a written statement, PSE&G said, ''We deny the assertions of
discrimination.'' Paul Rosengren, a spokesman for the company, said in the
statement that PSE&G has settled some of the grievances that had come out of
several company reorganizations and had referred others to the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, the federal agency that investigates discrimination
reports.

Mr. Rosengren said in the statement that the lawsuit, filed in State Superior
Court in Newark, ''disrupts the ongoing process.''

Joining the 11 employees and their lawyers at a news conference in a Newark
hotel were the president of the New Jersey chapter of the N.A.A.C.P., the
executive director of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition's Wall Street Project, and a
group of local elected officials.

The two civil rights groups are not directly involved in the lawsuit but said
they saw in it an opportunity to support people who had come to them seeking
help and at the same time advance broader social goals.

Keith Jones, president of the New Jersey chapter of the N.A.A.C.P., said he
thought the case was ''a train that was going to run on two tracks'' -- one
track being litigation, the other social justice.

R. Fenimore Fisher, executive director of the Rainbow/PUSH coalition, founded in
1997 to pressure American companies to improve minority employees' involvement
in their operations, said some of the plaintiffs had come to him in May 2003 for
assistance. He said company executives had agreed to meet with the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, president of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, but refused to meet with the
employees.

Mr. Fisher said he was ''strongly encouraging PSE&G to try and solve the matter
without going through formal litigation.''

Cyrus Mehri, a Washington-based lawyer who has represented minority employees
filing federal discrimination suits against large corporations like Texaco and
Coca-Cola, said that by going to state court, the New Jersey plaintiffs were
taking advantage of a New Jersey antidiscrimination statute that was ''quite
strong.''

''The New Jersey statute allows the plaintiffs to get damages for both disparate
treatment and disparate impact,'' he said. ''You can get to those issues in
federal court, but only after the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
considers it. This way you proceed to the merits more quickly.''

In court papers, Rhonda Price, a plaintiff and an apprentice substation mechanic
since 2002, described being forced to listen to ''discussions of lewd sexual
acts'' while working with white male co-workers. Supervisors ignored her
complaints about the incidents, the court papers said, and at one point a
co-worker used an offensive term about black women to refer to her. She was
reprimanded when she took her complaints to the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition,
according to the lawsuit.

Another plaintiff, Ulysses Rice Jr., 57, a black man who rose from cadet
engineer in 1968 to become a plant manager at the utility's Bergen generating
station in 1985, charged that after that, he has been moved laterally to at
least four different positions while being denied financial and career
advancement.

''For 18 years I've been stuck in a revolving door,'' Mr. Rice said in a
telephone interview. ''I said, 'Time out, that's enough, there has to be a
change.'''

The company employs 10,500 people and serves 2 million electric and 1.6 million
natural gas customers over a 2,600-square-mile area. Its stock is publicly
traded on the New York Stock Exchange, and last year the 100-year-old company
had revenues of $11.1 billion, ranking it 176th on the Fortune 500.

Jeff Brown, another lawyer from the firm representing the plaintiffs, Leeds,
Morelli & Brown of Long Island, said he hoped the lawsuit would encourage the
company to advance and promote minority employees into decision-making
positions.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Four PSE&G plaintiffs at a news conference yesterday were, from
left, Henry Torres, Shirley Henderson, Rhonda Price and Terry Romano. (Photo by
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); DISCRIMINATION (91%); RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (90%);
UTILITIES INDUSTRY (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%);
ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION
IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
EXECUTIVES (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); WAGES &
SALARIES (78%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (78%); EMPLOYMENT (78%); LAWYERS (77%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (68%); INVESTIGATIONS
(66%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: PUBLIC SERVICE ELECTRIC & GAS CO (91%); COCA-COLA CO (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (55%); NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (54%)

TICKER: KO (NYSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4931 ELECTRIC & OTHER SERVICES COMBINED (91%); NAICS312111 SOFT
DRINK MANUFACTURING (50%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED
WATER (50%)

PERSON: JESSE JACKSON (54%)

CITY: NEWARK, NJ, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1067 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spotlight on Iraq, Genocide in Africa

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 182 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Cruel Choices,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, April 14):

Unless we enter into the situation in Sudan, our administration is a
hypocritical one. Our goals in Iraq currently lie in restoring democracy. How
can we be so focused on toppling a nation, hostile to us even today, that was
relatively stable under its totalitarian regime when there is another nation
practicing genocide?

In Sudan, there are the same practices of ethnic cleansing as there were in
Rwanda in the early 1990's. Bill Clinton maintains that not entering into the
Rwandan conflict earlier was one of the biggest mistakes of his presidency.
Should President Bush not take the advice of his predecessor and make a stand to
stop the genocide in Sudan?

More important, under United Nations rulings, we cannot allow genocide to occur
in any nation. The United States, if it wants to maintain any credibility, must
take a strong stand in favor of sending peacekeeping forces to Sudan. If not, we
admit that we are a nation that acts only for the benefit of itself.

ALEXANDRA JOHNSON
Brooklyn, April 14, 2004

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); PEACEKEEPING (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); IRAQ (94%); AFRICA (92%); RWANDA (90%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A World Made More Dangerous as Terrorism Spreads

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1; Wildfires

LENGTH: 297 words


EVERY day --some days, it seems, nearly every hour --a terrorist alarm is
sounded somewhere in the world. Each new threat has immediate consequences.

Flights may be canceled, a few embassies closed. And it almost always stokes
fears that another terrorist attack is imminent.

Is the world more dangerous today than it was a year ago, or on Sept. 10, 2001,
or even since the end of the cold war?

Yes, say many terrorism experts, for a number of reasons: the American-led
occupation of Iraq, which has become a rallying cry for hundreds, perhaps
thousands, of Islamic militants; the campaigns by a growing number of groups to
obtain weapons of mass destruction; and the prolific violence of local terrorist
groups.

Since being routed from Afghanistan in late 2001, Al Qaeda has again proved its
protean nature by morphing into a baseless, rootless organization with potent
alliances. Although two-thirds of its core leadership has been killed or
captured, Al Qaeda has managed to export its violent, anti-Western militancy to
dozens of like-minded regional terrorist groups.

''Al Qaeda has been replaced by Qaeda-ism,''a top counterterrorism official
based in Europe said recently.

This Qaeda-ism accounts for some but hardly all of the world's terrorist
activities. There are dozens of other groups with locally motivated reasons for
murder and mayhem, from Maoist guerrillas in Nepal to right-wing paramilitary
groups in Colombia.

A worldwide map of the hotbeds of terrorist activity shows a daunting array of
distinct and interconnected motives. With so many groups declaring the United
States their principal enemy, the map also illustrates why even the most
optimistic counterterrorism officials predict that the war on terrorism will
last generations.   DON VAN NATTA Jr.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Residents of Medellin, Colombia, assist a civilian wounded in a
crossfire two years ago. (Photo by Agence France-Presse)
Rush-hour commuters were the target of the train bombings last month in Spain.
(Photo by Reuters)
In Kenya, a bomb blast ripped apart an Israeli-owned hotel in 2002. (Photo by
Agence France-Presse)
Chaldean Christian mourners in Baghdad after a suicide bomber struck last month.
(Photo by Agence France-Presse/Getty Images)
A car bombing victim in Karachi, Pakistan, this month. (Photo by Getty Images)
 An Indonesian woman was overcome after a blast in Jakarta killed over a dozen
people last August. (Photo by Reuters)Chart: ''The Landscape''Highlighted
countries are those that have been among the most prominent sites of recent
terrorist attacks, attempted attacks, heightened warnings or measures to counter
the spread of terrorism.THE AMERICASWhile the United States focuses on Al Qaeda,
Colombia offers proof that some of the bloodiest terrorism has no links to
Islamic fundamentalism. There are hundreds of violent incidents each year, from
car bombings to kidnappings, mass killings in isolated villages and
assassinations of human rights advocates and journalists. The culprits are
Marxist insurgencies and a right-wing paramilitary group linked in the past to
Colombia's army.EUROPEThe Madrid bombings last month confirmed Europe's fears
that it is a Qaeda target. Analysts say Al Qaeda and its affiliates are more
deeply entrenched in Europe than in North America. Investigators have thwarted
suspected plots in Britain, France, Belgium, Spain and Germany, and terrorist
groups may view Eastern Europe as the new soft spot for entry and
hiding.AFRICAIn Morocco, now both a target and operating base for bin Laden
followers, more than 30 people died in a suicide bombing in Casablanca last May.
Most of the suspects arrested in the Madrid bombings were Moroccan, the
suspected mastermind a Tunisian. America and France have reportedly been trying
to assist Mali, where members of an Algerian terrorist group affiliated with Al
Qaeda have taken refuge.THE MIDDLE EASTSince the American-led invasion of Iraq,
coalition troops there as well as Shiite clerics, foreign aid workers and U.N.
staff members have been targets of bombings, killings and kidnappings, most by
Iraqis, although American officials say there is some foreign involvement.
Israel, where hijackings and bombings long predate Al Qaeda, remains a frequent
target of Palestinian suicide bombers. In Saudi Arabia, Al Qaeda has been linked
to attacks whose ultimate target is the royal establishment that Osama bin Laden
hates.CENTRAL AND SOUTH ASIAAfghanistan's government remains threatened by Al
Qaeda and the Taliban, while in Pakistan, more attempts on the life of President
Pervez Musharraf are expected. Meanwhile, Islamic militants stage attacks weekly
in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir and mingle among Chechnya's rebels.
Suicide bombers linked to Al Qaeda have attacked in Uzbekistan. In Nepal, Maoist
insurgents have been blamed for several bombings.SOUTHEAST ASIAIndonesia, where
a Bali nightclub was bombed two years ago, and the Philippines, where the Abu
Sayyaf rebellion continues, were identified early as places where Qaeda
affiliates operated. The Philippine rebels now help train the Indonesian group.
Malaysia was a meeting place for Qaeda operatives before Sept. 11. Now militant
Islam, with apparent Qaeda connections, has flared in southern Thailand, and
Cambodia has responded to the spread of militant Wahhabi madrassas.Raymond
Bonner, Desmond Butler, Juan Forero, Seth Mydans and Greg Myre contributed
reporting for this chart.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (98%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); COLD WAR
(76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); FUNDAMENTALISM (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); RELIGION (55%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%); ABU SAYYAF GROUP (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (88%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (55%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%);
KARACHI,PAKISTAN (79%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); COLOMBIA (94%); EUROPE (94%); IRAQ (93%);
INDONESIA (93%); SPAIN (92%); NEPAL (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%);
ISRAEL (92%); FRANCE (92%); ASIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MALAYSIA (79%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MOROCCO (79%); KENYA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); THAILAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%);
GERMANY (67%); EASTERN EUROPE (52%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1073 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

How to Improve Domestic Intelligence

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: Washington


Before Sept. 11, Al Qaeda terrorists took advantage of yawning gaps between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation in order to
slip into the United States. Last week, the Sept. 11 commission hearings
recounted in painful detail the lapses of the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. before the
attacks on New York and Washington, and helped pressure President Bush to
consider reforming the way the government collects intelligence.

The White House has suddenly embraced an old idea -- appointing a national
intelligence czar to oversee the government's sprawling intelligence apparatus.
Many experts are also calling for dramatic changes in how the nation collects
intelligence inside its own borders, and are pointing to Britain's domestic
intelligence agency, known as MI-5, as a model.

But do Americans, rattled by terrorist threats, really want an efficient
domestic spy service?

The Sept. 11 hearings have certainly raised doubts about whether the F.B.I. is
still up to the job.

''You need intelligence collection done domestically, and the bureau has not
done it,'' said John MacGaffin, a former C.I.A. official who also worked as a
consultant to the F.B.I. Last year, he and a group of former senior
intelligence, law enforcement and Pentagon officials proposed creating a
separate counterintelligence and counterterrorism service within the F.B.I. Now
he says it should be split off into a new agency, which would allow the F.B.I.
to focus on its strength in traditional crime fighting.

But the F.B.I. still opposes establishing a stand-alone agency. And, the
creation of a secretive organization with a mandate to spy on Americans would
represent a dramatic departure for a country that has long feared any permanent
encroachments on civil liberties.

In fact, opposition to a domestic intelligence agency has created an alliance
between the F.B.I. and the American Civil Liberties Union, which has warned of
the threat from a secret police force. Such a new agency ''could easily employ
the same kind of dirty tricks the C.I.A. uses overseas here in the United States
against American citizens,'' Anthony D. Romero, the A.C.L.U.'s executive
director, said in a press release. ''Even during the most frigid days of the
cold war, we never saw the need to create a secret police force that would work
outside of the constraints of the Constitution.''

Such fears are why MI-5 has become a model for so many in Washington. Britain
has integrated domestic intelligence collection into a society that prides
itself on its protection of civil rights.

The key is that MI-5 has no arrest powers, and leaves that to Britain's police.
MI-5, known as the Security Service, is responsible for handling cases involving
terrorism, espionage and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, but
takes a supporting role to British law enforcement when cases become criminal
matters.

But if Britain has created an agency that focuses solely on national security
threats within its borders, it still hasn't eliminated the kind of interagency
rivalries that have plagued the United States.

In the end, the bureaucratic structure of intelligence will matter less than
success at gathering information.

''We are now spending about $40 billion for intelligence,'' Mr. MacGaffin said.
''For your $40 billion, you as a taxpayer should be entitled to having one guy
sitting on a rock next to Osama bin Laden somewhere in Afghanistan, and maybe
one guy sitting in the middle of a group of extremists here in this country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (94%); TERRORISM (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); POLICE
FORCES (87%); AL-QAEDA (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (78%); COLD WAR (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); NEWS BRIEFS
(74%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); CIVIL RIGHTS (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AL-QAEDA (84%); CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1075 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kerry Backs Off Statements on Vietnam War

BYLINE: By JODI WILGOREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, April 18


Senator John Kerry on Sunday distanced himself from contentious statements he
made three decades ago after returning from the Vietnam War, saying his long-ago
use of the word ''atrocities'' to describe his and others' actions was
inappropriate and ''a little bit excessive.''

''If you wanted to ask me, 'Have you ever made mistakes in your life?' sure,''
Mr. Kerry, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, said in an hourlong
interview on the NBC program ''Meet the Press.'' ''I think some of the language
that I used was a language that reflected an anger.''

The near-apology came after the host, Tim Russert, played videotape of Mr.
Kerry, in 1971, acknowledging that he had participated in shooting in free-fire
zones, burning villages and search-and-destroy missions. All those actions were
''contrary to the laws of warfare'' and the Geneva Conventions, he said then.
Republicans have seized on those comments, and accusations about war crimes the
young Mr. Kerry made in testimony before a Senate committee, to try to undercut
his war credentials.

''The words were honest,'' Mr. Kerry said Sunday, ''but on the other hand, they
were a little bit over the top.''

In an appearance his aides hoped would counterbalance President Bush's televised
news conference last week, Mr. Kerry said he completely supported Mr. Bush's new
position that Israel should be able to keep part of the land seized in the
Arab-Israeli war of 1967. He also backed Israel's assassination this weekend of
a Hamas leader.

''I believe Israel has every right in the world to respond to any act of terror
against it,'' he said. Some members of Mr. Kerry's campaign are concerned that
Mr. Bush's statements about West Bank settlements could draw Jewish Democrats.

Mr. Kerry's position on Israel was a rare point of agreement with the president,
whose handling of Iraq Mr. Kerry called ''stunningly ineffective.''

''It may well be that we need a new president,'' he said, ''a breath of fresh
air, to re-establish credibility with the rest of the world.''

The interview capped a week in which Mr. Kerry hammered Mr. Bush daily on Iraq,
hoping to contrast his internationalist approach and policy experience with what
his advisers see as Mr. Bush's simplistic ''stay the course'' presentation. He
spent all of Saturday huddled with aides in preparation for the show.

It was Mr. Kerry's 19th appearance on ''Meet the Press,'' his fourth since
December 2002. He appeared well prepared for the forum and avoided verbal
stumbles, correctly pronouncing the name of the United Nations' envoy to Iraq,
Lakhdar Brahimi, which he had mangled three times in recent days. Hours later,
at the University of Miami, Mr. Kerry goofed again, referring to the envoy as
''Brandini.''

The wide-ranging interview focused largely on foreign policy, but also touched
on job creation, budget balancing, his wife's tax returns and even the gas
mileage standards for new cars. Pressed on his past comments about raising the
retirement age and instituting a means test for Social Security, Mr. Kerry
turned the tables on Mr. Russert, saying, ''I wish I had the power to press this
button and put up on the screen what you said'' in 1997 when Medicare seemed on
the brink of bankruptcy.

Marc Racicot, chairman of Mr. Bush's re-election campaign, criticized Mr.
Kerry's appearance as ''little more than contradiction, a great deal of
confusion, inaccurate attacks and a fundamental misunderstanding of the threat
that we face with terror.''

In a conference call with reporters, Mr. Racicot called Mr. Kerry's reasoning on
voting to authorize the invasion of Iraq but not the $87 billion appropriation
for reconstruction, ''remarkably flawed.''

The interview did provide new fodder for Republican attacks on Mr. Kerry for
avoiding direct questions. Three times, on questions about troop deployment,
troop financing and whether he would pledge not to run for re-election if he
failed to fulfill promises to create 10 million jobs and cut the deficit in
half, Mr. Kerry said ''it depends'' on the circumstances or the situation.

Asked at the beginning of the show for a yes or no answer on whether the war in
Iraq was a mistake, Mr. Kerry responded, ''I think the way the president went to
war was a mistake.''

Pushed to reconcile his description of Cuba policy four years ago as
counterproductive with his current support for the embargo, he said, ''I think
in the year 2000, the politics are very different from where they are in 2004.''

When Mr. Russert asked whether his wealthy wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, would
release her tax returns, which she has refused to do, Mr. Kerry said, ''My wife
is doing exactly what the law requires.''

The most awkward moment came after the Vietnam-era videotape, Mr. Kerry's ''Meet
the Press'' debut, with the candidate watching his younger self use grave and
graphic words to describe the Vietnam War.

''Where did all the dark hair go, Tim?'' Mr. Kerry tried, wearing an odd grin.
''That's a big question for me.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''It may well be that we need a new president,'' Senator John
Kerry said yesterday on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.'' (Photo by
Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VIETNAM WAR (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); TERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (76%); GENOCIDE (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); HAMAS
(64%) Vietnam War; Election Issues; Presidential Election of 2004; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Television; Geneva Conventions; Vietnam
War

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (93%); TIM RUSSERT (70%) Jodi Wilgoren; John (Sen) Kerry; Tim
Russert

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1078 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Court Affirms Genocide In Bosnia

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 181 words


In a landmark decision, the appeals chamber of the United Nations war crimes
tribunal ruled that genocide took place in Bosnia during the war in the 1990's.
The five appeals judges, whose decision is final, settled a question much
debated by legal scholars: was the persecution and killing of Bosnian Muslims by
Serbs and others, known as ethnic cleansing. a deliberate genocidal campaign?
Referring to the massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys in the Bosnian
town of Srebrenica in 1995, the court said the crime ''should be called by its
proper name: genocide.'' The ruling came in an appeal by Radislav Krstic, above,
a Bosnian Serb general and the only person yet convicted of genocide in the
former Yugoslavia. The judges reduced his sentence to 35 years from 46 because
he had ''aided and abetted genocide'' in Srebrenica but had not taken part in
it. Legal scholars said the ruling on genocide, the most serious of war crimes,
was likely to have an important effect on the trial of Slobodan Milosevic, the
former Yugoslav president, and on other cases.   Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); JUDGES (90%); APPEALS COURTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SENTENCING (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); RELIGION (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%);
SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1080 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Visit Buoys Pataki On Antiterror Legislation

BYLINE:  By MARC SANTORA

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO, April 20


Gov. George E. Pataki, who has been battling for two years to get the State
Legislature to pass a set of laws that he says will help combat terrorism,
sought to bolster his case on Tuesday in the refracted light of a presidential
visit.

President Bush was in town to make a case that the Patriot Act has made America
safer, choosing Buffalo as the backdrop because of the successful prosecution of
young Yemeni men from nearby Lackawanna in a terrorism-related case. As Mr.
Pataki looked on approvingly from the audience, his top public security
official, James McMahon, joined a group of other New York law enforcement
officials on the stage with President Bush.

The not so subtle point was that everyone, from federal officials in Washington
to state troopers in Elmira, N.Y., has a part to play in providing security at
home.

The Buffalo event came before a fund-raiser in New York City, where the
president and Mr. Pataki attended a Bush-Cheney Victory Luncheon at the River
Club in Manhattan. Mr. Pataki has already helped raise millions of dollars for
the Bush campaign, helping win him the designation of "ranger," one of an elite
group of top fund-raisers. At the luncheon, the governor introduced the
president as "a friend of New York" and a friend of Israel.

Mr. Pataki has been particularly vocal in coming to the president's defense on
national security issues, and in a speech Saturday in Miami Beach, he went so
far as to say that it was the Democrats' failure to respond to previous
terrorism that set the stage for the Sept. 11 attacks. And he has highlighted
the issue of homeland security in Albany, too, trying to push through
antiterrorism measures, but with little success. While Mr. Pataki has said his
antiterrorism legislation is his top priority, he has so far been unable to
persuade the State Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats, to go along.

On Monday, the day before Mr. Bush's visit, several groups scheduled a news
conference in Albany to highlight the dangers of both the Patriot Act and Mr.
Pataki's antiterrorism proposals.

Udi Ofer, the project director for the New York Civil Liberties Union, decried
"the needless erosion of rightsand freedoms in the name of national security."

Specifically, Mr. Ofer objected to several provisions in Mr. Pataki's proposals
that would broaden the authority of the police and prosecutors in the state. For
instance, Mr. Ofer said, if the new laws are passed, the practice of not
convicting someone based solely on the testimony of an accomplice without
corroborating testimony will be scrapped.

The Civil Liberties Union also objects to what it sees as an attempt to allow
"double jeopardy" prosecutions, where a person could be tried for the same crime
more than once if they were acquitted in another jurisdiction.

The so-called roving wiretap provision also raises worries of abuse, Mr. Ofer
said. Basically, the law would allow state law enforcement officials to tap more
than one phone on the basis of one search warrant as a way of keeping up with
criminals who use multiple cellphones.

Mr. Pataki has responded to his critics by saying that such measures are needed
because of the threats that New York faces, and he notes that his legislation
has the support of Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat who is considering
running for governor in 2006.

But that has done little to convince Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a
Manhattan Democrat whose opposition means the proposals have little chance of
passing.

Governor Pataki said later that during his talks with the president they
discussed a range of issues, including the allocation of federal homeland
security funds for the state. He said that Mr. Bush was in favor of a
threat-based allocation system and that it was Congress that had kept New York
from getting a larger share of the security money.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. George E. Pataki greeted President Bush at Buffalo Niagara
International Airport yesterday. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); GOVERNORS
(79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); DOUBLE
JEOPARDY (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); FUNDRAISING (73%); TESTIMONY (60%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (93%)

CITY: BUFFALO, NY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); ALBANY, NY, USA (88%);
MIAMI, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1081 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 22, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karl Hass, 92, Nazi Convicted Of Mass Killing in Occupied Italy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 286 words

DATELINE: ROME, April 21


Karl Hass, a former Nazi officer convicted in the killing of 335 Italian
civilians in Rome during World War II, died Wednesday in a rest home where he
was serving a life sentence under house arrest, officials at the home said.

Mr. Hass, 92, had lived at the Garden Rest Home, in the Alban hills, near Rome,
since December 1996. His health had been failing, and on Wednesday he had a
heart attack, said the home's director, Riccardo La Rosa.

Mr. Hass, a former SS major, was sentenced in 1998 to life in prison for the
killings at the Ardeatine Caves, on the outskirts of Rome, when the city was
occupied by the Germans in World War II. He was spared prison because of frail
health and his age, and because he had returned voluntarily from Switzerland
after the sentencing.

In the same case, a military court convicted a former SS captain, Erich Priebke;
he is also serving a life sentence under house arrest in Rome.

German soldiers rounded up and shot the civilians, among them 75 Jews, in March
1944 in retaliation for a bomb attack in Rome by Italian resistance fighters
that killed 33 Germans.

Both SS officers insisted at their trials that they had no choice but to follow
orders.

Mr. Hass had come to Italy from Switzerland in 1996 at prosecutors' request to
testify against Mr. Priebke. But he changed his mind and injured himself when he
jumped from his hotel balcony in an effort to avoid taking the stand. He was
then put under house arrest and later indicted.

Survivors include a daughter, Erica, who lived in Geneva, and who came every few
weeks to visit Mr. Hass, Mr. La Rosa said.

''He didn't talk about the trial; he was very closed, very reserved,'' Mr. La
Rosa said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); WORLD WAR II (91%); JAIL
SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%); INDICTMENTS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (76%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (76%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); WITNESSES (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (68%) Deaths (Obituaries); World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (55%)

COUNTRY: ITALY (92%); GERMANY (87%); SWITZERLAND (55%)

REGION: Italy

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1083 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A 'Bone Woman' Chronicles the World's Massacres

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4; THE SATURDAY PROFILE

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: MELBOURNE, Australia


CLEA KOFF was present at the big events of the 1990's: Rwanda, Bosnia, Kosovo.
Just out of graduate school, she was not a fledgling diplomat, nor a journalist.
She was wearing overalls, protective gloves and boots.

Her job was to dig out the aftermath: the decayed bodies, the skeletons and
bones, hoping to make sense of the senseless.

Most of the time, she was able to keep her composure, even under the most
gruesome of circumstances, facing the recent dead.

She would concentrate, she said, on the notion that she was helping provide
critical evidence for the international trials where the authorities in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia have been charged with crimes against humanity and
genocide. That is what it meant to be a forensic anthropologist.

''We play a role in establishing what happened in the past,'' she said of the
profession she has practiced at the intersection of history and justice.

In Bosnia, she dug up bodies that had their hands tied behind their backs, were
blindfolded and then shot multiple times. That evidence was presented in The
Hague at the trial of the former leader of Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic.
''There is lawful killing in armed conflict but not that,'' she said. ''A
pathologist was asked at the trial of Milosevic if it was possible for those
people to have been killed in combat. He replied: 'I think not.' ''

Ms. Koff has chronicled her experiences unearthing mass graves in a book, ''Bone
Woman,'' published by Random House this month to coincide with the 10th
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda that left 800,000 dead. It is a highly
personal account written in an engaging I-was-there style.

She helps the reader understand the complexities of skeleton structure, the
exacting nature of having to bag and tabulate body parts. She gives a sense of
the survivors and the guilt and grief they live with.

It helps that Ms. Koff, now 31, is an accomplished writer who gave up a major in
English at Stanford University for archaeology, and then forensic anthropology.
''As we drove into Kigali town, I could not believe I was there,'' she writes of
the Rwandan capital. ''You know it is Africa: the air is fresh and then sweet --
strongly sweet.''

MS. KOFF speaks of her work with an irrepressible enthusiasm, and the kind of
conviction that she believes she was born to do the job. ''The bodies exhibit
clues to people's behavior as they approached death,'' she said over lunch in
this Australian city where she took time off to write the book. ''They are not
telling us about their political beliefs. They're telling us about themselves.''

What she found on the bodies often raised unanswerable questions. ''In some
cases people brought deeds to their houses,'' she said. ''People had baptismal
cards. Some people had on two sets of clothes. What were they thinking? One man
in Vukovar who had been taken from the hospital, had put his chest X-rays in his
bathrobe. What did he expect?''

She was 23 when she got a call, in 1996, asking her to join a team of 16 experts
who would work for the United Nations on the massacre sites in Rwanda.

She knew Africa from her heritage: her mother is Tanzanian, her father American.
She had traveled the continent as a child accompanying her parents on their
safaris making documentary films. But her experience until that time -- an
internship at a medical examiner's office in Arizona -- was hardly preparation
for the scale of Rwanda's carnage.

After the United Nations missions, she decided to write a book in order to show
Western readers that people in faraway places ''don't do these things just
because they can't control their primordial instincts.''

''Something like Rwanda, because it didn't happen with weapons of mass
destruction but with machetes, doesn't mean it happened without a policy,'' she
said.

The massacres were not driven solely by an ethnic hatred of one group, the
majority Hutu, against the minority Tutsi, she said. ''If people had refused to
kill because it didn't sound right, if there were not the material bribes -- I
feel there were enough people to allow a genocide not to take place.''

Many Rwandans joined in the mass killings because they were exploited, she said.
At the same time, she said, ''There were definitely people who killed
wantonly.''

BORN in Britain, Ms. Koff spent her primary school years in London, and then
moved to the United States -- Washington and then Los Angeles. She seems more
American than English, though at times she slips into a British accent. In the
last 18 months, she has split her time between Melbourne and Los Angeles, and
plans to return to the United States full time, she said.

Her real education came during her childhood traveling. Her father, David Koff,
and her mother, Musindo Mwinyipembe, believed that taking their two children to
the gritty reaches of Africa was the best preparation for life.

Her memories of Somalia include playing on the beach at Mogadishu with Somali
children. At the same time, she came across expatriates who lived in Mogadishu
behind high walls studded with cut glass to keep out local people.

She reports in her book that she sometimes felt the United Nations forensic
missions were similarly isolated from the communities they were working within.

Ms. Koff seems to inherit much of her drive from her father, whose work focused
on the poor. In 1980, Mr. Koff fought the Boston public television station,
WGBH, when executives there were unhappy with ''Blacks Britannica,'' a
documentary they had commissioned him to make on race in Britain.

After WGBH made cuts that altered the film's militant message, Mr. Koff went to
court, seeking an order barring the station from broadcasting the edited
version.

He lost. But the episode left an indelible impression on his daughter, who was
left in Britain at school while her parents fought the case in America. ''I was
6 or 7 years old,'' she recalled. ''We didn't understand the ins and outs, but
understood something was going on.''

Her next mission? A change. Ms. Koff plans to start a private agency in the
United States that will help families with missing family members. She plans to
act as a go-between for the families with the coroner's offices and the F.B.I.

''There are 5,000 long-term unidentified adult bodies in California,'' she said.
''Three thousand to 3,500 adults go missing in suspicious circumstances in
California every year. It is often very difficult for the families to get
cooperation from the police and medical examiners.''

The new work will keep her involved with her first love: bones. ''I have an
innate excitement about bones,'' she said. ''They speak to me.'' She quotes her
mentor, Clyde Snow, a pioneer in the field of forensic anthropology. ''He said,
'Bones don't lie.' I like that.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Science and Technology

PERSON: Clea Koff

GRAPHIC: Photo: CLEA KOFF (Photo by Regis Martin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FORENSICS (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WRITERS (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%);
GENOCIDE (88%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (78%); ARCHAEOLOGY (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (75%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); PUBLISHING (69%); PATHOLOGY (69%); ANNIVERSARIES
(63%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (55%); MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA
(50%)

STATE: VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA (65%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); SERBIA (93%); AUSTRALIA
(90%); KOSOVO (90%); AFRICA (73%); NETHERLANDS (55%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1085 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Attacked, Expelled, Ignored

BYLINE: By Nicholas D. Kristof

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 281 words


The Darfur region of western Sudan is one of the most remote and inhospitable
places on earth, which makes it an ideal place to get away with ethnic
cleansing. Since late last year, an Arab militia called the Janjaweed has killed
thousands of darker-skinned non-Arabs and driven about one million from their
homes.

Most of the refugees are still in Sudan, many of them in squalid camps, the
children dying of malnutrition and measles. An additional 110,000 refugees have
crossed into Chad. Even there they are not safe: the Janjaweed regularly raid
across the border.

The killing here is not about religion, as it is elsewhere in Sudan. It is
largely about race and ethnicity -- and the age-old tension between nomadic
herdsmen and settled farmers. A low-level rebellion began in Darfur a year ago,
backed by some of the local tribespeople. The government responded by arming the
Janjaweed, paying them and giving them helicopter support in scorched-earth
operations intended to empty the countryside.

After President Bush, Kofi Annan and others spoke out earlier this month against
the ethnic cleansing, Sudan agreed to a cease-fire in Darfur and promised
humanitarian access to the victims. But the State Department has suggested that
Sudan breached the cease-fire on its first day, and the United States Agency for
International Development says that even in the best of circumstances -- even if
the fighting stops -- 100,000 people in Darfur will die of disease and
malnutrition. Meanwhile, the world seemed to spend more time observing the 10th
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide and solemnly vowing ''never again'' than
actually doing something to prevent a recurrence in Darfur.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the Darfur region of Sudan, refugees flee the Janjaweed
militia. (Photograph by Francesco Zizola
 Magnum Photos)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (78%); REFUGEES (77%);
CHILDREN (76%); ETHNICITY (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); MALNUTRITION (71%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (50%); ANNIVERSARIES (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (54%)

STATE: EARTH (88%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1091 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

G.I.'s Are Accused of Abusing Iraqi Captives

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
TREATMENT OF PRISONERS

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


American soldiers at a prison outside Baghdad have been accused of forcing Iraqi
prisoners into acts of sexual humiliation and other abuses in order to make them
talk, according to officials and others familiar with the charges.

The charges, first announced by the military in March, were documented by
photographs taken by guards inside the prison, but were not described in detail
until some of the pictures were made public.

Some of the photographs, and descriptions of others, were broadcast Wednesday
night by the CBS News program ''60 Minutes II'' and were verified by military
officials.

Of the six people reported in March to be facing preliminary charges, three have
been recommended for court martial trials, having completed the military
equivalent of a grand jury proceeding, a senior Pentagon official said late
Wednesday. The decision on convening courts martial is now up to Lt. Gen.
Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior American commander in Iraq.

The other grand jury hearings, called Article 32 proceedings under military law,
have been delayed at the request of defense counsel.

The CBS News program reported that poorly trained American reservists were
forcing Iraqis to conduct simulated sexual acts, among other things, in order to
break down their will before they were turned over to others for interrogation.

Charges against the soldiers included assault, cruelty, indecent acts and
maltreatment of detainees, Pentagon officials have previously said.

Gary Myers, the lawyer for one of the enlisted men charged, said in an interview
that the military had treated the six soldiers as scapegoats and had failed to
address adequately the responsibilities of senior commanders and intelligence
personnel involved in the interrogations.

Top officers at the prison, including a brigadier general, face administrative
review, officials said. They are no longer stationed at the prison, Abu Ghraib
near Baghdad.

Mr. Myers said the accused men, all from an Army Reserve military police unit,
had been told to soften up the prisoners by more senior American interrogators,
some of whom they believe were intelligence officials and outside contractors.

''This case involves a monumental failure of leadership, where lower-level
enlisted people are being scapegoated,'' Mr. Myers said. ''The real story is not
in these six young enlisted people. The real story is the manner in which the
intelligence community forced them into this position.''

Mr. Myers represents Staff Sgt. Chip Frederick of the Army Reserve, who has been
charged in the case and who was interviewed by ''60 Minutes II.'' He complained
of a lack of training and admitted that dogs had been used to intimidate
prisoners.

In one photograph obtained by the program, naked Iraq prisoners are stacked in a
human pyramid, one with a slur written on his skin in English. In another, a
prisoner stands on a box, his head covered, wires attached to his body. The
program said that according to the United States Army, he had been told that if
he fell off the box, he would be electrocuted. Other photographs show male
prisoners positioned to simulate sex with each other.

''The pictures show Americans, men and women, in military uniforms, posing with
naked Iraqi prisoners,'' states a transcript of the program's script, made
available Wednesday night. ''And in most of the pictures, the Americans are
laughing, posing, pointing or giving the camera a thumbs-up.''

The CBS News program said the Army also had photographs showing a detainee with
wires attached to his genitals and another showing a dog attacking an Iraqi
prisoner. The program also reported that the Army's investigation of the case
included a statement from an Iraqi detainee who charges that a translator hired
to work at the prison raped a male juvenile prisoner.

At the Abu Ghraib prison, where the photographs were taken, American forces have
been holding hundreds of Iraqis since the American-led invasion of Iraq. The
prison is infamous as a site where Saddam Hussein tortured prisoners while he
was in power.

In March, the United States military first announced that the six enlisted
soldiers from the 800th Military Police Brigade were being charged in the case,
but few details were released.

An official confirmed that Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, who ran the prison, had
been reassigned.

Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, chief spokesman for the American military command in
Baghdad, told reporters that the investigation of Abu Ghraib prison began in
January after a soldier came forward.

''I'm not going to stand up here and make excuses for those soldiers,'' General
Kimmitt said. He said that ''if what they did is proven in a court of law, that
is incompatible with the values we stand for as a professional military force,
and it's values that we don't stand for as human beings.''

He added: ''This does not reflect the vast majority of coalition soldiers, vast
majority of American soldiers that are operating out of Abu Ghraib prison.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS
(90%); GRAND JURY (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); ARMIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); POLICE FORCES (77%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (76%); LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); TERRORISM
(59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Television; Courts-Martial; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Assaults; Sex Crimes; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: James Risen

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1094 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lesser Evils

BYLINE: By Michael Ignatieff.

Michael Ignatieff, a contributing writer for the magazine, is director of the
Carr Center at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. His most
recent book, ''The Lesser Evil,'' on which this article is based, will be
published by Princeton later this month.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 6931 words



I. The Fire Next Time
It has taken nearly three years, but the 9/11 commission and the Supreme Court
hearings on enemy combatants have given us our first serious public discussion
about how to balance civil liberties and national security in a war on terror.
Even so, we have not begun to ask the really hard questions. The hardest one is,
Could we actually lose the war on terror?

Consider the consequences of a second major attack on the mainland United States
-- the detonation of a radiological or dirty bomb, perhaps, or a low-yield
nuclear device or a chemical strike in a subway. Any of these events could cause
death, devastation and panic on a scale that would make 9/11 seem like a pale
prelude. After such an attack, a pall of mourning, melancholy, anger and fear
would hang over our public life for a generation.

An attack of this sort is already in the realm of possibility. The recipes for
making ultimate weapons are on the Internet, and the materiel required is
available for the right price. Democracies live by free markets, but a free
market in everything -- enriched uranium, ricin, anthrax -- will mean the death
of democracy. Armageddon is being privatized, and unless we shut down these
markets, doomsday will be for sale. Sept. 11, for all its horror, was a
conventional attack. We have the best of reasons to fear the fire next time.

A democracy can allow its leaders one fatal mistake -- and that's what 9/11
looks like to many observers -- but Americans will not forgive a second one. A
succession of large-scale attacks would pull at the already-fragile tissue of
trust that binds us to our leadership and destroy the trust we have in one
another. Once the zones of devastation were cordoned off and the bodies buried,
we might find ourselves, in short order, living in a national-security state on
continuous alert, with sealed borders, constant identity checks and permanent
detention camps for dissidents and aliens. Our constitutional rights might
disappear from our courts, while torture might reappear in our interrogation
cells. The worst of it is that government would not have to impose tyranny on a
cowed populace. We would demand it for our own protection. And if the
institutions of our democracy were unable to protect us from our enemies, we
might go even further, taking the law into our own hands. We have a history of
lynching in this country, and by the time fear and paranoia settled deep in our
bones, we might repeat the worst episodes from our past, killing our former
neighbors, our onetime friends.

That is what defeat in a war on terror looks like. We would survive, but we
would no longer recognize ourselves. We would endure, but we would lose our
identity as free peoples.

Alarmist? Consider where we stand after two years of a war on terror. We are
told that Al Qaeda's top leadership has been decimated by detention and
assassination. True enough, but as recently as last month bin Laden was still
sending the Europeans quaint invitations to surrender. Even if Al Qaeda no
longer has command and control of its terrorist network, that may not hinder its
cause. After 9/11, Islamic terrorism may have metastasized into a cancer of
independent terrorist cells that, while claiming inspiration from Al Qaeda, no
longer require its direction, finance or advice. These cells have given us
Madrid. Before that, they gave us Istanbul, and before that, Bali. There is no
shortage of safe places in which they can grow. Where terrorists need covert
support, there are Muslim communities, in the diasporas of Europe and North
America, that will turn a blind eye to their presence. If they need raw
recruits, the Arab rage that makes for martyrs is still incandescent. Palestine
is in a state of permanent insurrection. Iraq is in a state of barely subdued
civil war. Some of the Bush administration's policies, like telling Ariel Sharon
he can keep settlements on the West Bank, may only be fanning the flames.

So anyone who says ''Relax, more people are killed in road accidents than are
killed in terrorist attacks'' is playing games. The conspiracy theorists who
claim the government is manufacturing the threat in order to foist secret
government upon us ought to wise up. Anyone who doesn't take seriously a second
major attack on the United States just isn't being serious. In the Spanish
elections in March, we may have had a portent of what's ahead: a terrorist gang
trying to intimidate voters into altering the result of a democratic election.
We can confidently expect that terrorists will attempt to tamper with our
election in November. Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, said in a
recent television interview that the Bush administration is concerned that
terrorists will see the approaching presidential election as ''too good to pass
up.''

Thinking the worst is not defeatist. It is the best way to avoid defeat. Nor is
it defeatist to concede that terror can never be entirely vanquished. Terrorists
will continue to threaten democratic politics wherever oppressed or marginalized
groups believe their cause justifies violence. But we can certainly deny them
victory. We can continue to live without fear inside free institutions. To do
so, however, we need to change the way we think, to step outside the confines of
our cozy conservative and liberal boxes.

II. The Necessity of Lesser Evils
When democracies fight terrorism, they are defending the proposition that their
political life should be free of violence. But defeating terror requires
violence. It may also require coercion, secrecy, deception, even violation of
rights. How can democracies resort to these means without destroying the values
for which they stand? How can they resort to the lesser evil without succumbing
to the greater?

Putting the problem this way is not popular. Civil libertarians don't want to
think about lesser evils. Security is as much a right as liberty, but civil
libertarians haven't wanted to ask which freedoms we might have to trade in
order to keep secure. Some conservative thinkers, like those at the libertarian
Cato Institute, come down the same way but for different reasons: for them, the
greater evil is big government, and they oppose measures that give the executive
branch more power. Other conservatives, like Attorney General John Ashcroft,
simply refuse to believe that any step taken to defend the United States can be
called an evil at all.

But thinking about lesser evils is unavoidable. Sticking too firmly to the rule
of law simply allows terrorists too much leeway to exploit our freedoms.
Abandoning the rule of law altogether betrays our most valued institutions. To
defeat evil, we may have to traffic in evils: indefinite detention of suspects,
coercive interrogations, targeted assassinations, even pre-emptive war. These
are evils because each strays from national and international law and because
they kill people or deprive them of freedom without due process. They can be
justified only because they prevent the greater evil. The question is not
whether we should be trafficking in lesser evils but whether we can keep lesser
evils under the control of free institutions. If we can't, any victories we gain
in the war on terror will be Pyrrhic ones.

III. How to Think About Civil Liberties
Civil liberties are not a set of pesky side constraints, pettifogging legalisms
tying democracy's hands behind its back. Ask what the American way of life is,
and soon we are talking about trial by jury, a free press, habeas corpus and
democratic institutions. Soon we are talking about that freedom and that
confident sense of an entitlement to happiness that the Europeans find so
strange in this country. Civil liberties are what America is.

Civil liberties may define us, but we have a bad record of jettisoning them when
we get scared. We have the A.C.L.U. today because patriotic liberals after World
War I were ashamed that the Russian Revolution of 1917 had terrified us into the
Red Scare, the Palmer Raids and the needless roundup, arrest and deportation of
mostly Eastern European immigrants, whose worst offense was that they had
socialist, anarchist or communist illusions. We learned from the Red Scare that
we need a civil liberties lobby because frightened majorities do reprehensible
things. Between 1917 and 1920, we did ourselves plenty of harm. A congressman,
Victor Berger, was denied his seat in the House after being convicted of
espionage for writing an antiwar article, and a presidential candidate, Eugene
V. Debs, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for delivering an antiwar speech.
Aliens were harassed and deported. Legal strikes were smashed, and trade-union
leaders were jailed. Indeed, by comparison with the Red Scare or later shameful
episodes like Roosevelt's detention of Japanese during World War II, there have
been no mass detention camps in the United States since Sept. 11 and no
imprisonments for dissent. Not yet anyway.

Even so, after 9/11 we were frightened, and Congress and the government weren't
always thinking straight. After the attack, it may have made sense to detain
more than 700 aliens on one immigration pretext or another until we could figure
out whether there were other sleeper cells at work. But it made a lot less sense
to hold them for months (80 days on average) and to deny them lawyers and public
due process before we tossed most of them out of the country. It was shameful,
as a Justice Department report found, that many Arab and Muslim detainees were
abused and harassed in confinement. Civil libertarians like Prof. David Cole of
Georgetown nobly stood up and denounced such detainments as the abuses that they
were.

But being absolutely right on this issue doesn't make a civil liberties position
right on every other issue. Consider the question of a national ID system.
Instead of crying ''1984,'' the civil liberties lobby should be taking an honest
look at the leaky sieve of the existing driving license ID system and admit how
easy it was for the hijackers to talk their way into the ID's that got them onto
the planes. Instead of defending a failed ID system, civil libertarians should
be trying to think of a better one. One possibility is for Congress to establish
minimum national standards for identification, using the latest biometric
identifiers. Any legislation should build in a Freedom of Information
requirement demanding that the government divulge the data it holds on citizens
and purge data that is unsound.

President Bush has been trying to use civil liberties as a wedge issue,
campaigning for the swift renewal of the Patriot Act in an effort to portray his
rival as soft on the war on terror. The civil liberties lobby has taken the
bait, leading the charge against the Patriot Act and its renewal. But partisan
politics and civil liberties ideology are making it hard to take an unbiased
look at what Bush has actually done. While some aspects of the Patriot Act were
vexatious and ill conceived -- for example, giving federal agents the power to
force librarians and bookstores to divulge what their customers are reading --
other parts of the act (and the antiterrorism measures in general) are
right-minded. Giving the F.B.I. the same powers to wiretap terrorist suspects
that they already use against the Mafia and drug traffickers seems reasonable,
particularly because the taps are controlled by court order. Requiring banks and
security brokers to file suspicious-activity reports to prevent money-laundering
by terrorists sounds like an overdue reform. Enhancing the ability of the C.I.A.
and F.B.I. to pool and share information seems like a good idea. As the staff
reports of the 9/11 commission have shown, neither agency regularly shared its
list of Al Qaeda suspects before Sept. 11 or passed the list to the airlines.

Our vulnerability to attack on 9/11 was not a result just of bureaucratic
bungling, dysfunctional Beltway turf wars and plain inertia. The disaster also
was a result in part of the unintended consequences of well-meaning measures
taken by civil libertarians in the past. Erecting fire walls between domestic
intelligence gathering and law enforcement seemed like a positive development in
the wake of the abuses of J. Edgar Hoover's F.B.I. These same good intentions
led Congress in 1978 to pass the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. This law
created a special federal court that meets in secret to rule on requests by
counterintelligence officers to put espionage and terrorist suspects under
surveillance. These warrants could be issued on lower standards of evidence than
those required under the Fourth Amendment rules that regulate warrants issued in
standard criminal cases. In order to guarantee that law enforcement would not
exploit these lower standards, a legal ''wall'' was installed between
intelligence gathering and criminal investigations. The court could grant F.B.I.
intelligence agents a domestic surveillance warrant only if the primary purpose
of their surveillance was foreign intelligence, not criminal prosecution.

Richard Clarke, the former terrorism czar, has wisely proposed lowering the wall
between domestic law enforcement and intelligence functions. This would allow us
to pull all our domestic antiterrorism capabilities into a version of Britain's
MI5, an agency charged with domestic intelligence-gathering and counterterrorism
but without law enforcement responsibilities.

A second victory for civil liberties -- the taming of the C.I.A. after its
excesses during the Vietnam War era -- may have also weakened our human
intelligence capacities before 9/11. In the wake of disclosures that the C.I.A.
had tried to assassinate foreign leaders as well as thousands of Communist
political cadres in South Vietnam, Senator Frank Church's Congressional
investigation persuaded the Ford administration to rein in the C.I.A. and ban
covert assassination activity. At the time, this seemed like a victory for
civilian control of intelligence. But C.I.A. veterans like Robert Baer, a former
operative in the Middle East, charge that the post-Church controls on the C.I.A.
inadvertently created a culture in which agents preferred to sit behind
Washington desks, reading reports, rather than risking their lives running
informants and agents in the alleyways and tenements of Arab cities. This
aversion to risk led the C.I.A. to cease investing in human intelligence and to
rely too heavily on satellite and signals intelligence. The United States
appears, for example, to have had almost no one on the ground in Iraq after
1998, hence the catastrophic misjudgment by U.S. intelligence about Saddam
Hussein's weapons of mass destruction.

But the problems began much earlier. We know now that the war being waged by
Islamic fundamentalists against the United States began in 1983 with the bombing
of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut and escalated through the African embassy bombings
and the attack on the U.S.S. Cole. As the enemy steadily escalated the fight,
the C.I.A. needed to have operatives in the bazaars, teahouses and mosques of
the Arab world, bribing, importuning and, if necessary, eliminating our enemies.
Who doesn't wish we had killed Osama bin Laden in the late 1990's? But the rules
on assassination were drawn to outlaw it in so-called peacetime. They were at
war with us, and we convinced ourselves that we were not at war with them.
Post-Church, we may have betrayed a fatal preference for clean hands in a dark
world of terror in which only dirty hands can get the job done.

But dirty hands need not be lawless. If we need a tough counterintelligence
service, we do not want it out of control, bribing, suborning, bugging and
assassinating anyone it sees fit. To paraphrase Cofer Black, the former C.I.A.
counterterrorism chief, we may want to put terrorist heads in boxes, but we need
presidents, not C.I.A. operatives or their for-hire hitmen, to decide whose
heads we are targeting. There have to be rules, presidential directives
controlling the resort to assassination. Congress should weigh in here and call
for new legislation. Three rules for targeted assassination seem relatively
obvious: only as a last resort, only when capture is impossible without undue
risk to American lives and only where death or damage to innocent civilians can
be avoided. We need to make sure that assassinations don't do more harm than
good. As the Israelis have discovered through their own assassination policy,
killing Sheik Yassin of Hamas and his successor may only strengthen Hamas
control of Gaza. A war on terror that succeeds tactically -- taking out this
potential terrorist, breaking up that potential cell -- while failing
strategically, further enraging the Arab populace, is not a success. So we need
rules in a war on terror, first of all to keep free institutions intact and
second so that we don't fail in our strategic objective, which is to make
America some friends instead of numberless new enemies.

IV. Striking a Balance
Civil libertarians may tie our hands unduly, while the gung-ho ''anything goes''
brigade might bring us tactical victories at the price of strategic disaster.
Either extreme won't work, so where is the balance to be found?

Let's not pretend it's going to be easy to agree about this. Abiding
disagreement about the trade-off between liberty and security is a permanent
characteristic of any free society. The founding fathers designed the
Constitution to enable our institutions to adjudicate such fundamental
disagreements of principle. The key innovation of American government was the
system of checks and balances. The founders required the executive branch to
justify coercive measures before Congress, and later Justice Marshall in Marbury
v. Madison established the principle of judicial review. This system of
''adversarial justification'' is what keeps us free. Presidents are just like
the rest of us: they can justify anything if they have to justify it to only
themselves. Our system of government, like trial by jury, puts all coercive
measures to the test of hostile, questioning review. Our system is supposed to
challenge the president every step of the way. Show me, prove it to me, give me
the facts -- this is supposed to be the American way.

A war on terror puts this system under real strain. Checks and balances work
slowly -- Congress must deliberate; the courts must review -- and meanwhile, the
crisis calls out for decisive action. This is why terrorism's chief impact on
democracy -- not just in the United States but also in every other free society
and especially in Spain and Britain -- has been to strengthen the power of
presidents and prime ministers at the expense of legislatures and the courts and
to increase the exercise of secret government. Much of the war against terror
has to be fought in secret, and the killing, interrogating and bribing are done
in the shadows. This is democracy's dark secret -- the men and women who defend
us with a bodyguard of lies and an armory of deadly weapons -- and because it is
our dark secret, it can also be democracy's nemesis.

The key question is whether free institutions -- Congress, courts and the press
-- are strong enough to keep this secret army under control. Its budget is
offline, and its operations are below the Congressional radar. Despite the 9/11
commission's remarkable exercise in public education, the government is still
trying to make the war on terror ever more secret. The administration has fought
attempts by the A.C.L.U. to force the Justice Department to disclose how often
it has used its expanded authority under the Patriot Act. It has successfully
resisted attempts to require disclosure of the names of those detained in
investigations after Sept. 11, and an executive order of the president has
clamped down on the release of public information relating to critical
infrastructure. Obviously it's a good idea to keep recipes for ricin off
government-financed research Web sites, and it's not a good idea to have target
detail on critical infrastructure available for download. But adversarial
review, as intended by the founding fathers, can't work if ordinary citizens are
denied the information they need.

Keeping the war on terror under control also requires judges who are unafraid to
challenge presidential power. For nearly two years, the courts deferred to the
president's powers as commander in chief, refusing to deny him authority to
designate American citizens as ''enemy combatants'' and allowing him to imprison
foreign combatants at Guantanamo beyond the reach of American courts. The
president created military tribunals to try foreign combatants, but kept these
tribunals free from review by federal courts and free of the due process
safeguards that apply in U.S. military courts-martial. To their credit, a group
of military defense lawyers assigned to these tribunals has gone public to
question whether their defendants stand a chance of a fair trial.

The courts have watched these developments with growing alarm. The judges of the
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, even when refusing to
grant habeas corpus review to Yaser Esam Hamdi, one of the American enemy
combatants currently held in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., sounded troubled
by the president's powers. The government, they wrote, seems to be ''embracing a
sweeping proposition -- namely that with no meaningful judicial review, any
American citizen alleged to be an enemy combatant could be detained indefinitely
without charges or counsel on the government's say-so.'' Now, at last, the
Supreme Court is reviewing these presidential powers, and to judge from
questioning at the Guantanamo hearings, many justices are troubled by them. As
Justice Stephen Breyer said during oral arguments, ''It seems rather contrary to
an idea of a Constitution with three branches that the executive would be free
to do whatever they want, whatever they want without a check.'' Just as no
justice wants to second-guess a president's decision to commit U.S. forces, so
no court can afford to defer to the president on the fundamental civil rights of
American citizens. The Supreme Court will have to determine whether it was ever
in the intentions of the founders to give the president the power to imprison a
citizen at pleasure and to hold him beyond the reach of the law, and if these
were not their intentions, whether emergency or wartime situations could ever
justify such a departure from constitutional safeguards.

Whatever the court decides, Congress may eventually have to decide how much
emergency power the president should wield. Bruce Ackerman, a liberal law
professor at Yale, has recently proposed a wholesale revision of the president's
current power to declare a national emergency, suggesting that if terrorists
strike again, the president should be given the authority to act unilaterally
for a week and to arrest anyone he sees fit. After a week, Congress would have
to vote to renew his powers for a period of 60 days. Thereafter, an overwhelming
majority would be required to extend the term further. Better to formalize and
control emergency power, Ackerman argues, than to allow the president to slowly
accumulate the power of tyranny.

Yet Congress, with rare exceptions -- like the joint Congressional inquiry of
2002 into Sept. 11 and the powerful Senate dissents of Robert Byrd and Edward
Kennedy -- has become as reluctant as the judiciary to subject the president's
powers to proper scrutiny. The first Patriot Act was large, cumbersome and
poorly drafted, and it passed both the Senate and the House so quickly that it
is doubtful Congress really knew what was in it. As the sunset provisions of the
act come up for renewal in 2005, Congress has an opportunity to redeem itself.

Thus far, it has not been Congress but the bipartisan commission on 9/11 whose
public hearings have focused national debate on civil liberties. It was not
Congress that uncovered evidence that the United States has been handing
terrorist suspects over to foreign governments like Morocco, Egypt and Jordan
for possible torture but diligent reporters like Barton Gellman and Dana Priest
of The Washington Post.

Only if our institutions work properly -- if Congress reviews legislation in
detail and tosses out measures that jeopardize liberty at no gain to security,
if the courts keep executive power under constitutional control and if the press
refuses to allow itself to become ''embedded'' with the government -- can the
moral and constitutional hazards of lesser evils be managed.

V. The Detention Archipelago
Even if our institutions do their jobs, the hazards they must manage are
considerable. Consider the issue of preventive detention of terrorist suspects.
All the major countries on the front line of the war on terror are currently
detaining such suspects, often for indefinite periods of time. It is hard to see
how a successful counterterrorism campaign can succeed unless the police can
arrest and detain suspects on standards of evidence lower than those required
for proof of guilt in a criminal trial. Waiting until police have met the Fourth
Amendment's exacting standards for search, seizure and arrest would expose
innocent civilians to unnecessary risk of terrorist attack. Who doesn't wish the
9/11 hijacker who was pulled over for speeding in the weeks before the attack
had been detained until police could check his ID against C.I.A. and F.B.I.
watch lists?

Currently, terrorism suspects in the United States can be detained as enemy
combatants, held as material witnesses or detained for immigration violations.
We do not even know how many suspects are being held under these categories. If
we were to add up all the suspects, citizens and noncitizens held in U.S.
institutions, together with those in Guantanamo, Iraq, Afghanistan, Diego Garcia
and U.S. brigs and stockades in between, the number might run into the
thousands. No one knows how many detainees there are, and that is the crux of
the problem: the United States may be operating a global archipelago of
detention beyond the law and ken of its citizens. Clearly, there need to be
rules to govern detention, and the key rule -- one that defines democracy itself
-- is that no one, citizen or otherwise, should be held without access to public
review of his detention by independent judicial authorities. Where they are
held, whether offshore or at home, should be immaterial. If they are detained by
Americans, they are America's responsibility, and basic due process standards
should apply.

Philip Heymann of Harvard Law School has argued that we have to stop holding
American citizens indefinitely without charge. We should try them or let them
go. If a suspect cannot be brought to trial without revealing evidence that
would endanger key informants, then a federal judge could order further
detention, but only for a maximum period of two years. After that, the person
would have to be brought to trial or released.

Overseas, in Guantanamo, Iraq and elsewhere, where combatant or terrorist
detainees are held, the government should create military tribunals that offer
detainees the right to challenge the basis of their detention with the
assistance of counsel. Of course, this is costly, and of course, some bad
characters may talk their way out of America's clutches. Release upon detention,
though, does not preclude surveillance upon release. These are hard choices, but
we would be better advised to let a few bad characters go than to continue to
run a global network of detention facilities that, right now, are an open
invitation to abuse.

VI. Torture
The abuse we need to talk about is torture. Torture, our founding fathers said,
was the vice of tyrannies and its absolute exclusion the mark of free
government. At the same time, keeping torture, or at least what used to be
called ''the third degree,'' from creeping back into our police squad rooms at
home has required constant vigilance by D.A.'s and honest cops. Now it may be
creeping into our war on terror. There is some evidence that the United States
has handed key suspects over to Middle Eastern governments for torture. In the
metal containers stacked up behind rings of razor wire on Bagram air base in
Afghanistan, beatings are reportedly routine, and at least two suspects have
died during secret interrogations. It is possible that similar physical methods
have been used against detainees from the Hussein regime at Baghdad airport.

Some observers believe such physical methods are inevitable if we hope to break
terrorists who are willing to die in attacking us. Alan Dershowitz of Harvard
Law School supports an outright ban on torture, but argues that if the United
States is going to rely on it, Congress should regulate it by law. Interrogators
would at least be required to apply to a court for a ''torture warrant,'' which
would set limits to the practice. The evidence extracted by torture would remain
inadmissible in court, but it could be used to prevent impending attacks.

Dershowitz's ideas suggest that it is possible to bring the rule of law into the
interrogation room, but as an exercise in the lesser evil, it is likely to lead
to the greater. Once you allow warrants for genuine ''ticking bomb'' cases --
situations in which torture can prevent an imminent calamity from occuring --
little by little, torture may be used when there is no immediate danger. There
has never been any certainty, moreover, that information extracted by torture is
more reliable than information coaxed out of a suspect by persuasive means. Why
should we suppose that pain produces truth? And how can we forget what everyone
who has ever been tortured always tells us: those who are tortured stay tortured
forever. If you want to create terrorists, torture is a pretty sure way to do
so.

Israel has thought hardest about torture in terrorist cases. After watching how
interrogation degenerated into torture when the Landau Commission of 1987
allowed physical force in questioning, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled in 1999
that shaking suspects and confining them in chairs tipped forward in painful
positions for long periods were violations of Israel's national and
international commitments against torture.

Yet the Israeli Supreme Court also conceded that physical force against suspects
sometimes prizes out information that saves lives in ticking-bomb cases. So it
allowed interrogators a justifying excuse. Torture was banned absolutely, but
interrogators charged with torture could enter evidence that they were seeking
to save lives in order to plead to reduced sentences for breaking the rules. An
outright ban on torture, rather than an attempt to regulate it, seems the only
way a democracy can keep true to its ideal of respecting the dignity even of its
enemies. For that is what the rule of law commits us to: to show respect even to
those who show no respect for us.

To keep faith with this commitment, we need a presidential order or
Congressional legislation that defines exactly what constitutes acceptable
degrees of coercive interrogation. Here we are deep into lesser-evil territory.
Permissible duress might include forms of sleep deprivation that do not result
in lasting harm to mental or physical health, together with disinformation and
disorientation (like keeping prisoners in hoods) that would produce stress. What
crosses the line into the impermissible would be any physical coercion or abuse,
any involuntary use of drugs or serums, any withholding of necessary medicines
or basic food, water and essential rest.

Fine idea, you say, but who is to enforce these safeguards? It ought to be the
rule that no detainee of the United States should be permanently deprived of
access to counsel and judicial process, whether it be civilian federal court or
military tribunal. Torture will thrive wherever detainees are held in secret.
Conduct disgracing the United States is inevitable if suspects are detained
beyond the reach of the law.

VII. Controlling the President
So far, the basic rules for regulating a war on terror look relatively simple:
first, make sure all measures are subjected to review by Congress and the
judiciary; second, make sure the law keeps watch over detainees and suspects. In
a word, we need to ensure that we wage a war for the rule of law and not a war
against it and that we wage it by means of democratic consent rather than by
presidential decree. We have enough of an imperial presidency as it is.

Keeping the president under democratic control is not going to be easy. The
dilemmas here are best illustrated by looking closely at pre-emptive war. It is
a lesser evil because, according to our traditional understanding of war, the
only justified resort to war is a response to actual aggression. But those
standards are outdated. They were conceived for wars against states and their
armies, not for wars against terrorists and suicide bombers. Against this kind
of enemy, everyone can see that instead of waiting for terrorists to hit us, it
makes sense to get our retaliation in first. The problem with pre-emption is
keeping the president's war power under democratic control.

The president's power to make war is supposed to be balanced by Congress's power
to declare it, but in practice, since Vietnam, Congress has not been able to
rein in a president bent on the use of force overseas. A war on terror, declared
against a global enemy, with no clear end in sight, raises the prospect of an
out-of-control presidency. As we learned in the run-up to the war in Iraq, the
case for a pre-emptive war is always bound to be speculative, based on doubtful
intelligence that will be hard for either an electorate or its representatives,
let alone the bureaucracy, to assess for credibility. In the pre-emptive wars of
the future -- Iraq will not be our last exercise in this moral hazard -- our
leaders will try to secure our consent by alternately threatening and reassuring
us with the phrase ''If you only knew what we know.''

But as we have found to our cost, this is not nearly good enough. The facts may
not be as clear before the event as they are likely to be afterward, but voters
must be told what we need to know, before government commits to war in our name.
Over Iraq, our name was taken in vain.

We need national and international rules to control such wars. This may require
both Congressional legislation and United Nations resolutions. Pre-emptive war
can be justified only when the danger that must be pre-empted is imminent, when
peaceful means of averting the danger have been tried and have failed and when
democratic institutions ratify the decision to do so. If these are the minimum
tests pre-emptive war has to meet, the Iraq war failed to meet all three.

Even those -- like me -- who supported the Iraq war because it might bring
freedom and democracy to people who had been gassed, tortured and killed for 30
years had better admit that if our grounds for war had been squarely put to the
American people, they probably would have voted to stay home. Worse still,
Congress failed to put the president's case for war to adversarial scrutiny and
debate. The news media allowed itself to be managed and browbeaten. The war may
or may not bring democracy to Iraq eventually, but it hasn't done democracy any
good at home.

VIII. A Warrior's Honor
Regulating a war on terror with ethical rules and democratic oversight is much
harder than regulating traditional wars. In traditional wars, there are rules,
codes of warriors' honor that are supposed to limit the barbarity of the
conflict, to protect civilians from targeting, to keep the use of force
proportional and to keep it confined to military objectives. The difference
between us and terrorists is supposed to be that we play by these rules, even if
they don't. No, I haven't forgotten Hiroshima and My Lai. The American way of
war has often been brutal, but at least our warriors are supposed to fight with
honor and can be punished if they don't. There is no warrior's honor among
terrorists.

The real moral hazard in a war on terror emerges precisely here, in the fact
that no moral contract, no expectation of reciprocity, binds us to our enemy.
Indeed, the whole logic of terrorism is to exploit the rules, to turn them to
their own advantage. If we hesitate to strike a mosque because the rules of war
designate it as a protected place, then the smart thing for a terrorist to do is
to store weapons and suicide belts there. If our forces start from the
presumption that civilian women should be treated as noncombatants, then
terrorists will train women to be suicide bombers. If all existing codes of
warriors' honor forbid the desecration of bodies, then it is not just mindless
brutality but actually a sound terrorist tactic to drag contractors from a car
in Falluja, set them alight and display their severed and burned limbs from a
bridge. Such provocations are intended to drag us down to their level.

This is the deepest reason why it is difficult to maintain self-control, let
alone democratic control, in a war on terror. We are constantly being tempted to
descend to the logic of terror itself. An eye for an eye. A tooth for a tooth.
Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, but unsaintly men and women, seeing their
loved ones maimed and butchered, may begin to believe vengeance is theirs by
right.

The siren song in any war on terror is ''let slip the dogs of war.'' Let them
hunt. Let them kill. Already, we have dogs salivating at the prospect. A liberal
society cannot be defended by herbivores. We need carnivores to save us, but we
had better make sure the meat-eaters hunt only on our orders.

Taunting us until we let the dogs slip is any canny terrorist's best hope of
success. The Algerian terrorists who fought the French colonial occupation in
the 1950's had no hope of defeating the armies of France in pitched battle.
Their only chance of victory lay in provoking the French into a downward spiral
of reprisals, indiscriminate killings and torture so that the Algerian masses
would rise in hatred and the French metropolitan population would throw up its
hands in disgust. The tactic worked. Terror won in Algeria because France lost
its nerve and lost its control of counterterror.

In Iraq, we had better remember the French lesson: we cannot hope to win a war
of occupation with harshness alone. We need a political strategy that undermines
the terrorist claim that they are fighting a just war against military
occupation. We need to turn the place back to Iraqis quickly or we will just
have created another losing front in the war on terror.

On all fronts, keeping a war on terror under democratic scrutiny is critical to
its operational success. A lesser-evil approach permits preventive detention,
where subject to judicial review; coercive interrogation, where subject to
executive control; pre-emptive strikes and assassination, where these serve
publicly defensible strategic goals. But everything has to be subject to
critical review by a free people: free debate, public discussion, Congressional
review, in camera if need be, judicial review as a last resort. The war needs to
be less secretive, not more. We need to know more about it, not less, even if
what we learn is hard. If it comes to it, we need to know, every time we fly,
that in case of a hijacking, the president has authorized our pilots to shoot us
down if a crash risks killing still more people. In a war on terror, painful
truth is far better than lies and illusions.

Above all, we need to keep faith with freedom. When terrorists strike against
constitutional democracies, one of their intentions is to persuade electorates
and elites that the strengths of these societies -- public debate, mutual trust,
open borders and constitutional restraints on executive power- are weaknesses.
When strengths are seen as weaknesses, it is easy to abandon them. If this is
the logic of terror, then democratic societies must find a way to renew their
belief that their apparent vulnerabilities are actually a form of strength. This
does not require anything new or special. It simply means that those who have
charge of democratic institutions need to do their jobs. We want C.I.A. men and
women who understand that the dogs of war are needed, but that they need to be
on a leash. We want judges who understand that national security is not a carte
blanche for the abrogation of individual rights; a free press that keeps asking,
Where are the detainees and what are you doing with them? We want a Congress
that will not allow national security to prevent it from subjecting executive
power to adversarial review. This, after all, is only what our Constitution
intends. Our institutions were designed to regulate evil means and control
potentially evil people.

The chief ethical challenge of a war on terror is relatively simple -- to
discharge duties to those who have violated their duties to us. Even terrorists,
unfortunately, have human rights. We have to respect these because we are
fighting a war whose essential prize is preserving the identity of democratic
society and preventing it from becoming what terrorists believe it to be.
Terrorists seek to provoke us into stripping off the mask of law in order to
reveal the black heart of coercion that they believe lurks behind our promises
of freedom. We have to show ourselves and the populations whose loyalties we
seek that the rule of law is not a mask or an illusion. It is our true nature.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Since 9/11, National Guard and police patrols have beome part
of the commute at Grand Central Terminal. Security was increased further after
the Madrid bombings. (Photographs by Antonin Kratochvil/VII)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); DIRTY BOMBS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (77%); PRIVATIZATION (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(70%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); SPAIN (72%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1096 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Cruelest Month

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE.

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


''April is the cruelest month,'' wrote T. S. Eliot in ''The Waste Land.'' This
April cruelly set back democracy and antiterrorism in Iraq.

Casualties reached a peak. A Marine commander had to appeal to a Republican
Guard general to come to terms with Baathist insurgents in Falluja. President
Bush had to express America's disgust at the humiliation of Iraqi prisoners by a
handful of sadistic guards. Taken together, that's about as bad as it gets.

However, a certain grim logic suggests a turn for the better may be coming this
summer.

Our June 30 deadline for the end of occupation, once criticized, is now
inexorable. Iraqi sovereignty, it has been agreed, will be palpable but limited;
coalition troops will remain under command of the former occupiers, and the
purpose of the U.N.-chosen transitional Iraqi government is strictly to set up
free elections.

The U.N., at last given its long-sought ''central role'' in Iraq's politics, is
becoming less afflicted with hubris.

U.N. envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, the Berber who sought cheap popularity among
anti-Americans in Iraq by calling Israel ''poison'' and the U.S. support of Gaza
withdrawal ''thoughtless,'' was reported by Secretary General Kofi Annan to wish
he had not said that.

Annan went on to assure NBC's Tim Russert that any U.N. employee who refused to
cooperate with the independent investigation into the oil-for-food scandal would
be fired.

Annan still called corruption charges a ''smear.'' He passed the
failed-supervision buck to the Security Council's 661 committee, then lamely
professed little knowledge of a cover-up letter sent only two weeks ago in the
name of his chief aide, hinting that it might not have been his aide's doing.

But the secretary general seemed aware of the damage done to the U.N. by the $5
billion kickback scheme. Hoping to recoup its reputation in Iraq, he must
realize that this is no time to join French and Russian profiteers in
multilateralist triumphalism.

The new certainty in Iraq of ultimate coalition troop withdrawal should also
concentrate the minds of those Iraqis who until now have been all too content to
allow the outside world to bear the human and financial costs of overthrowing
Saddam.

But there is never any free ride to freedom. If Iraqis do not take up the
opportunity now made available to them by the sacrifice of outsiders, they will
slip back into a new dictatorship, with new torture chambers and mass graves.

The Kurdish minority is aware of this. That is why only a few hundred U.S.
troops are needed in northern Iraq to help the Kurds keep the peace and build
democracy in their region.

But in the Sunni triangle, many of Falluja's insurgents jubilantly declared
victory, waving a Saddam-era flag, when a Marine commander apparently made a
hasty deal with one of Saddam's generals to recruit a few hundred ex-officers
and quieten the hotbed city. We can hope that any such gamble with unvetted
Baathists does not mean we have stopped fighting to win and started fighting not
to lose.

Perhaps the sight of a Sunni force in charge of a key city will snap the Shia
leaders in the south out of their political torpor. Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani, unwilling so far to order his followers to confront Iran's violent
stooge, faces the need to exert his influence lest it be lost to the
anti-American firebrand.

Where are the religious Shia in the face of this challenge to their spiritual
leader? Where are the secular Shia who would face another horrendous wipeout if
the old Sunni military took over when coalition forces left? Where are the
voices of a million Iraqis who returned from exile after their persecutor was
overthrown? Where is the leader brave enough to tell fellow Iraqis that the
danger to them is not from America, but from Iran, Al Qaeda and a new Saddam?

The great majority of Iraqis are glad that Saddam is overthrown. We and the U.N.
are giving them democracy's moment, but courageous Iraqis must come forward to
seize it. Next April's goal is not ''stability,'' the new soft word for the old
hard tyranny. The goal -- theirs and ours -- remains Iraqi freedom.

Bob Herbert is on vacation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); POLITICS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(77%); SCANDALS (76%); TORTURE (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); CORRUPTION (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (77%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); TIM RUSSERT (50%) William
Safire; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); ISRAEL (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iran; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1097 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hostage Is Free; 9 G.I.'s Killed In Iraq Attacks

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS; James Glanz contributed reporting from Des Moines for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: COMBAT

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 2


An American contractor taken hostage by militants last month escaped from his
captors on Sunday and ran into the arms of a group of passing American troops,
on a day when nine other American soldiers died in violence across central and
northern Iraq.

In Washington, the chief American military commander appeared to back away
Sunday from the Iraqi general recently selected to lead the security force in
the battle-torn city of Falluja, after questions were raised about the general's
past association with one of Saddam Hussein's most fearsome military units.

The contractor, Thomas Hamill, a 43-year-old fuel-truck driver whose abduction
on April 9 was filmed by an Australian television crew and broadcast around the
world, bolted Sunday morning from the house where he was being held when he
apparently heard a group of American soldiers approaching.

''He came out of a building and identified himself to American soldiers -- it
looked like it was an escape,'' Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt told reporters in a
hastily prepared news conference. ''It looked like it was an escape.''

Mr. Hamill, a Mississippi dairy farmer who had come to Iraq to get out of debt,
was discovered near Samarra, about 40 miles from the site, west of Baghdad,
where he had been kidnapped. He had been working for the Halliburton subsidiary
Kellogg Brown & Root. American officers said that Mr. Hamill was suffering from
an infected gunshot wound in his right arm but that he was otherwise in good
condition.

''He got a chance to escape,'' Kellie Hamill, Mr. Hamill's wife, told NBC
television from the family's home in Macon, Miss. ''He was locked up in a room
somewhere. He got out, and there was a military convoy coming by.''

Mr. Hamill's abduction was one of a spate of kidnappings and killings of foreign
civilians that unfolded in early April, when American forces were faced with
uprisings in the Sunni Arab stronghold of Falluja and among the followers of a
young Shiite cleric, Moktada al-Sadr.

Among the eight other Americans taken from the same fuel convoy as Mr. Hamill,
four civilian contractors were killed, as was Sgt. Elmer Krause, an American
soldier. Another American soldier, Pfc. Keith Maupin, was captured and is
believed to be in the custody of militants, while two other civilian contractors
are missing.

The fate of three Italian contractors taken hostage is also unknown, as is the
condition of two Canadian businessmen.

Mr. Hamill's flight to freedom marked the brightest bit of news for the
Americans here in the past several weeks; the other events that marked the day
in Iraq seemed as grim and as uncertain as they have at any time in the past
month.

Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the
former Iraqi general who had been selected to lead a new Iraqi security force in
Falluja was not likely to take charge after all.

General Myers made his remarks about the general, Jasim Muhammad Saleh, after
indications that he had served in the Iraqi Republican Guard, regarded as Mr.
Hussein's most loyal troops.

The Falluja security force was announced last week as a way to stem the
bloodletting in the city, where hundreds of Iraqis and dozens of American
soldiers have died in fighting over the past month.

''There's another general they're looking at,'' General Myers said on the ABC
News program ''This Week.'' ''My guess is, it will not be General Saleh. It will
not -- he will not be their leader.''

''He may have a role to play, but that vetting has yet to take place,'' General
Myers said. He did not mention who else he had in mind.

General Saleh's past association with the Republican Guard has led to criticism
here and in the United States that the Americans, in their desire to find a way
out of the siege, handed authority to a prominent member of the government they
had fought so hard to topple.

Iraqi officers say General Saleh served in the Republican Guard as late as 2000.
Though much of the general's past may have been unclear, his ascension angered
many of the country's Shiites. Reuters reported Sunday that Shiite members of
the Iraqi Governing Council had issued a statement accusing commanders serving
in the new Falluja security force of taking part in the violent suppression of
the Shiite uprising against Mr. Hussein after the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

In remarks on another Sunday talk show, General Myers said he wanted to have an
Iraqi in charge who could help American soldiers re-enter the city without
having to shed blood.

''Obviously, it's not going to be in anybody's best interest to put somebody who
was connected to the former regime and atrocities -- to put him in charge out
there,'' he said on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation.''

Attacks against American soldiers continued Sunday across the Sunni heartland of
western and north-central Iraq. Six American soldiers were killed and as many as
30 wounded in a mortar attack on an American base in Ramadi, a town about 50
miles west of Baghdad.

American commanders offered few details of the attack, which occurred at about
2:30 p.m. ''One of the shells hit a densely packed location,'' a senior American
military officer said. ''It was pretty ugly.''

Last month, Ramadi was the scene of one of the most violent days of fighting for
American forces in Iraq, when 12 marines died in fighting with Sunni insurgents.

Also on Sunday, two American soldiers were killed and one wounded when their
convoy was struck by a homemade bomb in northwestern Baghdad. One American
soldier was killed and 10 wounded during an attack on a military base in Kirkuk.

Two American soldiers were killed overnight Saturday when their convoy was
attacked near Amara in southern Iraq.

There were indications on Sunday that tensions were rising between the American
military and the followers of Mr. Sadr, the Shiite cleric who led an uprising
against the occupation last month. Local leaders in Najaf said Sunday that
American soldiers had arrested a senior aide to Mr. Sadr, Adnan al-Anaibi, after
he was suspected of having broken into a human rights office in Babel.

Near Najaf, an American was apprehended by a private security company on April
29 at a base where Iraqi munitions were being destroyed, company officials and
the military said.

The American, Jeffrey B. Mcvey, had been suspected of collaborating with Iraqi
insurgents and was sought by the F.B.I. for unspecified ''crimes against the
coalition,'' said Michael A. Janke, chief operating officer of the company,
Special Operations Consulting-Security Management Group.

Mr. Mcvey maintained that the F.B.I. allegation was the result of a
misunderstanding, Mr. Janke said. A military official later said that Mr. Mcvey
may be cleared of any wrongdoing. When he was taken into custody, Mr. Mcvey was
carrying tags identifying him as working for a subcontractor to Parsons, a prime
contractor to the United States Army Corps of Engineers.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iraqi man, left, approached an Army truck yesterday near
Amara, where two American soldiers were killed overnight Saturday in an attack
on their convoy. Thomas Hamill, right, an American hostage, escaped from his
captors yesterday and was found by American soldiers near Samarra. (Photo by Al
Jazeera)
 (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. A10)Map of Iraq highlighting Samarra. (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOSTAGE TAKING (91%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (88%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); SHOOTINGS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (67%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (50%)

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (83%); KBR INC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: Halliburton Co; Kellogg Brown & Root

TICKER: KBR (NYSE) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (83%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (83%); NAICS238110 POURED CONCRETE FOUNDATION & STRUCTURE
CONTRACTORS (54%); NAICS237310 HIGHWAY, STREET & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (54%);
NAICS237120 OIL & GAS PIPELINE & RELATED STRUCTURES CONSTRUCTION (54%);
NAICS236210 INDUSTRIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (54%); SIC8711 ENGINEERING SERVICES
(54%); SIC1629 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION NEC (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (57%) Dexter Filkins; Thomas
Hamill; Moktada Al- Sadr

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (97%)

REGION: Iraq; Samarra (Iraq); Falluja (Iraq); Iraq; Canada; Italy

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1104 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ARMY PUNISHES 7 WITH REPRIMANDS FOR PRISON ABUSE

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER and DEXTER FILKINS; James Risen and Douglas Jehl
contributed reporting from Washington for this article, and Patrick Healy
contributed from Uniondale, N.Y.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PUNISHMENT

LENGTH: 1820 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


The senior American commander in Iraq has ordered the first punishments in the
abuse of prisoners by American soldiers there, issuing severe reprimands to six
who served in supervisory positions at Abu Ghraib prison and a milder ''letter
of admonishment'' to a seventh.

The officers and noncommissioned officers received penalties that most likely
will end their military careers, although they were not demoted or discharged.
They have not been charged with crimes; six subordinates accused of carrying out
the abuse already face criminal charges.

''They did not know or participate in any crimes,'' a senior American officer in
Baghdad said of the officers who received the reprimands, issued by Lt. Gen.
Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior American commander in Iraq. ''Their
responsibility is to set the standards in the organization. They should have
known, but they did not.''

As more details emerged of widespread problems in the detention system in Iraq,
President Bush on Monday telephoned Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld ''to
make sure that appropriate action was being taken against those responsible for
these shameful, appalling acts,'' said Scott McClellan, the White House
spokesman.

Officials with contractors whose employees at Abu Ghraib have been implicated in
the abuses said that they had heard nothing from the Pentagon and that their
employees remained in Iraq. [Page A6.]

The military's investigative report into abuses of detainees in Iraq, by Maj.
Gen. Antonio M. Taguba, described broader problems in the prison system and
pervasive flaws in the leadership, training and morale of the military police at
Abu Ghraib and elsewhere. It suggested that these problems had contributed to
abuse even after earlier instances were reported and punished.

The report found, for example, that after several detainees were beaten in May
2003 at Camp Bucca, another detention site in Iraq, nothing was done to make
clear to the military police elsewhere that such actions were not to be
tolerated. Soldiers responsible for those earlier abuses were charged and
punished late last year. The report found at least 27 cases of escapes by
prisoners and said the number was probably higher but could not be verified
because the rolls of prisoners had been so poorly maintained.

It cited ''riots, escapes and shootings'' of prisoners over many months, adding
that ''the same types of deficiencies'' were found repeatedly but ''little to
nothing was done.''

A key recommendation of the Taguba report was to immediately send to Iraq a team
of specialists to train soldiers who are assigned to run prisons. The report
said the team should include experts on internment operations, international
law, interrogation, intelligence gathering and Arab cultural issues.

Among the problems at Abu Ghraib, the report said, was ''a potentially dangerous
contingent'' of Iraqi guards who had given inmates contraband, weapons and
information and had helped at least one inmate to escape.

Edward Diamantis, a captain with the 800th Military Police Brigade, which has
its headquarters in Uniondale, N.Y., has returned to the United States. He said
the reservists' monthly weekend training sessions had often been spent learning
military policy on things like sexual harassment and homosexuality. Other times,
drug tests took up the training day, or instructors were absent from training
sessions.

''Some relevant mission readiness training gets pushed aside by things that
don't seem all that relevant,'' he said. ''The last comprehensive, top-to-bottom
training was in 1998. I'd call that a problem.''

But military officers have said there was no excuse for the behavior documented
in photographs now circling the globe. All Army personnel in their basic
training and their advanced individual training receive courses on the laws of
armed combat that include clear instructions against such abuse and torture, and
these officers say that common decency should have prevented the soldiers from
such actions.

Captain Diamantis served directly under Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski at the
brigade's headquarters just east of the runways of the Baghdad International
Airport. He spent most of his days there, but made several journeys to the Abu
Ghraib prison and other detention facilities.

Captain Diamantis said he had first heard rumors of the mistreatment at Abu
Ghraib in January, and during a conversation with General Karpinski later that
winter she told him that something ''very, very bad'' had been happening in the
prison, he said. ''There's some very, very stupid people, and they're going to
bring some stuff down on our heads,'' Captain Diamantis recalled the general
saying.

The Maryland unit whose soldiers are charged with abusing prisoners at Abu
Ghraib was not trained in Uniondale, Captain Diamantis said.

The Central Intelligence Agency is also investigating reports of detainees dying
during incarceration, and even in interrogation, while in American custody in
Iraq, a C.I.A. official said Monday. The official said the agency's inspector
general was investigating the possible involvement of C.I.A. personnel in the
deaths of two prisoners in Iraq, one at Abu Ghraib in November and another
elsewhere at an unspecified time.

The prisoner at Abu Ghraib died hours after being taken into custody, the
official said. The official said he did not know the cause of the death in that
case or the other one being looked into by the inspector general.

But the C.I.A. official said abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib was ''not
something to the best of our knowledge my agency has any involvement in.''
Altogether, the official said, the agency was involved in the interrogation of
no more than two dozen individuals at Abu Ghraib between September and December.

The commander of the military police battalion at Abu Ghraib, who confirmed that
he had received a serious rebuke, known as a General Officer Memorandum of
Reprimand, wrote in an e-mail message that the abuse had been carried out by a
handful of soldiers who sought to hide their behavior from commanders by
demeaning and humiliating detainees late at night.

''If they thought these acts were condoned, then why were they only done a few
nights between 0200 and 0400 instead of during any time between 0600 and 2400
when there were many others around?'' wrote the officer, Lt. Col. Jerry L.
Phillabaum, a reservist and 1976 graduate of West Point.

Colonel Phillabaum, who has been relieved of command of the 320th Military
Police Battalion and whose performance was severely criticized in General
Taguba's report, said he was aware that military intelligence had asked M.P.'s
to ''deprive some prisoners of clothing to humiliate them'' and to ''limit their
sleep to 4 hours in a 24-hour period. But ''taking these prisoners out of their
cells and staging bizarre acts were the thoughts of a couple of demented
M.P.'s,'' he wrote, ''who well know such acts are prohibited.''

Military officers would not say publicly whether General Karpinski, commander of
the 800th Military Police Brigade and the senior officer at Abu Ghraib, was
among the seven who received reprimands. But General Taguba's 53-page report on
the military's inquiry into abuse at Abu Ghraib said she had received a General
Officer Memorandum of Admonishment from General Sanchez.

In the criminal portion of the investigation, six enlisted personnel or
noncommissioned officers of the 372nd Military Police Company -- who were
assigned to the sprawling prison west of Baghdad that was notorious under Saddam
Hussein for overcrowding and torture -- face charges of assault, cruelty,
indecent acts and maltreatment of detainees.

The Taguba report indicates that the military police may have been used to
''soften up'' detainees in Afghanistan before interrogations there as well.
Without providing details, the report includes a reference stating that recent
intelligence collection in support of the Afghan operation used the military
police to ''actively set favorable conditions for subsequent interviews. Such
actions generally run counter to the smooth operation of a detention facility,
attempting to maintain its population in a compliant and docile state.''

Arabic language television networks showed interviews on Monday with two of the
Iraqis said to be depicted in the photographs taken with the American guards.

In a brief interview on Al Jazeera, Haishem Mohsen, a man who said he was
depicted in the photos, described his abuse at the hands of Americans. Mr.
Mohsen said that when he was detained in January, he was interrogated by
American intelligence officers and Iraqi and Egyptian interpreters. ''They
covered our heads with bags, they beat us with the butts of their guns without
any fear that we would die of the blows,'' he said. ''They made us take our
clothes off and they pushed us against the wall. They did things to us that I am
unable to talk about.''

The other Iraqi, Haider Sabar, said an American intelligence officer, along with
an Iraqi and an Egyptian translator, showed him ''immoral photos of the acts
that took place,'' apparently to frighten him.

The names of both the men in the report by Al Jazeera roughly matched those on a
list of abused Iraqi detainees named in an investigation by the American
military.

In addition to General Karpinski and Col. Thomas M. Pappas, commander of the
205th Military Intelligence Brigade, the Taguba report identifies a number of
other officers and enlisted personnel who have either already been disciplined
or who now face disciplinary action. Among them is Colonel Phillabaum, who was
criticized for failing to properly supervise his soldiers in a section at Abu
Ghraib, for failing to ensure his soldiers knew and understood the protections
afforded to detainees in the Geneva Convention, and for other reasons, according
to the report.

The report also recommended that several more junior officers in the 320th
Military Police battalion as well as officers and senior enlisted personnel in
the 372nd Military Police Company face disciplinary actions. The report
recommended that Maj. David W. DiNenna Sr., the operations officer of the 320th,
be relieved of his position, while Capt. Donald J. Reese, commander of the
372nd, should be relieved of command along with First Lt. Lewis C. Raeder, a
platoon leader in the 372nd.

The report also cites Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan, former director of the Joint
Interrogation and Debriefing Center and liaison officer to the 205th Military
Intelligence Brigade, and says he should be relieved from duty and reprimanded
for making misrepresentations to investigators, among other reasons.

The Taguba report concludes that several soldiers committed egregious acts and
grave breaches of international law at Abu Ghraib and Camp Bucca, and that
senior leaders failed to comply with policies and commands to prevent abuses at
the two prisons between August 2003 and February 2004.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iraqi prisoner is pinned under a stretcher by an American
soldier. The prison-abuse scandal in Iraq has stirred anger in the Arab world.
An American soldier surveys several bound Iraqi prisoners, shown in an undated
photograph taken inside Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad. Seven officers were
reprimanded yesterday for actions at the prison. (pg. A6)Chart: ''Blurring Lines
in Chain of Command''An Army investigation of detainee abuse at Abu Ghraib
prison in Iraq found that military intelligence officers, rather than military
police, were given control of the prison, worsening an already ''ambiguous
command relationship.'' The chart below shows the chain of command at the time
of the abuses, from October to December 2003.Gen. John P. Abizaid -- Commander,
United States Central CommandLt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez -- Commander, Combined
Joint Task Force SevenLt. Gen. David D. McKiernan -- Commander, Coalition Forces
Land ComponentUnits at Abu Ghraib prisonCol. Thomas M. Pappas -- Commander,
205th Military Intelligence Brigade Was made commander of Abu Ghraib in November
2003Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski -- Commander, 800th Military Police Brigade Was
responsible for all military prisons
was reprimanded and removed from commandLt. Col. Steven L. Jordan -- Director,
Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Center Recommended to be relieved from duty
and reprimandedLt. Col. Jerry L. Phillabaum -- Commander, 320th Military Police
Battalion Was relieved of command and reprimanded372nd Military Police Company
-- In March, six soldiers were charged with abusesTHE INVESTIGATIONSSEPTEMBER
2003Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, commander at Guantanamo Bay, reviewed the
procedures to get information from internees in Iraq.NOVEMBER 2003A report by
Provost Marshal Donald Ryder found ''no military police units purposely applying
inappropriate confinement practices'' in Iraq.FEBRUARY 2004A report by Maj. Gen.
Antonio M. Taguba found numerous instances of criminal abuse of prisoners at Abu
Ghraib between October and December 2003.APRIL 2004New investigations began on
interrogation practices and reservist training.THE ALLEGATIONSOCTOBER 2003Eight
Marine reservists were charged in the death of an Iraqi prisoner.DECEMBER 2003A
lieutenant colonel was fined $5,000 after he shot a gun next to an Iraqi
detainee while questioning him about a planned attack.JANUARY 2004Three military
police soldiers from Pennsylvania were discharged for abusing Iraqi prisoners in
a southern Iraqi camp.MARCH 2004Six enlisted personnel faced criminal charges
for abuses at Abu Ghraib. One has been court-martialed.MAY 2004Reprimands of six
people are announced
 a letter of admonishment is given to a seventh. (pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); PRISONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (86%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); RIOTS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); MANAGER TRAINING (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%); GENOCIDE
(60%); TERRORISM (59%); MILITARY TRAINING (58%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Prison Escapes; Demonstrations and Riots;
Terrorism; Police

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Thom Shanker; Dexter Filkins; Ricardo (Lt Gen) Sanchez; Antonio M (Maj
Gen) Taguba

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (59%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1110 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi-Americans, Split on Prospects, See Little Progress Back Home

BYLINE: By JOHN M. BRODER; Ben Lefebvre contributed reporting from Detroit for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: ALHAMBRA, Calif., May 6


The pictures of American troops sexually humiliating and physically abusing
Iraqi prisoners at a Baghdad prison left Hanaa al-Wardi shaking in fury and
disgust.

Mrs. al-Wardi, a microbiologist and artist who left Iraq in the early 1970's and
now lives in Southern California, said she held President Bush to blame not only
for the horrors at Abu Ghraib prison, but also for the failure to restore
stability and basic services in Iraq, where many of her relatives live. She
wishes the same humiliation on the president that was visited upon the Iraqi
prisoners.

''The only way this feeling is going to be calmed is when I see Bush, Cheney and
Wolfowitz naked with bags on their heads,'' she said. ''You might think this is
really harsh, but they deserve it. To treat the Iraqi people as totally
subhuman, that's not right. Especially if you go in on the pretext that you are
going to liberate them, give them a better life, give them freedom.''

Mrs. al-Wardi, one of an estimated 50,000 Iraqis in the United States, is not
alone in her anger and revulsion. Even some who supported the war and still hope
the occupation can lead to a free and democratic Iraq share her views.
Interviews with a dozen Iraqi-Americans in Los Angeles and Detroit, two of the
nation's largest Iraqi emigre communities, show a split on long-range prospects
for Iraq. But there was virtual unanimity among those interviewed that the Bush
administration had badly botched the job since the fall of Baghdad a little more
than a year ago.

''This so-called liberation turned out to be nothing more than an occupation,''
said Basam al-Hussaini of San Dimas, Calif., who left Iraq as a teenager in 1982
after government forces killed two of his brothers. ''They have done a good job
of occupying the land of Iraq, but a horrible job of occupying the hearts of the
Iraqi people.''

Though his family belongs to the Shia sect of Islam, Mr. al-Hussaini was sharply
critical of American military actions in Falluja, a Sunni stronghold. He said
that military force only exacerbated problems there and that the Americans would
have been well received if they had provided water, power and fuel instead of
bullets and tank shells.

He also said that the degradation of the Iraqi prisoners was inexcusable and
would be remembered long after American forces left Iraq. He said that nudity
and homosexuality were strict taboos in Muslim culture.

''To force someone to have sex with the same gender, particularly in front of a
woman, is one of the most humiliating things imaginable; it is a type of torture
in our culture,'' Mr. al-Hussaini said.

Dr. Maha Hussain, a professor of internal medicine at the Comprehensive Cancer
Center at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, holds a more sanguine view of
the American occupation, though she, too, believes that the revelations from Abu
Ghraib have deeply damaged the United States throughout the Muslim world.

Dr. Hussain said the soldiers involved had disgraced their fellow troops and
embarrassed their nation and should be harshly punished.

Yet she supports the military mission in Iraq as ''a necessity, not a choice.''
Dr. Hussain, who left Iraq in 1983 and completed her medical studies in the
United States, said the Iraqis fomenting dissent and attacking American troops
were doing a disservice to their county.

''I am extremely disappointed,'' she said. ''Not at the deployment, but at the
Iraqis who cannot see the merits of peace and reaching their goal by peaceful
means. Unfortunately, we're treating them with kid gloves. They need to be dealt
with firmly.''

Several of those interviewed expressed concern about the Marines' turning to
former Iraqi military officers to help quell the revolt in Falluja. Imam Sayed
Hassan al-Qazwini, spiritual leader at the Islamic Center of America in Detroit,
called it the ''re-Baathification'' of Iraq.

''It's like if the Nazis were brought back to rule Germany,'' said Mr.
al-Qawzini, 40, who was born in Najaf to a prominent family of Shia clerics.

The imam also said the United States had failed to promote representational
government in Iraq, citing the case of Moktada al-Sadr, the radical young Shia
cleric in Najaf.

''I'm not a big fan of this man,'' he said. ''But he has a big following in
Iraq. We alienated this man, and now he's become rebellious. We closed down his
newspaper even though we said we'd bring freedom of speech.''

Mr. al-Qawzini said he had seen a growing disenchantment among his followers,
who generally applauded the toppling of Saddam Hussein. ''I can see how bitter
they are,'' he said. ''It really bothers me. I tend to be optimistic, but the
news is grim.''

Dr. Ridha Hajjar, the acting imam at the Ahlul Beyt mosque in Pomona, Calif.,
said he opposed the war from the outset, although he wanted to see Mr. Hussein
removed. His initial feelings have been confirmed in the past year, he said.

Dr. Hajjar said the Iraqi people had grown impatient with the American promises
of security and physical rebuilding. ''One year passed, and there's no concrete
development on the ground,'' he said. ''People are not that patient. They
expected immediate relief.''

The prison reports have fueled this frustration, Dr. Hajjar said. ''These things
now make people even more disgusted. They say, 'You're not different from the
others we had.' ''

Ban al-Wardi, a lawyer in Long Beach, Calif., and the daughter of Hanaa
al-Wardi, said she was suspicious of the Bush administration's motives from the
beginning.

''Iraq has been colonized before; Iraq has been occupied before,'' Ms. al-Wardi
said. ''We have had our people punished, dehumanized, portrayed as animals.''

Ms. al-Wardi, president of the Los Angeles chapter of the American Arab
Anti-Discrimination Committee, said the mistreatment of prisoners in Iraq
reflected the same hostility to Arabs and Muslims that Americans of Arab descent
have felt since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

''This is exactly how we felt when we were being detained and strip-searched and
called terrorists,'' she said. ''It's so rampant right now, the feeling that all
Arabs are terrorists and so it's justified to torture and humiliate them.''

Her mother, who was interviewed separately, said that early in the war she told
her friends that the United States might be able to undo decades of oppression
and turn Iraq into the Switzerland of the Middle East.

''A year ago, I was hoping that something good would come of this,'' Mrs.
al-Wardi said ruefully. ''But I was just wrong. I was totally naive.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Imam Sayed Hassan al-Qazwini of the Islamic Center of America
in Detroit
Hanaa al-Wardi, with her husband, Dhia, in Alhambra, Calif.
and her daughter Ban al-Wardi of Long Beach point to failures in Iraq.
(Photographs by J. Emilio Flores for The New York Times)
 (Photo by Tom Pidgeon for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (71%); RELIGION (65%); TERRORISM (62%); GENOCIDE (62%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (61%) Iraqi-Americans; Public Opinion; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) John M Broder; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: Iraq; Falluja (Iraq); Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1113 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections

LENGTH: 64 words


Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Wednesday about an Iraqi's
account of his mistreatment by American captors at the Abu Ghraib prison last
November misspelled the surname of a soldier from the 372nd Military Police
Company accused of having participated. He is Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr.,
not Granier.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); WAR &
CONFLICT (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%);
TERRORISM (84%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (83%); ARMED FORCES (81%) Correction
Stories; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1115 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

My Life as a Guard

BYLINE: By Ted Conover.

Ted Conover is the author, most recently, of ''Newjack: Guarding Sing Sing,''
which won the National Book Critics Circle Award.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31; The Roots of Abu Ghraib

LENGTH: 828 words


When they see the photographs of the torture at the Abu Ghraib prison near
Baghdad, Iraqis and many others around the world will focus on the debasement
and humiliation of the Iraqi prisoners. When I looked at the photos, I noticed
something more: I couldn't take my eyes off the American soldiers. I couldn't
stop trying to imagine the scene as one of the photos was set up: ''Hey, let's
put 'em in a pyramid. And now, you -- get over there and give me the
thumbs-up.''

This is not torture as we see it in movies, with bare wires or fizzy water up
the nostrils. Those scenes always have an evil sadist directing things, an
eccentric genius of pain. These soldiers do not look like sadists or geniuses,
but rather like Americans abroad creating their very own souvenirs.

It is a heady thing to have prisoners at your mercy. Prison officials in the
United States often say that the job involves ''care, custody and control.'' In
New York, where I worked as a prison guard for almost a year in the late 1990's,
training focuses mainly on the final element -- control -- but the care and
custody are in some ways more crucial. Because therein lies the true test of the
officer, the system and indeed the nation: how will you treat those who are
helpless before you?

President Bush has said that ''the practices that took place in that prison are
abhorrent and they don't represent America.'' How, then, does such abuse happen?

Prison work is easier if you don't get too personal with the prisoners, don't
empathize with them too much. Soldiering is probably the same: it's easier to
fight the enemy if he is faceless, less than human. A military prison, then, has
the potential to be the most heartless of worlds. It is perhaps not a
coincidence that the Third Geneva Convention, revised in 1949, addresses the
rights of prisoners of war; the horrors of World War II were the great stimulus
to the writing of the convention. The nations of the world, including America,
were nearly unanimous that such atrocities should never be allowed to be visited
upon anybody again, anywhere.

But here we see the faces of the American torturers of wartime prisoners -- and
they seem to be having a pretty good time. And the victims of this torture, it
should not surprise us, are hooded and . . . faceless.

Up the chain of command, heads are rolling, of course; the general who was in
charge of the prison has been reprimanded, and Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld is reported to have received a dressing-down from the president. Not
all those depicted in the photos have been charged, and they may have played a
small or minor role, although six military police officers at Abu Ghraib are
facing courts-martial. Still, there's been no answer yet as to how this was
allowed to happen.

In the prison where I worked (and in most prisons, I suspect), there are two
sets of rules. There are the official rules, which you learn during training and
carry in a booklet in your pocket. And then there are the real rules -- the
knowing what you can and cannot get away with.

Prison officers, in charge of people who are usually not nice, are bound to
overstep the rules occasionally. The infractions may be relatively minor, like
forgetting to unlock the cell of a difficult inmate when it's recreation time,
or more serious, like participating in an ''adjustment'' of an abusive inmate.
And when and if the incidents are made public, the test is always: will your
superiors back you up? Is the boss a good guy or a jerk? Which rule book does he
follow?

In a prison, of course, the boss is the superintendent or warden. He's the one
who, in ways that are sometimes unspoken, sets the tone for the institution,
making clear what's acceptable and what is not.

In a military prison during a time of war, it may be little harder to divine
exactly who is in charge, and what's likely to happen if something goes wrong --
if a prisoner dies during interrogation, for example. The discredited former
commander of Abu Ghraib, Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, has said that while the
soldiers in the photos were technically under her command, military intelligence
effectively ran the unit where the abuse took place.

What we do know about the treatment of prisoners in this ''war on terror'' (of
which Iraq, we are told, is a part), is that the Geneva Conventions don't always
apply -- the prison at Guantanamo Bay, filled with hundreds of ''enemy
combatants'' (who are not afforded the protections of P.O.W.'s) being Exhibit
No. 1. Is Guantanamo different from Abu Ghraib? The administration would say
yes. Then again, the new head of Abu Ghraib, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, was in
charge of the interrogations at Guantanamo until just recently.

President Bush may indeed have felt ''deep disgust'' upon seeing these torture
photos. Then again, the man who sets the tone for the entire war effort has
never claimed to be the prisoner-protection president.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (91%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PRISONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); POWS & MIAS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); LAW OF WAR (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); WORLD WAR II
(71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (61%); TERRORISM (60%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Ted Conover; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Officials Grapple With How and When to Release Images

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
DETAINEES

LENGTH: 1043 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


The Defense Department is planning to provide Congress with many more pictures
of the abusive treatment of Iraqi detainees, but has not decided whether to
release them to the public, Congressional leaders and Pentagon officials said
Sunday.

In the end, President Bush is likely to make the determination on making the
images public, aides said.

Inside the White House, several of Mr. Bush's aides have argued that he has
little choice but to make them public. Sooner or later, they say, the images
will leak out, prolonging the pain, fueling Iraqi and Arab suspicions of a
Pentagon-orchestrated cover-up, and giving new life to calls for Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's removal.

Many in the Pentagon, though, are resisting. Pentagon officials warned that a
public release could jeopardize its criminal inquiry. They theorized that
defense lawyers could cite a governmental release in motions to dismiss charges,
arguing that their clients could not get a fair hearing. So far, seven soldiers
are facing charges related to abuse of Iraqi detainees.

In meetings this weekend, officials who took part said, some senior military
officials argued that releasing the pictures would only further inflame Iraqis,
fuel the insurgency and make it nearly impossible to gain help from Arab allies.
Moreover, the officials expressed fear in those meetings that any captured
American soldiers would be placed at greater risk.

That argument broke out in public on Sunday when the chairman of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, seemed to back
keeping the images from public view, describing them as ''of a classified
nature'' on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.'' He was immediately
challenged by a fellow Republican, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who
shot back: ''If there's a videotape out there, for God's sake let's talk about
it, because men and women's lives are at stake, given how we handle this. So I
want to get it all out on the table.''

The Pentagon's chief spokesman, Larry Di Rita, confirmed that the Defense
Department had been in discussions with Congress to find a way for members to
view the photographs and videos. ''We're looking for a mechanism to do that,''
Mr. Di Rita said.

One complication, he said, is that the Pentagon is not certain it has obtained
all photographic and video material gathered as evidence in the case from
military investigators in Iraq.

While pressure grew to push the images out for public review, the Pentagon was
aware that such a decision could taint the criminal investigation.

On one hand, Mr. Di Rita said, is ''an understandable desire for people to see
and get a better sense of the range of activities that may be depicted in the
photos.'' On the other, he noted, ''is everybody's desire and obligation to be
careful about not prejudicing an administrative review and criminal
proceeding.''

In an interview later Sunday, Mr. Graham, a colonel in the Air Force Reserve
with 20 years' experience in the area of military justice, said: ''We actually
have an opportunity to prove to those who may still be open-minded that there is
a difference between us and the Saddam Hussein regime. I really do believe that
a lot of people are sort of checking under the hood of democracy to see if they
want to be part of it.''

He said the material was almost certain to become public eventually and that a
''drip, drip'' of damaging photos would only add to what he described as a
public relations disaster. He said there might be a way to release the material
and protect the investigation, but ''at the end of the day there is a larger
issue and this is of the credibility of the United States.''

During back-to-back hearings on Friday on detainee abuse convened by the House
and Senate, members from both parties warned that American troops in Iraq were
less secure, and the United States was less secure, because the depraved acts of
detainee abuse have so ignited world anger. Some members of Congress have called
on Mr. Rumsfeld to resign.

Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee, agreed that the public should view the images.

''It's best that this be seen for what it is,'' Senator Levin said. ''Judgments
then can be made by people. Any effort to hide this kind of material is just not
going to work. We have an open society. We are proving it, I believe, by
proceeding to investigate the way we are.''

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who also serves on the Armed
Services Committee, warned that scandals grow until information is released.

''Look, one thing I know about scandals: They go on and on and on until the
American people feel they have a full and complete picture of what happened,''
Senator McCain said on ''Fox News Sunday.''

''And to hold back these pictures, or to hold back the videos and only show them
to members of Congress or something like that, first, is foolish, because
they'll leak out, but second of all, it is sending the wrong signal,'' he added.

But Senator McCain indicated that focusing on the images missed larger, more
important questions, including whether the military police unit at Abu Ghraib, a
notorious prison during the Hussein era, was acting on the specific orders of
military intelligence to soften up detainees in advance of interrogation.

Senator Levin also warned that the degrading treatment of detainees might be
''much more systemic than just a few guards abusing prisoners,'' and that it
might have been part of a wider effort ''to extract information from these
prisoners.''

''And this was part of a new intelligence policy which goes right on up to the
Pentagon and perhaps even beyond,'' Senator Levin said.

He said that ''some of the environment here was actually set at the White House
when they said it was a bunch of legalisms to discuss whether or not the Geneva
Conventions would apply to prisoners directly or whether they would be treated
consistent with the Geneva Conventions or in the same way but not precisely.''

This policy, Senator Levin said, was ''splitting legal hairs about the
application of Geneva Conventions, and it seems to me that sent exactly the
wrong message to the intelligence people and to the guards themselves.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senators John W. Warner, left, and Lindsey Graham appearing
yesterday on ''Meet the Press'' to discuss the abuse of Iraqi detainees. (Photo
by ''Meet the Press'')

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); EVIDENCE (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY
POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); LAWYERS (75%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (60%); TERRORISM
(59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Photography;
Intelligence Services; Terrorism

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (66%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (66%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (66%)

PERSON: JOHN WARNER (78%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%) Thom
Shanker; George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; John S (Sen) Mccain

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prisoner Abuse Scandal Puts McCain in Spotlight Once Again

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


Tucked away in Senator John McCain's office, almost invisible amid the family
pictures, trinkets and mementos that are the stuff of a busy lawmaker's career,
are hints of another life:

A chunk of pale orange brick from the infamous prison, nicknamed the Hanoi
Hilton, where Mr. McCain was held for more than five years during the Vietnam
War. A framed photocopy of a telegram, dated Sept. 13, 1968, documenting the
young Captain McCain's decision to refuse his captors' offer of early release. A
photograph of the statue that stands by the small lake in Hanoi where Mr.
McCain, a Navy fighter pilot, was shot down and captured.

The senator from Arizona does not flaunt these things -- the telegram hangs out
of view, behind a door -- and he does not often talk of his other life. ''It was
a long time ago,'' he said quietly last week, ''and it is something I've put
behind me.''

But as the Iraqi prisoner abuse scandal unfolds, Mr. McCain is, as he often is,
in the center of the swirl on Capitol Hill. Now, though, he has a bigger
platform than ever, by dint of his unusual position as both a member of the
Senate Armed Services Committee and a former prisoner of war. And he is filled
with anger, the kind of anger that bespeaks something deep and personal.

With the Senate preparing to take up a resolution condemning the abuse, possibly
as soon as Monday, Mr. McCain has made it clear that he intends to use both his
platform and his anger to prod the Bush administration to make the facts of the
scandal public immediately. He is not interested, he said in an interview
Friday, in ''some commission to investigate and report out six or nine months
from now.''

''They can do whatever they want,'' he said, ''but the facts have got to come
out now.''

Those facts are not yet out to the senator's satisfaction, and his furor was on
full display on Friday as he questioned Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld,
repeatedly cutting Mr. Rumsfeld off when he was unable to say who was in charge
of the interrogations and what instructions were given to guards. His face grew
red and his brow furrowed as his voice rose in exasperation. ''Secretary
Rumsfeld,'' Mr. McCain declared, practically exploding, ''in all due respect,
you've got to answer this question!''

Mr. McCain's rage was in full flare outside the hearing room as well, as a
reporter suggested that the mistreatment had been necessary to extract
information.

''Look,'' the senator said stiffly, ''history shows -- and I know a little bit
about this -- that mistreatment of prisoners and torture is not productive. It's
not productive. You don't get information that's usable from people under
torture, because they just tell you what you want to hear.''

The son and grandson of prominent Navy admirals, Mr. McCain, 67, was making his
23rd bombing run over North Vietnam when he was shot down in October 1967. Both
arms and a leg were broken in the crash. ''He was damn near dead when they
captured him,'' said Orson Swindle, a member of the Federal Trade Commission and
a former Marine pilot who lived with Mr. McCain in captivity.

The senator gained hero status when, though sick and injured, he refused an
offer of early release. He says he did not want to trade on his father's name.
''It would be used as propaganda,'' he said, ''so I said no.'' He did not get
out of prison until 1973. The torture, Mr. Swindle said, ''was pretty severe.''
Mr. McCain said he speaks of it ''only when asked.''

His worst moment? ''When I succumbed to physical mistreatment and signed a war
crimes confession.'' What kind of mistreatment? ''It was pretty bad,'' he said.
Then he paused. ''Including a broken arm.''

And then, indicating that this particular line of questioning was over, he
announced brightly, ''I want to remind you, my dear, it was long ago and far
away.''

Long ago or not, Mr. McCain lives with the daily physical reminder of that
torture. His gait is slightly out of joint and his arms sit at awkward angles to
his body. He has difficulty raising them to comb his hair. Putting a suit jacket
on is a challenge. This does not seem to slow him down; he is often seen dashing
about the Capitol, running off to this hearing or that television appearance.

Mr. McCain is known for a rare quality in Washington: candor. Reporters quote
him endlessly for the same reason his fellow Republicans are endlessly irked by
him: he never fails to offer a Republican critique of President Bush, with whom
he has not quite patched up relations after their bitter primary campaign in
2000.

The senator did not disappoint on Friday morning, during a 45-minute
conversation in his office before the Rumsfeld hearing. Asked if Mr. Bush had
been correct, the day before, in apologizing for the abuse, Mr. McCain said the
apology was late. When should it have come? ''Before yesterday. The moment it
broke.'' Mr. McCain also said the Abu Ghraib prison, a symbol of torture under
Saddam Hussein, was now a symbol of shame to the United States and should be
razed as a gesture to the Arab world.

Despite what some might think, the senator insists he was not reminded of his
own experience, more than three decades ago, when he saw the photographs of
naked Iraqi prisoners, images he calls ''so horrific it defies my imagination.''
But asked to compare the two situations, he offered a quick and revealing
rejoinder: ''I was never subjected to sexual humiliation and degradation.''

Rick Davis, who ran Mr. McCain's campaign for the presidency in 2000, was struck
by that comparison. ''He said, 'You know, I was tortured, but I was never
humiliated.' To me, torture is humiliation. I guess he saw it in a different
light. Only someone who has been there would understand the difference.''

But if the senator is angry, he says it is not because the prisoner abuse
scandal evokes his own past. It is because he sees an institution he loves, the
American military, sullied by its own behavior.

''I have seen a lot of people die,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I've seen a lot of
terrible things in my life. But to see it done by Americans to human beings is
what's so appalling. It's so outrageous, I can't describe it.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John McCain, left, and Senator John W. Warner
questioning Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld at a hearing on Friday. (Photo
by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); VIETNAM WAR (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); SCANDALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); GENOCIDE (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(60%); TERRORISM (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Vietnam War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (93%); JOHN WARNER (79%) Sheryl Gay Stolberg; John S (Sen)
Mccain; George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

CITY: HANOI, VIETNAM (58%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); VIET NAM (88%); VIETNAM (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1127 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Father's Nemesis Who Became a Son's Trusted Aide

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19; White House Letter

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


At the heart of the melodrama playing out in Washington is the complex character
of Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, the great warrior of Iraq and
Afghanistan who is now struggling to hang on to his job. If he survives, it will
largely be because of President Bush, who spanked him last week for his handling
of the Iraq prison abuse scandal but insisted Mr. Rumsfeld's position was
secure.

Mr. Bush's relationship with Mr. Rumsfeld seems complicated right now, but it is
nothing compared to the relationship that Mr. Rumsfeld had with Mr. Bush's
father. People close to the Bushes say the family history may color Mr.
Rumsfeld's future, even if it means that the second President Bush, whose
administration has so often gone in the opposite direction of the first one's,
will deal with Mr. Rumsfeld in an entirely different way than his father did.

As veterans of the Ford White House remember, Mr. Rumsfeld was an intense rival
of George Bush's, and by all accounts the men had a terrible relationship in the
1970's and 1980's. Bush partisans still say that Mr. Rumsfeld masterminded what
became known as the Halloween Massacre, the 1975 Ford cabinet shake-up in which
Mr. Rumsfeld jumped from his position as White House chief of staff to become
secretary of defense, thereby enhancing his prospects, never realized, of being
President Gerald R. Ford's running mate in 1976.

In that same shuffle, Mr. Bush, who had been the chief United States envoy to
China, was sidelined as director of central intelligence -- a job that took Mr.
Bush out of the running for vice president, since at the time C.I.A. directors
were thought to have no future in politics.

The defense secretary and the C.I.A. chief soon clashed over the agency's
estimates of Soviet military spending. In 1988, when Mr. Bush was the vice
president running for president, Mr. Rumsfeld briefly joined the race.

''There's a certain amount of disrespect when Rumsfeld decides to run for
president in '88 with a sitting vice president,'' said James Mann, the author of
''Rise of the Vulcans,'' a history of the current president's war cabinet.

Today the relationship between Mr. Rumsfeld and Bush pere is said to be thawed,
or at least that is what the elder Mr. Bush indicated Friday from his office in
Houston, where he was watching, on and off, Mr. Rumsfeld's Congressional
testimony about the scandal.

''He asked me to tell you that he would characterize his relationship with
Donald Rumsfeld as a very pleasant one, and he thinks Donald Rumsfeld would say
the same,'' said Jean Becker, Mr. Bush's chief of staff.

Which brings us to Mr. Rumsfeld's selection as defense secretary for a second
time, by the current President Bush. Mr. Bush, who had rejected Daniel R. Coats,
the former Republican senator from Indiana, turned to Mr. Rumsfeld as a
bureaucratic strongman (and Vice President Dick Cheney's old friend) who could
go one on one against the star of the new cabinet, Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell.

Republicans who know both Bushes say that the father's history with Mr. Rumsfeld
was either irrelevant to the son or, more interestingly, another way to show
that he was his own man. Just as he would march into Baghdad and topple Saddam
Hussein -- the road his father never took -- the current President Bush would
manage Mr. Rumsfeld.

Today Mr. Bush's relationship with his defense secretary, who is facing
worldwide calls to resign, is described as professionally close but hardly cozy.
''Rumsfeld's relationship with Bush is based on performance, not personal
factors,'' a senior administration official said. ''When the performance was
there, the relationship was fine.''

Republicans close to the Bushes say that Mr. Rumsfeld is nothing but deferential
to the president, 15 years his junior, and that he admires Mr. Bush for
something he was not able to do: win a presidential election.

Mr. Bush, in turn, feels enormous loyalty to the defense secretary for managing
the Pentagon in one of the country's most perilous times.

''He's conducted two wars on behalf of the president,'' Condoleezza Rice, the
national security adviser, said Saturday as part of a White House communications
offensive to broadcast support for Mr. Rumsfeld. On Monday, Mr. Bush will
continue to shore up the defense secretary with a rare presidential visit to the
Pentagon.

For now, only a handful of people know precisely what happened in the Oval
Office last Wednesday, when Mr. Bush chastised his father's old rival for
failing to inform him about the graphic pictures of abuse by American soldiers.
In the authorized recounting by Mr. Bush's aides, there was little detail.

Did Mr. Bush yell? Did he speak more in sorrow than anger? Was it a slap on the
wrist? How did Mr. Rumsfeld respond?

Whatever occurred, it is a safe bet that no one in the room brought up the
president's father.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush, shown in December, has publicly supported
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, right, in the Iraq prison scandal. (Photo
by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); GENOCIDE (74%); DEFENSE SPENDING (73%); SCANDALS (71%); TERRORISM (66%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (94%) Elisabeth Bumiller; George (Former Pres) Bush;
George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CHINA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1128 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blair Offers An Apology For Abuses By Soldiers

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
BRITAIN

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 9


Prime Minister Tony Blair apologized Sunday for the abuse of Iraqi prisoners by
British soldiers as his government prepared to make a detailed statement in
Parliament on Monday about the investigations into mistreatment.

''We apologize deeply to anyone who has been mistreated by our soldiers,'' Mr.
Blair said, speaking in Paris in an interview with French television. ''This is
totally unacceptable. Those responsible will be punished according to the army
disciplinary rules.''

The announcement that Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon would appear on Monday before
the House of Commons followed the government's disclosure that it was put on
notice in February by the International Committee of the Red Cross that American
and British troops were abusing prisoners, but withheld the information from
Parliament.

In a disclosure this weekend, the Ministry of Defense said three British
soldiers had taken part in interrogations at the Abu Ghraib prison, the scene of
what appear to be the worst abuses, from January to April. But a ministry
spokeswoman said she had no information about whether they were aware of, or
involved in, the abuse of prisoners there.

As each day brings fresh accusations of abuse, Mr. Blair is said to be grappling
with a request from President Bush to send up to 3,000 additional British troops
to Iraq to take the place of departing Spanish forces. But Mr. Blair faces a
potential revolt in his party over the prospect of a deeper entanglement in
Iraq. One of his close political allies, Lord Puttnam, told a television
interviewer this weekend that Mr. Blair had become so closely associated with
bad news from Iraq that he should step down. ''If I were him, I would go before
the summer recess'' of Parliament, Lord Puttnam said.

The crisis over the treatment of prisoners has further weakened Mr. Blair as Mr.
Bush's principal ally in Iraq, and it has deflated his efforts to move the
political agenda in Britain away from that issue. It has also weakened his role
as a bridge between the United States and Europe.

On Sunday, he traveled to Paris to meet with President Jacques Chirac of France.
He was seeking help and support not only on Iraq but also for changes to protect
British sovereignty in the pending European constitution, which will determine
Britain's future in Europe.

Britain's Sunday newspapers published more details about the abuse cases. The
Sunday Times said soldiers from the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers faced
prosecution after photos surfaced showing Iraqi prisoners being forced to engage
in sex acts. A Ministry of Defense spokeswoman said that the abuse occurred last
year and that the investigation file had been forwarded to military prosecutors.

Another case on which a prosecutorial decision is pending here is the death last
year of a young hotel clerk after a brutal interrogation session by British
troops in Basra. Last week, Adam Ingram, the armed forces minister, said that 33
criminal investigations had been conducted into civilian deaths, injuries or ill
treatment and that of those, 12 were still active and 6 had been referred for
possible prosecution.

Investigations are still under way into a series of photographs published a week
ago by The Daily Mirror, showing the beating and humiliation of a person
described as a hooded Iraqi prisoner. Though the authenticity of the photos has
been challenged, The Daily Mirror has continued to report additional accusations
of abuse, including those from one unidentified soldier who agreed to meet with
Royal Military Police investigators, the paper said.

The Red Cross's concerns about British-run prisons in Iraq, while serious, were
not as extensive as those expressed about abuses in the American-run Abu Ghraib
prison near Baghdad, the agency's director of operations, Pierre Krahenbuhl,
said last week.

The Red Cross expressed its concerns about British-run prisons in February in a
confidential report to the Ministry of Defense, officials said. The disclosure
drew an indignant response from opposition party leaders, who pointed out that
last week Mr. Ingram had told lawmakers he had not seen any reports from
organizations like the Red Cross warning of prisoner abuse.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT
(79%); PRIME MINISTERS (79%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (74%); US
PRESIDENTS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); DAILY NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING
(60%); GENOCIDE (60%); TERRORISM (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (56%) Red Cross

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (92%); JACQUES CHIRAC (56%) Patrick E Tyler; Tony (Prime Min)
Blair; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (97%); IRAQ (97%); FRANCE (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);
EUROPE (93%); SPAIN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Spain

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1129 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Must Find A Way to Move Past the Images

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
PROSPECT

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


When President Bush travels to the Pentagon on Monday morning for a classified
briefing on the Iraq war, the subtext of the conversation will have little to do
with the commanders' latest assessments of whether insurgents can be routed from
Falluja and Najaf.

Instead, some of Mr. Bush's senior aides conceded in conversations over the
weekend, the far larger question hanging over Mr. Bush's encounter with his
embattled secretary of defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld, and the nation's military
leaders is whether the revelations of prisoner abuse have so undermined American
political objectives for remaking Iraq that the military challenges have
suddenly become a secondary problem.

Even some of the most vociferous enthusiasts of Mr. Bush's plan to make Iraq the
cornerstone of a freer, more democratic Middle East are now conceding privately
that their early optimism has been shattered.

Just weeks ago, some of these same officials expressed cautious confidence that
once the insurgents were captured or killed, the occupation authority would
somehow stumble through the next seven weeks, cobbling together a transitional
Iraqi government and making the transfer of sovereignty the crowning symbol of
how America liberated a nation from tyranny. But now, they say, the main issue
is regaining American political legitimacy as the power behind that transition.

With Arab television stations broadcasting images of the abused prisoners and
only snippets of Mr. Bush's vow to punish those responsible, some of Mr. Bush's
aides say they fear many ordinary Iraqis can no longer take the risk of backing
any plan that carries the American imprimatur.

Worse, aides fear the images are becoming recruiting posters for the insurgents.
It is a problem, one senior aide said over the weekend, ''that you simply can't
solve with the First Armored Division.''

Another senior official, insisting on anonymity, put the ugly turn in the
American occupation more starkly. ''If in the coming months Iraq looks
relatively stable and on some path to democracy, this whole issue of abuse will
be a tragic problem that was addressed and solved,'' he said.

But, he continued, ''If the wheels come off in the next few months, then it will
be an example of how our discipline broke down, and it will be regarded as a
signpost on the road'' to far worse troubles.

The question facing Mr. Bush, aides say, is a narrow one. Should he order the
release of the remaining photographs and videos -- even if they contain graphic
images, as rumored, of assaults or rapes?

No matter how Mr. Bush handles the question of the graphic evidence, the bigger
issue for the war, and for his re-election campaign, is whether he can undo the
damage that the revelations have done to his broader political goals for Iraq.

It will be months, maybe years, before anyone will know for certain whether the
image of a hooded Iraqi prisoner connected to electrical wires that was splashed
across the world's magazine covers last week will become the symbolic image of
the American occupation -- the way the photograph of a naked Vietnamese girl
running from an American attack helped turn opinion against American action in
Southeast Asia.

But clearly, the prisoner abuse issue is affecting how Mr. Bush talks about the
liberation of Iraq. He still tells audiences, as he did in Pittsburgh last month
and Cincinnati last week, that ''because of our actions, because of the actions
by our coalition, Saddam Hussein's torture chambers are closed.'' But he no
longer dwells on such comparisons, perhaps mindful that Mr. Rumsfeld found
himself last week rejecting any comparisons between the prisoner abuses and the
systemic use of torture at Abu Ghraib and other prisons under Mr. Hussein's
rule.

In fact, the American abuses appear more a product of poor training, a breakdown
of command authority and astoundingly bad judgment than any premeditated plan.

One of Mr. Rumsfeld's most skilled bureaucratic opponents inside the
administration, Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage, drove the point
home on CNN last week when he said, ''For many of our European friends, what
they saw on those horrible pictures is tantamount to torture, and there are very
strong views about that.'' He added, ''In the Arab world, there is general
dismay and disgust, but in some places we were not real popular to start with.''

If Mr. Bush has a strategy for undoing that damage beyond the television
appearances he made on two Arab networks last week, White House officials freely
admit they cannot describe it.

''I'm not sure such a strategy is possible,'' one senior official said late last
week. ''The facts are simply not with us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); TERRORISM (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); PLATFORMS
& ISSUES (73%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (65%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (62%); SEX OFFENSES
(60%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Photography; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Election Issues  ; Presidential Election of 2004; Assaults; Sex Crimes;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) David E Sanger; George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec)
Rumsfeld

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1130 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld Should Stay

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE; Bob Herbert is on vacation..

E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Donald Rumsfeld has been designated by Democratic politicians as the scapegoat
for the scandal at Abu Ghraib prison. But any resignation would only whet their
appetite to cut and run. The highly effective defense secretary owes it to the
nation's war on terror to soldier on.

Because today's column will generate apoplectic e-mail, a word about contrarian
opinion: Shortly after 9/11, with the nation gripped by fear and fury, the Bush
White House issued a sweeping and popular order to crack down on suspected
terrorists. The liberal establishment largely fell cravenly mute. A few lonely
civil libertarians spoke out. When I used the word ''dictatorial,''
conservatives, both neo- and paleo-, derided my condemnation as ''hysterical.''

One Bush cabinet member paid attention. Rumsfeld appointed a bipartisan panel of
attorneys to re-examine that draconian edict. As a result, basic protections for
the accused Qaeda combatants were included in the proposed military tribunals.

Perhaps because of those protections, the tribunals never got off the ground.
(The Supreme Court will soon, I hope, provide similar legal rights to suspected
terrorists who are U.S. citizens.) But in the panic of the winter of 2001,
Rumsfeld was one of the few in power concerned about prisoners' rights. Some now
demanding his scalp then supported the repressive Patriot Act.

In last week's apology before the Senate, Rumsfeld assumed ultimate
responsibility, as J.F.K. did after the Bay of Pigs fiasco. The Pentagon chief
failed to foresee and warn the president of the danger lurking in the Army's
public announcement in January of its criminal investigation into prisoner
abuse. He failed to put the nation's reputation ahead of the regulation
prohibiting ''command influence'' in criminal investigations, which protects the
accused in courts-martial.

The secretary testified that he was, incredibly, the last to see the humiliating
photos that turned a damning army critique by Maj. Gen. Antonio Taguba into a
media firestorm. Why nobody searched out and showed him those incendiary
pictures immediately reveals sheer stupidity on the part of the command
structure and his Pentagon staff.

But then Senator Mark Dayton of Minnesota rudely badgered the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs, Richard Myers, repeatedly hurling the word ''suppression'' at him.
General Myers had been trying to save the lives of troops by persuading CBS to
delay its broadcast of pictures that would inflame resistance. Rumsfeld quieted
the sound-bite-hungry politician by reminding him that requests to delay
life-threatening reports were part of long military-media tradition.

This was scandal with no cover-up; the wheels of investigation and prosecution
were grinding, with public exposure certain. Second only to the failure to
prevent torture was the Pentagon's failure to be first to break the bad news:
the Taguba report should have been released at a Rumsfeld press conference
months ago.

Now every suspect ever held in any U.S. facility will claim to have been
tortured and demand recompense. Videos real and fake will stream across the
world's screens, and propagandists abroad will join defeatists here in calling
American prisons a ''gulag,'' gleefully equating Bush not just with Saddam but
with Stalin.

Torture is both unlawful and morally abhorrent. But what about gathering
intelligence from suspected or proven terrorists by codified, regulated,
manipulative interrogation? Information thus acquired can save thousands of
lives. Will we now allow the pendulum to swing back to ''name, rank, serial
number,'' as if suspected terrorists planning the bombing of civilians were
uniformed prisoners of war obeying the rules of war?

The United States shows the world its values by investigating and prosecuting
wrongdoers high and low. It is not in our political value system to scapegoat a
good man for the depraved acts of others. Nor does it make strategic sense to
remove a war leader in the vain hope of appeasing critics of the war.

This secretary of defense, who has the strong support of the president, is both
effective and symbolic. If he were to quit under political fire, pressure would
mount for America to quit under insurgent fire. Hang in there, Rummy! You have a
duty to serve in our ''long, hard slog.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); POLITICS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SCANDALS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(77%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); TESTIMONY
(72%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); TORTURE (70%); GENOCIDE (67%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: MARK DAYTON (50%) William Safire; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1133 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Media Quandary Over Showing Graphic Images of Abuse

BYLINE: By DAVID CARR; Bill Carter contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PHOTOS

LENGTH: 740 words


As the images of American soldiers torturing and humiliating Iraqi prisoners
inflame public opinion about the war, news organizations increasingly find
themselves part of the debate.

The news media are wrestling with how many and how much of the graphic
photographs they should show, and their decisions are drawing controversy of
their own. Some critics have accused news organizations of serving an antiwar
agenda and endangering troops and Americans overseas by showing such shocking
images.

Newspapers tend to signal the importance of an article or image by the
prominence of its placement, but because of the nudity and humiliation on
display in the Iraq photographs, many newspapers have chosen to put articles
about them on the front page but the images inside.

The Daily News and The New York Times yesterday ran on their front pages an
image, first published in The New Yorker, of a naked Iraqi prisoner being
menaced by dogs held by guards. The Washington Post put the same photograph on
Page 19 of the first section of the paper.

Most of the broadcast networks and cable news channels have shown many of the
images, although the Fox News Channel is using them less and less. And in what
they show, many news organizations have cropped out or obscured parts of the
images -- often nudity -- deemed unsuitable for many readers.

''Many people receive the newspaper at home,'' said Leonard Downie Jr.,
executive editor of The Washington Post. ''What is on the front page is more
difficult to avoid than what is inside. The people who follow a story inside are
usually more prepared for what they see when they get there.''

In its initial coverage last week, The Post placed on the front page a
photograph of a female soldier holding an Iraqi prisoner by a leash.

''We decided that the importance of the news was the most important
consideration,'' Mr. Downie said. ''By today, we decided that we had published
so many shocking photos that it was fine to publish inside rather than on the
front page.''

Bill Keller, executive editor of The New York Times, said: ''The picture that we
ran this morning was new and added a dimension to a big story. The earlier
pictures showed someone being humiliated. This picture showed a person actually
being terrorized.''

Bill Shine, the executive producer of Fox News, said his network was not giving
much prominence to the latest picture because the public already understood what
had happened. ''Day by day, we are dialing back on their use and attempting to
put them in context,'' he said.

The New York Post followed a similar logic in deciding to run the photograph of
the cowering prisoner inside the newspaper yesterday.

''How many photos of naked Iraqis does one want to see?'' said Col Allan, its
editor in chief. ''I think that the relentless stream of images, the vast number
of these things, will wear out public patience. Clearly, the images are serving
the political agenda of many newspapers.''

Bill O'Reilly, a host on the Fox News Channel, suggested in his syndicated
column yesterday that the pictures would be used to ''promote violence against
America.''

David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, which has published two stories
about the prisoner abuse written by Seymour M. Hersh, defended the use of the
images.

''In this instance, I don't think you want to go out of your way to protect the
tender sensibilities of the reader,'' Mr. Remnick said. ''You don't aim to be
gratuitous, but to weaken the power of these images in a story where the
photographs are at the center of things would be an editing mistake in my
judgment.''

John Banner, executive producer of ABC's ''World News Tonight,'' said he had no
trouble deciding to show all the pictures released, including those of dead
prisoners.

''This is visual evidence on a major story,'' Mr. Banner said. ''We are
certainly going to not let images with nudity or gore or violence go on the air.
But we have a responsibility to our audience to inform them of wrongdoing.''

The debate goes beyond journalism. Graphic images from the Vietnam War played a
role in changing public opinion of the war. And Colin L. Powell, now secretary
of state, wrote in his autobiography that television coverage of the so-called
''Highway of Death'' in the first Persian Gulf War played a role in his decision
to recommend that the war be brought to an end.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); TELEVISION
PROGRAMMING (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); NETWORK TELEVISION (77%); GENOCIDE
(74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CABLE TELEVISION (72%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY
(67%); TERRORISM (59%) News and News Media; Photography; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; Torture  ; Terrorism

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (83%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC (56%); GRAHAM
HOLDINGS CO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Fox Entertainment Group Inc; New Yorker
(Magazine)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (83%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (83%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711
NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%); NAICS517110 WIRED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (56%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%)

PERSON: BILL O'REILLY (70%) David Carr; Bill O'Reilly; David Remnick; Seymour M
Hersh

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1134 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

PRESIDENT BACKS HIS DEFENSE CHIEF IN SHOW OF UNITY

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON and CARL HULSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
PRESIDENT

LENGTH: 1387 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


President Bush made a robust show of support on Monday for Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld, as the White House, the Pentagon and Congress grappled with
whether and how to release more pictures of Iraqi prisoners being abused by
American soldiers.

After meeting at the Pentagon with his war council, Mr. Bush emerged to face
reporters and television cameras, flanked by Vice President Dick Cheney on his
right and Mr. Rumsfeld on his left, and delivered an unqualified endorsement of
his defense secretary.

''You are courageously leading our nation in the war against terror,'' he said
to Mr. Rumsfeld. ''You are doing a superb job. You are a strong secretary of
defense, and our nation owes you a debt of gratitude.''

In his show of support, Mr. Bush sought to quash speculation that he would seek
Mr. Rumsfeld's resignation. By arraying other senior aides around him as he made
the statement -- including Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Gen. Richard
B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff -- he sought to create a
tableau of a national security team that, however fractured it has been over
Iraq, was now united in its determination to deal with the repercussions of the
abuse cases, quell the insurgency in Iraq and transfer governance to the Iraqis.

Mr. Bush later went to Mr. Rumsfeld's office, where he was shown more than a
dozen images of the abuse, most of which have not been publicized, White House
and Pentagon officials said. Mr. Bush's spokesman, Scott McClellan,
characterized the president's reaction as ''one of deep disgust and disbelief
that anyone who wears our uniform would engage in such shameful and appalling
acts.''

Administration officials debated whether to release publicly all the pictures in
the government's possession, with many of the president's political and
communications advisers advocating moving quickly to get the images out and
avoid the prospect of weeks or months in which they leak out piecemeal.

But no decision was made, officials said, adding that they continued to weigh
issues including the effect of any release on pending criminal inquiries and the
privacy of people shown in the images, some of which, government officials said,
show American soldiers having sex with one another.

Separately, the Pentagon and Congressional leaders continued to negotiate ways
to allow lawmakers to view the images in the absence of a public release.

The images include both photographs and videotapes. White House officials said
Mr. Bush had been shown still images taken from videotapes as well as
photographs.

The Senate, by a vote of 92 to 0, adopted a resolution condemning the prisoner
abuse. The resolution also included language sought by Democrats that called for
the Senate to ''conduct a full investigation of the abuses alleged to have
occurred at Abu Ghraib'' and hold those responsible accountable.

Mr. Bush's presumed Democratic rival in the presidential race, Senator John
Kerry of Massachusetts, continued to criticize the administration's handling of
the abuse cases. Suggesting that he did not want to see punishment limited to
courts-martial of those directly involved in the abuse of the Iraqi detainees,
he told a local television reporter in Pennsylvania that he opposed a total
focus on ''people at the low end of the totem pole, and we're not going up the
chain for real accountability,'' adding, ''It clearly goes beyond a corporal and
a sergeant.''

A new poll showed that most people thought that Mr. Rumsfeld should not lose his
job over the issue. Asked whether he should resign, two-thirds of 1,030 people
questioned from Thursday through Sunday by the University of Pennsylvania's
National Annenberg Election Survey said Mr. Rumsfeld should not resign.

By a percentage of 47 to 31, people responding to the poll said they believed
that the soldiers implicated in the abuse had acted on their own and not under
orders. But 52 percent said the Pentagon had tried to cover up the matter, while
32 percent said the Pentagon had acted properly. The poll had a margin of
sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.

Advisers to the White House said Mr. Bush's trip to the Pentagon was intended in
part to shift the focus toward what comes next -- questions of how to deal with
the abuse cases and the diplomatic damage they have caused and away from the
question of whether Mr. Rumsfeld could hang on to his job.

Advisers to the White House said Mr. Bush had never seriously considered firing
Mr. Rumsfeld. They said that once it was clear Mr. Bush wanted Mr. Rumsfeld to
stay, it became important to show the world that he meant it, and that the event
at the Pentagon had been put together with that goal in mind.

But one adviser said White House officials were well aware that Mr. Rumsfeld's
job could still be on the line, especially if there are further revelations of
abuse, and that Mr. Bush's embrace of him was a calculated risk.

''The question now is whether the drip, drip, drip will kill Rumsfeld,'' the
adviser said. ''That's a difficult problem.''

The hope at the White House, the adviser said, is to put the focus on showing
the world that the United States will respond appropriately to the abuse of
Iraqis and that Mr. Rumsfeld is the right person to do that job. It is also
important, the adviser said, for the president to show the electorate that he
will live up to his reputation for loyalty and for remaining steady in the face
of adversity.

Republicans in Congress will intensify their effort to help the White House in
coming days by suggesting that Democrats are politicizing the issue, the adviser
said. House Republicans in particular have already sought to equate criticism
from Democrats with a lack of support for fighting terrorism.

The White House signaled that it was sympathetic to calls from Congress for
access to the abuse pictures, although Republicans in Congress, like
administration officials, were divided over whether to make the images public.

Republican members of the Senate Armed Services Committee met in the office of
the panel's chairman, Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, to discuss
how to deal with the material.

''It seems to me that it is inevitable that they are going to come out bit by
bit over the next few weeks or months and that it would be far better to have
them all released at once,'' said Senator Susan Collins, a Maine Republican who
is a member of the committee.

Other lawmakers said they were not yet convinced that the material should be
publicly disseminated.

''I don't know what is to be gained,'' said Senator John Cornyn, a Texas
Republican and former State Supreme Court justice, who said he was worried that
the release could complicate criminal investigations.

One senator who had been briefed on the material said some of it was sexually
explicit and suggested a ''total breakdown in discipline and authority'' at the
prison.

The White House signaled that it would work to make sure that Congress received
some access to the pictures, but delegated the negotiations to the Pentagon.

After a meeting of Republican and Democratic leaders in the Senate on Monday
evening, the two parties agreed that staff lawyers would examine the issues
surrounding how the Senate would handle the pictures if a deal to make them
accessible was completed with the Pentagon.

While lawmakers prepared for another major hearing on Tuesday, lawmakers said
that Republican backing for Mr. Rumsfeld remained strong and that Mr. Bush's
personal endorsement of the secretary carried significant weight.

''I don't think anyone should have to resign their jobs because of the criminal
misconduct of others,'' said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South
Carolina.

Other lawmakers said they believed that Mr. Rumsfeld's job was secure as long as
there were not further developments that called into question his handling of
the prison scandal. But one top Republican aide said the crisis was still
playing itself out. ''Everybody wants to cut to the chase, but the movie has
just started,'' he said.

Among the questions that have not yet been fully answered are how seriously the
White House, the Pentagon and the State Department took warnings they received
last year from the International Committee of the Red Cross about mistreatment
of prisoners in Iraq.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush was flanked by Vice President Cheney and senior
aides yesterday in a show of support for Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.
(Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A1)
 Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld looked on as President Bush gave him
robust support yesterday. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); TERRORISM (70%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (65%) Photography; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Privacy  ; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (93%); DICK CHENEY (92%) Richard W Stevenson; Carl Hulse;
George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; Colin L
(Sec) Powell; Richard B (Gen) Myers

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1135 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Just Trust Us

BYLINE: By PAUL KRUGMAN.

E-mail: krugman@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 732 words


Didn't you know, in your gut, that something like Abu Ghraib would eventually
come to light?

When the world first learned about the abuse of prisoners, President Bush said
that it ''does not reflect the nature of the American people.'' He's right, of
course: a great majority of Americans are decent and good. But so are a great
majority of people everywhere. If America's record is better than that of most
countries -- and it is -- it's because of our system: our tradition of openness,
and checks and balances.

Yet Mr. Bush, despite all his talk of good and evil, doesn't believe in that
system. From the day his administration took office, its slogan has been ''just
trust us.'' No administration since Nixon has been so insistent that it has the
right to operate without oversight or accountability, and no administration
since Nixon has shown itself to be so little deserving of that trust. Out of a
misplaced sense of patriotism, Congress has deferred to the administration's
demands. Sooner or later, a moral catastrophe was inevitable.

Just trust us, John Ashcroft said, as he demanded that Congress pass the Patriot
Act, no questions asked. After two and a half years, during which he arrested
and secretly detained more than a thousand people, Mr. Ashcroft has yet to
convict any actual terrorists. (Look at the actual trials of what Dahlia
Lithwick of Slate calls ''disaffected bozos who watch cheesy training videos,''
and you'll see what I mean.)

Just trust us, George Bush said, as he insisted that Iraq, which hadn't attacked
us and posed no obvious threat, was the place to go in the war on terror. When
we got there, we found no weapons of mass destruction and no new evidence of
links to Al Qaeda.

Just trust us, Paul Bremer said, as he took over in Iraq. What is the legal
basis for Mr. Bremer's authority? You may imagine that the Coalition Provisional
Authority is an arm of the government, subject to U.S. law. But it turns out
that no law or presidential directive has ever established the authority's
status. Mr. Bremer, as far as we can tell, answers to nobody except Mr. Bush,
which makes Iraq a sort of personal fief. In that fief, there has been nothing
that Americans would recognize as the rule of law. For example, Ahmad Chalabi,
the Pentagon's erstwhile favorite, was allowed to gain control of Saddam's files
-- the better to blackmail his potential rivals.

And finally: Just trust us, Donald Rumsfeld said early in 2002, when he declared
that ''enemy combatants'' -- a term that turned out to mean anyone, including
American citizens, the administration chose to so designate -- don't have rights
under the Geneva Convention. Now people around the world talk of an ''American
gulag,'' and Seymour Hersh is exposing My Lai all over again.

Did top officials order the use of torture? It depends on the meaning of the
words ''order'' and ''torture.'' Last August Mr. Rumsfeld's top intelligence
official sent Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, the commander of the Guantanamo prison,
to Iraq. General Miller recommended that the guards help interrogators,
including private contractors, by handling prisoners in a way that ''sets the
conditions'' for ''successful interrogation and exploitation.'' What did he and
his superiors think would happen?

To their credit, some supporters of the administration are speaking out. ''This
is about system failure,'' said Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican from South
Carolina. But do Mr. Graham, John McCain and other appalled lawmakers understand
their own role in that failure? By deferring to the administration at every
step, by blocking every effort to make officials accountable, they set the
nation up for this disaster. You can't prevent any serious inquiry into why
George Bush led us to war to eliminate W.M.D. that didn't exist and to punish
Saddam for imaginary ties to Al Qaeda, then express shock when Mr. Bush's
administration fails to follow the rules on other matters.

Meanwhile, Abu Ghraib will remain in use, under its new commander: General
Miller of Guantanamo. Donald Rumsfeld has ''accepted responsibility'' -- an
action that apparently does not mean paying any price at all. And Dick Cheney
says, ''Don Rumsfeld is the best secretary of defense the United States has ever
had. . . . People should get off his case and let him do his job.'' In other
words: Just trust us.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(85%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); RULE OF LAW (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%);
EXTORTION (71%); US PATRIOT ACT (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); EVIDENCE
(69%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%); AL-QAEDA (64%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (64%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (62%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%); PAUL KRUGMAN (50%) Paul
Krugman; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1136 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

First Baghdad Court-Martial May Set Table for Later Ones

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
PROSECUTION

LENGTH: 929 words


The trial next week of an American military policeman on charges of mistreating
Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib prison is likely to disappoint people eager for a
thorough airing of the available evidence. It may also frustrate those who would
like to see tough punishment should his guilt be established.

Both the speed with which the policeman, Specialist Jeremy Sivits, has been
brought to trial and the relatively minor sanctions he faces suggest that
prosecutors are working their way up the chain of culpability from the bottom.
These factors also suggest that Specialist Sivits has entered into a plea
agreement in exchange for his testimony at later trials. Six other soldiers are
also facing criminal charges in the abuse and humiliation of Iraqi prisoners at
Abu Ghraib.

''They've probably got a domino theory of prosecutions,'' said John D. Hutson,
the dean of the Franklin Pierce Law Center and a former judge advocate general
of the Navy. ''And there may be a race to the courthouse among the potential
defendants to see who can get the best deal.''

If there is a plea agreement, it is likely that only limited evidence, relevant
to the appropriate punishment, will be presented.

''The facts are probably not going to be aired at the first trial,'' said
Michael F. Noone Jr., a law professor at Catholic University and an expert in
military justice. ''Critics of the administration are going to say there is a
cover-up here.''

Sound prosecutorial strategy, then, in the short term at least, may frustrate
the administration's stated goal of showing the world that the proceedings will
be transparent.

The trial of Specialist Sivits is set to start on May 19. Trials of the six
other American soldiers have not been scheduled. Seven other soldiers who held
supervisory roles have received letters of reprimand.

Specialist Sivits will be tried in a somewhat streamlined proceeding known as a
special court-martial, as opposed to a general court-martial. The most notable
feature of special courts-martial is that the maximum penalty is not
particularly severe. At worst, Specialist Sivits faces a year in confinement, a
demotion, fines and a bad-conduct discharge.

Even so, the speed of his case has surprised some experts.

''It's clearly attributable to the need to respond domestically, internationally
and within Iraq to the demand for justice,'' said Miles P. Fischer, the chairman
of the Committee on Military Affairs and Justice of the Association of the Bar
of the City of New York. ''It potentially compromises the rights of the accused
because of what I'm sure his defense counsel will call a rush to judgment.''

Others said the speed of the proceedings was unremarkable. While the abuses came
to light only recently, they said, investigations into them have been under way
for some time.

''The military tries its cases very quickly,'' said Lee D. Schinasi, a law
professor at the University of Miami School of Law and a former vice dean at the
Army Judge Advocate General's School in Charlottesville, Va. ''We don't have the
crowded docket problems or scheduling problems with private practitioners.''

Mr. Hutson said the nature of the case might account for the pace.

''It's not really a terribly complicated case,'' he said. ''You've got pictures,
for God's sake.''

Holding the trials in Iraq rather than in the United States is also
unremarkable, legal experts said.

''It is not at all unusual to conduct courts-martial in the theater of
operations,'' said Ronald W. Meister, a New York lawyer who served in the Judge
Advocate General's Corps in the Navy. Mr. Meister said about 25,000
courts-martial were held in Vietnam.

Holding trials near the scene of the crime also makes it easier to secure
evidence and testimony, he added.

Those accused in the military justice system are entitled to military lawyers
provided by the government, and they may retain civilian lawyers at their own
expense. In most other ways, courts-martial mirror the rules of procedure and
evidence used in criminal trials in the federal courts.

Except for uniforms, Professor Schinasi said, ''it would be invisible to you
which was a civilian trial and which was a military trial.''

The military has emphasized that the trials will be open to the news media and
the public, though not to electronic coverage. None of that is unusual. On the
other hand, it is the rare trial that is held, as Specialist Sivits's will be,
in the Baghdad convention center.

''There's public and there's public,'' Mr. Fischer said. ''They don't normally
hold them in convention centers and print out fliers.''

The exceptionally public nature of the trial, coupled with the certainty of no
more than mild punishment and the possibility of none at all, may create public
relations problems. But there is no prospect, legal experts agreed, that the
American authorities would allow the accused soldiers to be tried before an
Iraqi or international court.

''Some of these offenses are arguably war crimes,'' Mr. Hutson said, ''but there
is no chance that the United States is going to turn this over to a system of
justice other than our own.''

That is particularly true in Iraq, Mr. Fischer said.

''Occupying powers don't have their troops tried by the occupied country,'' he
said. ''That's not how it works.''

The case against Specialist Sivits is, of course, only the beginning.

''The more important question is, Where does this end?'' Mr. Hutson said. ''If
this ends with a staff sergeant, and everyone else goes home with a chestful of
medals, then we've got problems.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY COURTS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); PLEA
AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); MISCONDUCT (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAWYERS
(75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); LAW
SCHOOLS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); MANAGERS &
SUPERVISORS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); TERRORISM (59%); COLLEGE
& UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Courts-Martial; Plea Bargaining; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (56%)

PERSON: Adam Liptak; Jeremy (Specialist) Sivits

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1139 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Proof of Abuse: Images That Shocked the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 102 words



To the Editor:

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's declaration that the United States
supports the rule of law was gratifying (excerpts from the Congressional
hearing, May 8). It might have been more convincing if we had not repudiated the
International Criminal Court and continued to pressure other countries into
guaranteeing that no American would ever be sent to The Hague for war crimes or
crimes against humanity.

Credibility suffers when we approve international law, but only for others.

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
New Rochelle, N.Y., May 8, 2004

The writer was a prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crimes trials.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
RULE OF LAW (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); WRITERS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1141 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tourists and Torturers

BYLINE: By Luc Sante.

Luc Sante, who teaches creative writing and the history of photography at Bard
College, is the author of ''Low Life,'' ''Evidence'' and ''The Factory of
Facts.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1083 words


So now we think we know who took some of the photographs at Abu Ghraib. The
works attributed to Specialist Jeremy Sivits are fated to remain among the
indelible images of our time. They will have changed the course of history; just
how much we do not yet know. It is arguable that without them, news of what
happened within the walls of that prison would never have emerged from the fog
of classified internal memos. We owe their circulation and perhaps their
existence to the popular technology of our day, to digital cameras and JPEG
files and e-mail. Photographs can now be disseminated as quickly and widely as
rumors. It's possible that even if Specialist Joseph M. Darby hadn't gone to his
superiors in January and ''60 Minutes II'' hadn't broken the story last month,
some of those pictures would sooner or later have found their way onto the Web
and so into the public record.

Leaving aside the question of how anyone could have perpetrated the horrors
depicted in those pictures, you can't help but wonder why American soldiers
would incriminate themselves by posing next to their handiwork. Americans don't
seem to have a long tradition of that sort of thing. I can't offhand recall
having seen comparable images from any recent wars, although before the digital
era amateur photographs were harder to spread. There have been many atrocity
photographs over the years, of course -- the worst I've ever seen were taken in
Algeria in 1961, and once when I was a child another kid found and showed off
his father's cache of pictures from the Pacific Theater in World War II, which
shook me so badly that I can't remember with any certainty what they depicted.
I'm pretty sure, though, that they did not show anyone grinning and making
self-congratulatory gestures.

The pictures from Abu Ghraib are trophy shots. The American soldiers included in
them look exactly as if they were standing next to a gutted buck or a 10-foot
marlin. That incongruity is not the least striking aspect of the pictures. The
first shot I saw, of Specialist Charles A. Graner and Pfc. Lynndie R. England
flashing thumbs up behind a pile of their naked victims, was so jarring that for
a few seconds I took it for a montage. When I registered what I was seeing, I
was reminded of something. There was something familiar about that jaunty
insouciance, that unabashed triumph at having inflicted misery upon other
humans. And then I remembered: the last time I had seen that conjunction of
elements was in photographs of lynchings.

In photographs that were taken and often printed as postcards in the American
heartland in the first four decades of the 20th century, black men are shown
hanging from trees or light fixtures or maybe being burned alive, while below
them white people are laughing and pointing for the benefit of the camera. There
are some pictures of whites being lynched, too, but these tend not to feature
the holiday crowd. Often the spectators at lynchings of African-Americans are so
effusive in their mugging that they all seem to be vying for credit. Before
seeing such pictures you might expect the faces in them to express some kind of
collective rage; instead the mood is giddy, often verging on hysterical, with a
distinct sexual undercurrent.

Like the lynching crowds, the Americans at Abu Ghraib felt free to parade their
triumph and glee not because they were psychopaths but because the thought of
censure probably never crossed their minds. In both cases a contagious
collective frenzy perhaps overruled the scruples of some people otherwise known
for their gentleness and sympathy -- but isn't the abandonment of such scruples
possible only if the victims are considered less than human? After all, it is
one thing for a boxer to lift his hands over his head in triumph beside the
fallen body of his rival, quite another to strike a comparable pose next to the
bodies of strangers you have arranged in quasi-pornographic tableaus. The
Americans in the photographs are not enacting hatred; hatred can coexist with
respect, however strained. What they display, instead, is contempt: their
victims are merely objects.

It is conceivable that such events might have occurred in a war in which the
enemy looked like us --certainly, there are Americans to whom all foreigners are
irredeemably Other. Still, it is striking how, in wartime, a fundamental lack of
respect for the enemy's body becomes an issue only when the enemy is perceived
as being of another race. You might have heard about the strings of human ears
collected by some soldiers in Vietnam, or read the story, reported in Life
during World War II, about the G.I. who blithely mailed his girlfriend in
Brooklyn a Japanese skull as a Christmas present. And the concept of the human
trophy is not restricted to warfare, but permeates the history of colonialism,
from the Congo to Australia, Mexico to India. Treating those we deem our equals
as game animals, however, has been out of fashion for quite a few centuries.

Of course the violence at Abu Ghraib was primarily psychological -- hey, only a
few people were killed -- and the trophies were pictorial, like the results of a
photo safari. Some commentators have made a point of noting this very relative
nonviolence, contrasting it with the lynching of the four American military
contractors in Falluja last month. This line of argument is notable for what it
leaves out: there is a difference between the rage of a people who feel
themselves invaded and the contempt of a victorious nation for a civilian
population whom it has ostensibly liberated.

That prison guards would pose captives -- primarily noncombatants, low-level
riffraff -- in re-enactments of cable TV smut for the benefit of their friends
back home emerges from the mode of thinking that has prevented an accounting of
civilian deaths in Iraq since the beginning of the war. If civilian deaths are
not recorded, let alone published, it must be because they do not matter, and if
they do not matter it must be because the Iraqis are beneath notice. And that
must mean that anything done to them is permissible, as long as it does not
create publicity that would embarrass the Bush administration. The possible
consequences of the Abu Ghraib archive are numerous, many of them horrifying.
Perhaps, though, the digital camera will haunt the future career of George W.
Bush the way the tape recorder sealed the fate of Richard Nixon.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); DIGITAL CAMERAS (78%); HISTORY (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); WORLD WAR II (71%); ARMED FORCES
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%); TERRORISM (60%)
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Photography;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Luc Sante; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (91%); ALGERIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company


                             1143 of 1143 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Abu Ghraib Spin

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 768 words


The administration and its Republican allies appear to have settled on a way to
deflect attention from the torture of prisoners at Abu Ghraib: accuse Democrats
and the news media of overreacting, then pile all of the remaining
responsibility onto officers in the battlefield, far away from President Bush
and his political team. That cynical approach was on display yesterday morning
in the second Abu Ghraib hearing in the Senate, a body that finally seemed to be
assuming its responsibility for overseeing the executive branch after a year of
silently watching the bungled Iraq occupation.

The senators called one witness for the morning session, the courageous and
forthright Maj. Gen. Antonio Taguba, who ran the Army's major investigation into
Abu Ghraib. But the Defense Department also sent Stephen Cambone, the under
secretary of defense for intelligence, to upstage him. Mr. Cambone read an
opening statement that said Donald Rumsfeld was deeply committed to the Geneva
Conventions protecting the rights of prisoners, that everyone knew it and that
any deviation had to come from ''the command level.'' A few Republican senators
loyally followed the script, like Senator James Inhofe of Oklahoma, who offered
the astounding comment that he was ''more outraged by the outrage'' than by the
treatment of prisoners. After all, he said, they were probably guilty of
something.

These silly arguments not only obscure the despicable treatment of the
prisoners, most of whom are not guilty of anything, but also ignore the evidence
so far. While some of the particularly sick examples of sexual degradation may
turn out to be isolated events, General Taguba's testimony, and a Red Cross
report from Iraq, made it plain that the abuse of prisoners by the American
military and intelligence agencies was systemic. The Red Cross said prisoners of
military intelligence were routinely stripped, with their hands bound behind
their backs, and posed with women's underwear over their heads. It said they
were ''sometimes photographed in this position.''

The Red Cross report, published by The Wall Street Journal, said that Iraqi
prisoners -- 70 to 90 percent of whom apparently did nothing wrong -- were
routinely abused when they were arrested, and their wives and mothers
threatened. The Iraqi police, who operate under American control and are
eventually supposed to help replace the occupation forces, are even worse --
sending those who won't pay bribes to prison camps, and beating and burning
prisoners, according to the report.

The Red Cross said most prisoners were treated better once they got into the
general population at the larger camps, except those who were held by military
intelligence. ''In certain cases, such as in Abu Ghraib military intelligence
section, methods of physical and psychological coercion used by the
interrogators appeared to be part of the standard operating procedures by
military intelligence personnel,'' the report said.

It was alarming yesterday to hear General Taguba report that military commanders
had eased the rules four times last year to permit guards to use ''lethal
force'' on unruly prisoners. The hearing also disclosed that Lt. Gen. Ricardo
Sanchez, the commander in Iraq, had authorized the presence of attack dogs
during interrogation sessions. It wasn't very comforting that he had directed
that these dogs be muzzled.

These practices go well beyond any gray area of American values, international
law or the Geneva Conventions. Mr. Cambone tried to argue that Mr. Rumsfeld had
made it clear to everyone that the prisoners in Iraq were covered by those
conventions. But Mr. Rumsfeld's public statements have been ambiguous at best,
and General Taguba said that, in any case, the Abu Ghraib guards had received no
training. All the senators, government officials and generals assembled in that
hearing room yesterday could not figure out who had been in charge at Abu Ghraib
and which rules applied to the Iraqi prisoners. How were untrained reservists
who had been plucked from their private lives to guard the prisoners supposed to
have managed it?

General Sanchez did give some misguided orders involving the Abu Ghraib prison
and prisoners in general. But the deeply flawed mission in which he participates
is the responsibility of the Bush administration. It was Mr. Bush and Mr.
Rumsfeld, not General Sanchez, who failed to anticipate the violence and chaos
that followed the invasion of Iraq, and sent American soldiers out to handle it
without the necessary resources, manpower and training.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (88%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); PRISONS (78%); ARMIES (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); POLICE
FORCES (77%); WITNESSES (76%); TESTIMONY (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); ARRESTS
(73%); BRIBERY (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%)

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (52%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (67%) George W (Pres) Bush; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2004


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
