
                              2 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

For First Time, U.S. Is Excluded From U.N. Human Rights Panel

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1534 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 3


In a move that reflected a growing frustration with America's attitude toward
international organizations and treaties, the United States was voted off the
United Nations Human Rights Commission today for the first time since the
panel's founding under American leadership in 1947.

The ouster of the United States from the commission while nations like Sudan and
Pakistan were chosen for membership was certain to generate further hostility to
the United Nations among conservatives in Washington.

The unexpected move, which came in a secret vote, was apparently supported even
by some friends of the United States. The vote also served notice that a bloc of
developing nations opposed to American policies is becoming much stronger and
more effective, and that Washington can no longer expect to be elected
automatically to important panels.

Four nations competed today to fill three Western vacancies for three-year terms
on the 53-member commission. The secret vote is conducted among the members of
the Economic and Social Council, which oversees the Geneva-based commission and
is made up of different members than the commission, although there can be some
overlap, as there is now.France had 52 votes out of a possible 54 today, Austria
got 41 and Sweden 32. The United States trailed with 29 and was eliminated.

"It's an unequivocally devastating blow," said William H. Luers, president of
the United Nations Association of the United States, the largest American
support group for the organization. He said he feared the effect on a Congress
with many critics of the organization.

"It couldn't be worse," he said. "All the conservatives in the administration
will see this as proof that we are in an organization full of enemies."

Also elected to the commission today were Bahrain, Korea, Pakistan, Croatia,
Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Togo and Uganda. One-third of the
seats on the commission -- which meets annually to survey human rights
practices, pass resolutions critical of abusers and assign monitors -- are open
to election every year.

President Bush, addressing the American Jewish Committee tonight, made one of
his strongest statements yet of the country's defense of human rights and
religious freedoms, dwelling on Sudan and China, but did not address the
decision on the Human Rights Committee.

Amnesty International USA called the removal of the United States from the
commission "part of an effort by nations that routinely violate human rights to
escape scrutiny." Amnesty accused members of commission of failing to do their
job, succumbing instead to political and economic pressures.

"The U.S. was among the few nations willing to actively push for condemnation at
the U.N.H.R.C. of the brutal human rights violations committed by nations like
China," it said.

At Human Rights Watch, Joanna Weschler, the group's representative at the United
Nations, said the commission was becoming "a rogues' gallery of human rights
abusers." But she added: "It wasn't just enemies. It was friends as well who
voted the U.S. out of the commission."

Friends of the United States in Europe and elsewhere have grown increasingly
impatient, disappointed and annoyed with actions by Washington.

And in recent years, critics of the United Nations in Congress have played down
American involvement in world organizations generally, rejected a host of
treaties and agreements and built up a huge debt in overdue payments to the
United Nations budget. More than $580 million of that debt is still tied up in
the House of Representatives despite an agreement worked out in December to
lower American dues.

Then came the Bush administration's rejection of the Kyoto pact to reduce global
warming and a decision to develop a missile shield that many other nations saw
as a threat to the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty and to arms control in
general.

Madeleine K. Albright, who was the United States ambassador to the United
Nations before becoming secretary of state, said in an interview that it was
"beyond belief" that at the end of the day Sudan was a member of the commission
and the United States was not. Sudan has been accused of a broad array of human
rights abuses during its civil war, including slavery.

"It's really a bad decision, and it is not only going to harm the ability of the
United Nations to function on human rights issues because the United States was
the one who was depended upon to introduce some of the resolutions, but I also
believe that it will harm the United Nations," Dr. Albright said. "It's one of
those things where decisions are made out of some kind of short-term pique or
something like that, and it hurts very much at a time when the United Nations
needs very much to have American support."

Today, Singapore's ambassador to the United Nations, Kishore Mahbubani, who is
currently a member of the Security Council, said it was not American human
rights policies that led to this vote, but the overall perception of American
inattention to the organization.

He said the United States would have to be better at the active campaigning and
political horse-trading that other nations employ to gain places on important
committees and other bodies. The administration has not yet sent an ambassador
to New York. Although John Negroponte, a career diplomat, has been named to the
job of United Nations ambassador, his name has not yet been sent to the Senate
for confirmation.

Representative Nita M. Lowey, the New York Democrat who is co-chairman of the
bipartisan United Nations working group and ranking Democrat on the House
foreign operations subcommittee, said in a statement today that what happened
was an embarrassment to the United States.

"President Bush has dragged his feet in getting key foreign policy officials
confirmed," she said. "It is unacceptable that we still have no U.N. ambassador,
and this vote is a painful blow to to our global leadership on human rights and
democracy. The U.S. commitment to human rights has fallen victim to the
administration's laissez-faire attitude toward diplomacy and foreign policy."

The acting United States ambassador to the United Nations, James B. Cunningham,
said today that the outcome "won't, of course, affect our commitment to human
rights issues, in and outside the United Nations."

Jean-David Levitte, the French ambassador, attributed the overwhelming vote for
France to its policy of approaching human rights issues with cooperation and
dialogue rather than confrontation, a system he said worked well with China.
France and other European nations did not back an American resolution at the
just-concluded six-week annual session of the Human Rights Commission that would
have held China up to public criticism.

But, Mr. Levitte said, that did not mean that France was prepared to go soft on
human rights issues in the commission, where the French often back American
moves on other issues. "We need the U.S. engagement in the U.N., and we need the
U.S. in the Human Rights Commission," he said. "My hope is that what happened
will not trigger bitter feelings in the U.S. Congress and a new fever against
the U.N."

In Washington, Representative Christopher H. Smith, Republican of New Jersey and
vice chairman of the House International Relations Committee, who took part in
the recent annual commission meeting in Geneva as part of the Bush
administration's delegation, said he was "disappointed but not surprised" by
today's action.

"In Geneva, there was a great deal of animosity about the United States bringing
the resolution on China," he said. "This seems to me to be a retaliation in part
for standing side by side with Israel and standing out on China. This to me is
payback for our principled positions."

Mr. Smith backs a Congressional call for American action in voting countries
that abuse rights off the commission if the panel's credibility is to survive.

Felice Gaer, director of the Jacob Blaustein Institute for the Advancement of
Human Rights in New York and a member of the United Nations Committee Against
Torture, said the American delegation at this year's Human Rights Commission
meeting, did a lot of good in pressing for criticism of countries like China,
Iran and Cuba. But when it came to issues like children's rights and the
outlawing of "disappearances," the United States took an aggressively negative
stand.

William vanden Heuvel, a former merican deputy representative at the United
Nations who is now chairman of the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute in
Hyde Park, N.Y., said today's vote would have "serious repercussions" on the
Human Rights Commission, which Mrs. Roosevelt helped to create. He said,
moreover, that to have all three new Western seats filled by members of the
European Union was questionable. But he also said the United States had to face
a new reality.

"There are so many people in so many countries who are so angry at the United
States for not living up to its word," he said, after a briefing for ambassadors
here before the vote in the Economic and Social Council. "We're advised too by
our representatives how various members of the United Nations are increasingly
finding the United States an untrustworthy partner."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
FREEDOM OF RELIGION (72%); RELIGION (60%); JEWS & JUDAISM (60%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%); UNITED NATIONS
ECONOMIC & SOCIAL COUNCIL (56%) UNITED NATIONS; AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (ORGN);
UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (94%); CROATIA (92%); UGANDA (92%);
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); FRANCE (79%); AUSTRIA (55%)

REGION: SUDAN;  PAKISTAN;  BAHRAIN;  SOUTH KOREA;  CROATIA;  ARMENIA;  CHILE;
MEXICO;  SIERRA LEONE;  TOGO;  UGANDA

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Righteous Indignation

BYLINE:  By Belinda Cooper;  Belinda Cooper is a visiting assistant professor of
law at Ohio Northern University and a senior fellow at the World Policy
Institute.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 1086 words


THE MOBILIZATION OF SHAME
A World View of Human Rights.
By Robert F. Drinan.
240 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $24.95.

Human rights are again high on the international agenda, after years of cold-war
stalemate between two blocs that not only disagreed on even the fundamental
definition of rights, but justified violations of them in the name of larger
ideological goals. Many nations now participate in a complex international
system of human rights treaties, conventions and institutions. In a
comprehensive, if sometimes rambling, overview of this system, Robert F. Drinan,
a Jesuit priest, professor of law at Georgetown University and human rights
advocate, seeks in "The Mobilization of Shame" to tell the "amazing story of how
the family of nations has struggled to develop and inculcate human rights in the
past three generations."

A former United States congressman, Drinan is understandably concerned first and
foremost with American policy. He describes the importance of American support
for the Nuremberg war crimes tribunal and the establishment of the United
Nations, as well as the incorporation of some human rights-supporting mechanisms
into American foreign policy, especially since the Carter years. But despite
"the desire to provide leadership and moral ideals" that he believes lies "deep
within the American soul," he argues that American backing for human rights has
been inconsistent at best.

While praising positive achievements like the 1992 Torture Victims Protection
Act, which allows foreign citizens to sue their tormentors in American courts,
and the State Department's annual country-by-country reports on human rights,
Drinan criticizes the United States' frequent unwillingness to cooperate in
international human rights efforts. The United States is the only nation besides
Somalia that has not yet ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child, though it "leads the developed world in child poverty." It is one of
a small number of countries -- including China and Iran -- that account for most
of the world's executions, despite an emerging international consensus against
the death penalty. In 1998 it found itself in equally unfortunate company as one
of only seven nations to oppose the statute for an international criminal court,
which President Bill Clinton signed but which the Senate is unlikely to ratify
anytime soon.

The few human rights treaties the United States has signed contain reservations
ensuring that they do not conflict with existing domestic law. Even in the new,
post-cold-war order, many Americans resist even the appearance of sacrificing
sovereignty to an international authority, and tend to support international
human rights efforts only as long as they do not obligate us to alter our own
practices.

But Drinan provides little real insight into the reasons for this American
mind-set. Nor does he discuss specific American objections to human rights
instruments or suggest ways of responding to them. It is thus difficult to
evaluate his assertion that "the United States more than any other country will
shape the future of the amazing developments in international human rights." In
fact, much leadership on human rights has lately come from outside the United
States: Drinan himself describes Europe's well-developed regional human rights
system, for example, and Europe and Canada have led the way in supporting an
international criminal court.

Drinan's overall outlook for human rights is hopeful, and his optimism is not
entirely unjustified. It was hardly imaginable, when he published a similar
summary of the status of international human rights in 1987 ("Cry of the
Oppressed"), that only a few years later the Soviet bloc would crumble, United
States-supported dictatorships in Latin America would be replaced by democracies
and apartheid in South Africa would vanish.

But although the end of the cold war renewed the possibility of international
cooperation, it hardly spelled the end of rights abuses. Drinan singles out
several issues for closer scrutiny, including the right to food, prisoners'
rights, the death penalty and religious freedom, but here his optimism seems to
take him too far. Given recent events in China and Afghanistan, for example, is
it really "plausible to think that the abolition of intolerance and persecution
based on religious differences may be on the horizon"?

More important, Drinan's proposals for dealing with those who continue to refuse
to adhere to international human rights standards are unsatisfying. As the title
of the book suggests, Drinan views shame and indignation as the strongest
weapons in the human rights arsenal: "Ultimately," he maintains, "this is the
moral power which, more than laws or economic sanctions, will induce nations to
follow the less traveled road that leads to democracy and equality."

Yet he provides no evidence that shame is an effective method of overcoming the
"deep-seated self-interest of all nations" and forcing them to change abusive
practices. It was not a moral awakening, but military and economic pressure,
that caused Serbia to renounce Slobodan Milosevic. It is difficult to imagine
the regimes of Iraq or Cuba responding to moral suasion. And governments that
disagree on the very definition of fundamental rights, like China -- which
claims that it protects its people's economic and social rights -- see no reason
to be ashamed. Shame and outrage may prompt individuals to stand up for the
rights of others, and they surely help motivate the growing number of human
rights organizations that play a crucial international role. But they cannot
alone protect human rights on a larger scale.

Drinan might have given greater attention to the long-term need for more
concrete mechanisms like regional and international institutions with the power
to enforce their decisions. A beginning has been made with the highly effective
European Court of Human Rights, whose decisions are largely binding on the
members of the Council of Europe, and the current international criminal
tribunals, which have imprisoned top war criminals.

One would have wished that Drinan, with his years of experience, had offered
more practical guidance for the future. Still, in the current debates it is
valuable to have a writer of such undeniable moral stature remind us of the
importance of international cooperation on human rights, and point out the
embarrassment of Washington's reluctance to participate in existing human rights
mechanisms.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: MOBILIZATION OF SHAME, THE (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); COLD WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); LAW SCHOOLS
(78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); CHILD WELFARE
(74%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (72%); LITERATURE (70%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (70%); US PRESIDENTS
(68%); CHILD POVERTY (62%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  REVIEWS

COMPANY: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS (58%)

ORGANIZATION: YALE UNIVERSITY (84%); GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (57%); UNITED NATIONS
(55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS611310 COLLEGES, UNIVERSITIES & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (70%); JIMMY CARTER (50%) COOPER, BELINDA; DRINAN, ROBERT F

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (73%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Lost Vote for Human Rights

BYLINE:  By Merle Goldman;  Merle Goldman, professor of history at Boston
University, was an American delegate to the United Nations Commission on Human
Rights in 1993 and is author of "Sowing the Seeds of Democracy in China."

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


China's satisfaction with the American loss of a seat at the 53-member United
Nations Commission on Human Rights reveals how important the United States has
been at the commission in dealing with China's human rights abuses. Now there
will be no nation willing to sponsor resolutions critical of China -- at a time
of intensifying repression of religious groups, notably the Falun Gong movement,
and democratic reformers. In addition, we have lost a forum to call attention to
the arrest of two American citizens, Wu Jianmin and Li Shaomin, who have been
detained for several months without charges.

Since 1990, in the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square crackdown, the United
States has sponsored resolutions at the human rights commission critical of
China's abuses. And virtually every year, China has been able to block a vote on
the resolution because it has the support of many developing nations that agree
with its assertion that, for less developed countries, priority should be given
to economic rights and to rights of sovereignty -- that is, noninterference in a
country's internal affairs.

Despite these regular defeats, debates within the United Nations human rights
commission have been far more effective than Congressional denunciations or
criticism by human rights and other groups in moving China toward compliance
with international norms. The multilateral nature of the commission, many of
whose members have been hostile to the United States, has made it difficult for
China -- itself currently on the commission -- to dismiss criticisms as merely
manifestations of domestic American power politics or overreaching "hegemonism."

For example, the desire to avoid censure by the human rights commission has led
China to affirm certain principles that, until the 1990's, it totally rejected.
In 1997, China signed the United Nations Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights after several of our allies -- France, Germany, Italy, Spain,
Japan, Canada and Australia -- had decided not to cosponsor an American
resolution aimed at China. The following year, in return for the United States'
not sponsoring a critical resolution, Beijing signed the United Nations Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights.

It is true that these advances came in the context of quiet diplomacy, as
advocated by China; but it is equally true that the threat of public censure at
the United Nations commission was critical to China's acceptance of the two
covenants.

In this year's commission meeting, the United States could get no other Western
country to join it in sponsoring a resolution critical of China and had to
sponsor one on its own. Nevertheless, prevention of that resolution's passing
was so important to China that President Jiang Zemin toured Latin America in
part to line up votes against it.

The loss of our commission seat seems to have been due to many factors,
including neglect of our European allies, a resurgent unilateralism in the Bush
administration and a certain inattention to diplomatic detail. In any case, we
have now lost the most effective forum for bringing pressure on China with
regard to human rights. Some will say that United Nations human rights
resolutions are meaningless because there is no way to enforce them. But because
China wants to be a major global player, it has increasingly, though
reluctantly, complied with or signed onto norms recognized by the world
community. These universal norms may not always temper the actions of China's
leaders, but they encourage and inspire those in China who seek to gain
political and religious rights and fight against their government's abuse of
human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Jorge Colombo)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (86%); DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); CULTS & SECTS
(76%); POLITICS (76%); RELIGION (71%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GOLDMAN, MERLE (PROF); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (74%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (96%); SPAIN (79%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);
JAPAN (79%); CANADA (79%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Lists Abuses By Guerrillas In Colombia

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, July 9


The largest rebel group here regularly violates the rights of noncombatants by
attacking civilians, kidnapping for ransom, recruiting children and focusing on
medical workers, all in spite of the group's occasional pledges to abide by some
international rights norms, Human Rights Watch says in a new report.

Written as a 9,000-word letter to the rebel leader, Manuel Marulanda, the report
says the organization, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, has increased
attacks on civilians by using homemade gas-cylinder bombs, notoriously
inaccurate weapons that are usually aimed at police outposts but often destroy
whole neighborhoods.

The rebels are also responsible for disappearances, the mistreatment of
prisoners and the executions of people judged in unauthorized courts to be enemy
collaborators, Human Rights Watch said. The report is to be issued on Tuesday in
Washington. The rebels received a copy last week.

The findings have been compiled as Colombia remains locked in an increasingly
brutal conflict in which massacres of civilians, displacements of villagers and
abductions are weekly occurrences. Groups like Human Rights Watch fault the
right-wing United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, a paramilitary organization
financed by landowners to attack rebels, for most abuses.

But the rebel force, or FARC, is increasingly responsible for rights violations,
said Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas division of Human Rights
Watch.

In an interview last week, Mr. Vivanco, who signed the letter to Mr. Marulanda,
said the rebel group had often used the principles of international humanitarian
law for its own purposes. Examples cited included the rebels' calling on the
government to agree to a prisoner exchange or pushing for the army to track down
paramilitary gunmen.

Rebel leaders who met with Human Rights Watch researchers have said
international standards represent "elite interests" and are not applicable here.
"We've come to the conclusion that they're using international humanitarian law
as just part of a P.R. operation," Mr. Vivanco said by telephone from
Washington. "It's part of their rhetoric. But they have shown no will, no
intention whatsoever, to enforce those principles in practice."

Human Rights Watch, which researched the report in trips here last summer and
this year, said evidence showed that the rebels executed a member of Congress,
Diego Turbay, and six other people on Dec. 29, 2000, an attack that the group
has denied.

The report also criticized the guerrillas for "grossly inappropriate punishment"
against two rebels believed responsible for the deaths on March 5, 1999, of
three Americans who were visiting an Indian tribe. Rebel leaders told Human
Rights Watch that the two were sentenced to dig a 55-yard-long trench and clear
land. American officials have asked, in vain, for the two to be handed over.

Human Rights Watch, which visited rebel-controlled territory in southern
Colombia, said the force had "established a pattern of abducting civilians
suspected of supporting paramilitary groups, many of whom are later killed."
Last year, the force killed 496 civilians after having accused many of being
paramilitary or government sympathizers, according to a leading Colombian rights
group cited by Human Rights Watch.

The report calls "particularly repugnant" the use of children as combatants and
spies. Human Rights Watch notes that rebel leaders have said they will not use
children younger than 15. Despite some welcome developments like the
demobilization of 62 children in February, large numbers of fighters are under
15, the rights group said.

Mr. Vivanco noted that his was Human Rights Watch's first letter written
directly to Mr. Marulanda. It represents, Mr. Vivanco added, a trend by rights
groups and others to "hold the top guys accountable for the actions of their
troops."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); SENTENCING (69%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(83%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF COLOMBIA (55%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH;
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; MARULANDA, MANUEL

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (57%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 5, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Revolt at the U.N.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 765 words


Thanks in part to the inattention of the Bush administration, the United States
lost its seat on the United Nations Human Rights Commission this week for the
first time since the panel was established in 1947. But the administration's
failure to detect and defeat the brewing rebellion among other nations was only
one element of an embarrassing defeat. Even more important was the rising
resentment abroad about America's often patronizing treatment of the U.N. and
Washington's disdain for international compacts on issues ranging from the
environment to the use of land mines.

Critics of the U.N. in the administration and Congress will doubtless blame the
world organization for the loss of the seat and cite it as another reason to
withhold Washington's financial support and to take other punitive actions. Such
a response would ignore the underlying issues that precipitated the revolt and
only worsen American relations with the U.N., an institution with the potential
to be a major asset to American diplomacy.

The Human Rights Commission itself is an example of the positive role the U.N.
can play. The commission, which meets in Geneva, is often frustratingly
bureaucratic, and counts among its members some of the world's most egregious
violators of human rights, including Sudan, Pakistan and Togo. But this year the
commission condemned human rights abuses in Cuba and Iran, and censured Russia
for its actions in Chechnya. It sends special rapporteurs to investigate
violations, a spotlight that is profoundly embarrassing to dictators.
International human rights groups have correctly warned that the commission may
be inactive without American leadership and that Washington's voice on human
rights issues will be weakened.

The United States was dropped from the commission when the three seats reserved
for Western nations in this year's balloting went to France, Austria and Sweden
in a vote of the 54 members of the Economic and Social Council, the U.N. body
that oversees the commission. American diplomats apparently complacently assumed
the American seat was safe after 43 nations assured Washington of their support
and did not realize a revolt was developing, encouraged by human rights abusers,
including Cuba and China. Washington also failed to persuade Austria or Sweden
to pull out of the race. The breakdown may be partly due to the absence of a new
American ambassador to the U.N. The White House has selected John Negroponte, an
experienced diplomat, but has yet to submit his nomination to the Senate.

President Bush and Secretary of State Colin Powell must be mindful of the
erosion of international respect for the United States, even among some of its
European allies. Not all the foreign complaints are justified. Washington has
long been the commission's fiercest defender of Israel and the author of the
most aggressive resolutions condemning nations such as China and Cuba. Those
policies are entirely appropriate.

But other American behavior, including a tendency to treat the U.N. as a
benighted and irritating stepchild, has needlessly provoked opposition.
Washington's failure to pay U.N. dues is the most conspicuous example. But
member states are also angry about the Pentagon's insistence that Americans not
be covered by an international criminal court, the Bush administration's
withdrawal from talks about global warning and even Washington's policies of
pushing poor countries not to make copies of AIDS drugs. President Bush's open
contempt for the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty has alarmed not only Russia,
the other signatory to the accord, but NATO allies as well.

Until a new election next year when Washington can try to reclaim membership on
the Human Rights Commission, the organization is likely to take a softer line on
most nations, and a more aggressive one toward Israel. But the more important
fallout from this week's vote will probably come in Washington. The Bush
administration and responsible members of Congress must move quickly to prevent
a backlash against the U.N.

Payment of Washington's back dues is vital to maintaining American influence at
the U.N. The payment plan that was carefully negotiated by Richard Holbrooke in
the last days of the Clinton administration remains a reasonable deal for the
United States and should be approved by the House, where it has been stalled.
The lesson of the commission vote is not that the U.N. is inherently inimical to
American interests, but rather that Washington has to do a better job of working
with other nations if it wants to retain its authority at the U.N.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); VOTERS & VOTING (67%) EDITORIALS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (58%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); PAKISTAN
(79%); FRANCE (79%); EUROPE (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); SWITZERLAND
(78%); AUSTRIA (68%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Colombian Human Rights Figure Is the New Defense Minister

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 437 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 30


Gustavo Bell, who as Colombia's vice president directed the government's human
rights efforts, has been chosen to replace Luis Fernando Ramirez as minister of
defense. Mr. Ramirez, who resigned on Friday and may run for president in next
year's election, is credited with overseeing the modernization of the Colombian
Army, which had suffered a string of battlefield defeats.

Mr. Bell's appointment, announced without fanfare on Tuesday, came as a
surprise. Press and pundits here had speculated for weeks that Mr. Ramirez would
be replaced by Eduardo Pizano, chief of staff for President Andres Pastrana, or
Romulo Gonzalez, the justice minister.

But on Tuesday the government announced that Mr. Bell, 44, a lawyer and former
governor, would head the government's public security forces. Mr. Bell was
traveling in Indonesia today and was not available for comment. As defense
minister, he will manage the 150,000-strong armed forces and the 100,000-member
national police.

He will also also continue administering $900 million in American aid for the
army and police, much of it in the form of helicopters and military equipment
used by a 3,000-man antinarcotics brigade.

Today, much speculation centered on whether Mr. Bell's appointment was a signal
to military officials about the need to cut links that human rights groups say
the army has with right-wing paramilitary forces.

But several human rights officials here and in the United States said that Mr.
Bell, while ostensibly committed to improving human rights conditions, had
little to show for his efforts. And military officials, in fact, welcomed the
appointment, Mr. Ramirez said.

"He shares democratic values, and he's generally concerned on human rights, but
he's extremely weak," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas
division of Human Rights Watch. "His performance as vice president of Colombia
in charge of human rights issues has been extremely ineffective."

The military has, over the years, been criticized for collaborating with
paramilitary gunmen, who even the Defense Ministry holds responsible for 70
percent of the massacres in Colombia's 37-year-old conflict.

Under Mr. Ramirez, the American government says, the military has purged some
human rights abusers and begun efforts to track paramilitaries and their
supporters, though officials say more needs to be done.

"There have been some efforts made on issues related to human rights abuses,
which were positive," said Peter Romero, assistant secretary of state, by phone
from Washington. "It has taken a while to gear up, but we're finally seeing the
fruits of those labors."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); ARMIES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(77%); POLICE FORCES (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (72%); GOVERNORS (72%); HELICOPTERS
(52%) APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  ELECTIONS

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; BELL, GUSTAVO (MIN); RAMIREZ, LUIS FERNANDO (MIN)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDONESIA (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 26, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

War's Legacy: Many in Guatemala Still Fear Army

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1298 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANITA LAS CANOAS, Guatemala


The two soldiers, dressed in battle gear and carrying assault weapons, went to
Eulogia Lopez's house with assurances that they had come to guarantee peace and
build latrines for the village school.

They invited her to a town meeting, but she declined. In October 1982, soldiers
had asked her husband to a similar meeting. It was the last time she saw him
alive -- the army killed Mr. Lopez and 11 other civilians.

"I was not in agreement with the army then, and I'm not in agreement with them
now," Mrs. Lopez said. "They used to ask people to go to meetings and kill them.
They may come offering help now, but the killers return later."

The peace accords that ended 36 years of civil war in 1996 limited the army to
protecting Guatemala's borders and sovereignty, but redefining the domestic role
of the military has proved difficult. Soldiers have gone recently to nearby
villages in this part of southwestern Guatemala distributing fertilizer. In
other areas, troops have rebuilt roads or performed other public works.

In June, after 78 felons bribed their way out of the country's most secure
prison, government officials suggested that the military take over the prison
system.

In this region, which was decimated by massacres during the civil war, the
increased visibility of the military has brought fear and uncertainty at a time
when human rights groups continue to be threatened and harassed. Activists are
worried by the untouchable defense budget, as well as the persistence of a
presidential bodyguard unit that has been linked to political murders and
domestic spying, and which was supposed to be disbanded.

While the military says it wants to improve its domestic image, many civilians
fear that it is only trying to find a way to go unpunished for the past, given
that a report issued after the accords were signed blamed the military for most
of the war's 200,000 deaths.

A visit by several dozen troops to Santa Anita came in February, a few months
before this village and several others filed a genocide lawsuit against former
Gen. Efrain Rios Montt and other high-ranking officials.

The lawsuit accused the former general and the other men of overseeing 11
massacres in which 1,250 were killed in the early 1980's. The soldiers' visit
was seen by many here as simple intimidation.

"You don't have to be a rocket scientist to see how the villagers interpreted
that visit," said Paul Seils, the legal director of the Legal Action Center for
Human Rights, which prepared the genocide lawsuit. "Why so many of them? Why so
fully armed? We can only arrive at an interpretation that says, 'We are here and
we know what you are doing.' "

Certainly, for Elena Gonzalez Hernandez, the sight of several dozen troops in
battle gear arriving in the early morning revived the horror of the war. In 1982
she and her family fled their hillside home as the soldiers advanced, looking
for the guerrillas they said were in hiding. She lost four of her brothers that
year, as well as two friends who were thrown alive into a burning house.

"We were scared when they came again this year," she said. "What were they
looking for now?"

Luis Valcarcel, an assistant to the mayor, said the soldiers had asked to check
local maps. He said that while they said they had come to build latrines for the
school, the community had to build them themselves, since the soldiers spent
most of the three days in the region visiting other villages.

"They told us at a meeting they came not to do violence," he said. "They said
they came to do civic work. We see their faces, but we do not know what is in
their hearts."

Even those who were not yet born during the war, but were raised with stories
about the conflict, recoiled at the visit. When a group of soldiers entered the
school, one student ran off in fear and has yet to return, said Felix Julaj
Morales, a teacher.

"Many of the children did not want to talk to them at first," he said. "Then
they spoke with the children and said the army's function now was to guard the
borders and protect the population. They gave out candy. They said they wanted
to live in peace with the community."

The soldiers have not returned to the village, but they have been to nearby
areas to distribute fertilizer. They have also kept up a more sustained program
of civic works in Quiche Province, much to the dismay of human rights activists.

"They have begun anew their institutional participation," said Helen Mack, the
head of a foundation that has brought legal action against high-ranking officers
whom it accused of ordering the assassination of her sister Myrna in 1990. "They
begin to identify leaders in meetings as part of their control of the
population. Supposedly they come with good motives, but they have their own
objectives."

Even if the military's motives are straightforward, the country has not gotten
to the point where people believe them, said one diplomat who has been
monitoring the fulfillment of the peace accords.

The military, the diplomat said, has not changed its world view, which considers
domestic critics subversives, civilians incompetent and the peace accords a
victory for the guerrillas. As a result, civilians in turn view civic works by
the military with suspicion.

"The anti-subversive ideology which is still present in the armed forces has to
be reviewed, so there exists a doctrine of civic action that is accepted," the
diplomat said, speaking on condition of anonymity. The defense minister, Gen.
Eduardo Arevalo Lacs, did not respond to several requests for an interview. Nor
did Mr. Rios Montt or representatives of his political party.

General Arevalo told human rights advocates at the time that the soldiers had
gone to the area at the request of the local governor. He also said, according
to the advocates, that the visit had only been to help residents who felt
ignored by other government agencies.

The overarching problem, human rights activists said, is that the government has
shown neither the willingness nor the ability to carry out the reforms from the
peace accords or to bring to justice those officers who masterminded human
rights abuses.

While the activists were heartened by the recent conviction of three military
men for the bludgeoning death of Bishop Juan Gerardi, the author of a critical
human rights report in 1998, many activists say they continue to suffer
harassment: anonymous threats, lurking by suspicious people outside their
offices and break-ins in which computer files are reviewed or stolen.

Only a few days after the three military men were convicted in early June, a
visiting researcher from Amnesty International said unknown assailants had tried
to abduct her as she was entering her hotel room. Interior Minister Byron
Barrientos dismissed the allegation, suggesting that the international human
rights group had fabricated the incident.

Against those events, the pending genocide lawsuit filed by the villagers of
Santa Anita and the surrounding region, as well as a continuing investigation of
other officers who may be linked to the bishop's murder, are seen as possible
flash points for resistance from the military.

"What worries me is the continuing impunity of the people in the army," said
Nery Rodenas, director of the Archbishop's Office for Human Rights. "There is a
lack of convergence between their acts and the requirements of the peace
accords. They are sticking to a vision of the past, in the sense of considering
themselves lords over the people."

In Santa Anita, people like Mrs. Lopez cling to other, heartbreaking images of
the past.

"We don't want their help," she said of the soldiers. "We want justice. We will
struggle to see where we get. If people continue to struggle, not just for one
day, we will get justice. As long as I'm alive, I will look to that day."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eulogia Lopez and her daughter Maria in the entrance to their
home. Mrs. Lopez's husband was killed in a massacre by the military in 1982, so
she is suspicious of recent offers by the army of help for her village. (David
Gonzalez/The New York Times) Map of Guatemala highlights Santa Anita Las Canoas:
Santa Anita Las Canoas is in a region decimated by massacres.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LITIGATION (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); FELONIES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(77%); DEFENSE SPENDING (73%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (72%); CORRECTIONS
(71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); GENOCIDE (69%); BORDER CONTROL (68%);
PRISONS (66%); MURDER (56%); BUDGETS (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  PUBLIC OPINION

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Rightists Said to Harass Social Workers

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 15


For 29 years, the Popular Women's Organization in Barrancabermeja has run soup
kitchens, offered programs for children and provided social services to the poor
-- work that has little to do with this country's civil conflict.

But in Barrancabermeja, an industrial city north of here that has recently been
the scene of fierce street battles between rebels and right-wing paramilitary
gunmen, anyone involved in social work or human rights advocacy has become fair
game for the paramilitaries, local community workers said this week.

On Jan. 27, two men identifying themselves as members of the United Self-Defense
Forces of Colombia, a ruthless paramilitary organization, tried to force the
women's group to abandon a neighborhood center so that paramilitaries could
occupy it. The women refused, but the fighters have continued to threaten them.

Then on Feb. 8 paramilitary fighters told a Swedish member of Peace Brigades
International, a group of non-Colombian volunteers that provides unarmed escorts
to local community and human rights workers, that he and others from his
organization were considered "military targets."

The intimidation has alarmed international human rights groups like Amnesty
International, which is trying to marshal an international reaction from
American and other officials so the Colombian security forces will adequately
protect the women and pursue the violators.

"The explicit threat against the women's group and international human rights
monitors is indicative of a clear deterioration of the civil conflict that we
are seeing not only in Barrancabermeja but throughout Colombia," Andrew Miller,
a Latin America specialist at Amnesty International, said by phone from his
office in Washington.

Several weeks ago, about 250 paramilitary gunmen descended into poor
neighborhoods in Barrancabermeja to try to wrest away the strategically
important city from leftist rebels who have operated there for years.

Going from neighborhood to neighborhood, the paramilitaries have attacked rebels
and paid young men as much as $240 to join their group. So far this year, nearly
70 people have been killed by both paramilitaries and rebels in the city of
300,000.

Those deemed in opposition -- including human rights groups that denounce abuses
or the women's group, which refuses to cooperate with any local gunmen -- can
become targets, human rights workers in Barrancabermeja say.

"As the paramilitary presence has grown, so has the pressure of these groups in
the poor neighborhoods," said Jaime Prieto, the Catholic bishop in
Barrancabermeja. "That's apparent with the nightly incursions, the selective
assassinations, the cutoff of telephone services to some neighborhoods, and the
intimidation of specific groups."

In the case of the women's group, the paramilitaries "wanted to define our
work," said Yolanda Becerra, the group's director.

"This is something that happens to a lot of people," Ms. Becerra said. "They
push people out of their homes, and they take over."

So far, the paramilitaries have forced one women's group involved in social
work, the Corporation for the Woman, Family and Community, to abandon its
center, said Francisco Campos of Credhos, a local human rights group.

Mr. Campos said that five workers in his own organization had fled
Barrancabermeja since September after receiving threats. "We're all suffering
here," Mr. Campos said. "There's a general threat, a threat against all of the
defenders of human rights."

The trouble for the women's group began when two men walked into the house the
group runs in a southeastern neighborhood and demanded the keys. The women serve
lunch daily for dozens of people and offer dance lessons and other programs for
children.

"I told them that we weren't going to turn over the keys," said Glorio Amparo,
who runs the center, one of five in Barrancabermeja. "The guy told us that we'll
be back at 4 and if we have resistance we'll roll right over you."

One of the men later returned and threatened Ms. Amparo, who called the police.
The authorities arrested the man, she said, and have since provided patrols,
sometimes parking a tank outside the house.

But the women have complained that the man who made the threats was seen on the
streets three days later, having apparently been released.

The threats have continued, directed at the women's group and also at Peace
Brigades, which has been providing round-the-clock protection at the house.

But the women's group has vowed to stay put. "We are convinced that not all is
lost in Barrancabermeja,"Ms. Amparo said.

"As long as there are people here, we're not going to give up. Sure we're
afraid, but we're sticking together. We are continuing to work. This is our way
of life, our conviction."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Columbia highlighting Barrancabermeja: Rebels and paramilitary
gunmen have fought in Barrancabermeja.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WOMEN (90%); CHILDREN (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); FOOD BANKS & SOUP KITCHENS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); CIVIL WAR
(77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); TELEPHONE SERVICES (64%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF
COLOMBIA (57%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (57%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BARRANCABERMEJA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Finds Rights Abuses in China, Colombia and Israel

BYLINE:  By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The State Department concluded today that despite seven years of deepening
American economic engagement with China, the human rights situation there had
worsened significantly, with "intensified crackdowns" on religious
organizations, political dissenters and "any person or group perceived to
threaten the government."

The department's annual review of human rights in 195 countries and territories,
the Bush administration's first, also offered a harsh assessment of how Israel
dealt with Palestinian uprisings last year. It described Indonesia as a nation
increasingly out of control, where random killings and lawlessness are becoming
the norms.

And the report concluded that Colombia, whose president, Andres Pastrana, is to
meet Mr. Bush in the White House on Tuesday, is far from bringing paramilitary
groups under control.

In what could prove a particularly sensitive section, the report concludes that
in Colombia, where the United States is providing a $1.3 billion, two-year aid
package, mostly military, "paramilitary forces find a ready support base within
the military and police, as well as among local civilian elites in many areas."

While the report praises President Pastrana, it denounces massacres and abuses
by private and government security forces in the struggle against leftist
rebels.

The department's report was assembled and drafted largely during the Clinton
administration. But Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and the national security
adviser, Condoleezza Rice, had time to review the findings and in a few
sensitive chapters, particularly on Israel, to alter some wording, Bush
administration officials said.

Today the administration, as expected, announced that the United States would
pursue a resolution condemning China's record at the United Nations Human Rights
Commission, which is to meet in Geneva next month. The Clinton administration
never succeeded in getting enough countries to join in the annual resolution to
win passage, and it is unclear how much political capital the Bush
administration is willing to expend to win support for a resolution that is
almost certain to be defeated once again.

But the report poses a deeper problem for Mr. Bush: He must now choose the best
path for influencing the rights records of other nations, a issue that vexed his
predecessor for eight years.

Mr. Clinton insisted that over time, economic engagement with China would force
the government to loosen its control over the political process. There is little
evidence yet that the strategy is working, though the acting assistant secretary
for human rights, Michael Parmly, noted today that "the Internet has resulted in
some improvements" in China, "largely in spite of government actions to control
it."

But he noted that in dealings in Tibet and in the crackdown on the Falun Gong
and other religious groups, "the situation has worsened in significant areas."

At the same time, the report is also harshly critical of conditions in three
countries where the United States has maintained nearly a full economic embargo:
Cuba, Myanmar and North Korea. In each, the report found conditions were no
better, and in some cases were worse.

Critics of both approaches -- engagement and isolation -- will find ammunition
in the voluminous report (so voluminous that the State Department now publishes
it only on a CD-ROM and on its Web site, www .state.gov).

"Their dilemma is the same as the one Clinton faced," said Mike Jendrzejczyk,
who follows Asia for Human Rights Watch. "It hasn't changed one iota. The issue
hasn't been whether to engage, but how."

An early test of whether the administration plans to turn the findings into new
policy may come as General Powell pursues the resolution against China.

He and Mr. Bush could press Mexico, or European allies, to support the
resolution, or they could save their political influence for another issue.
Diplomats at the State Department said it is too early to know how far General
Powell is willing to go.

Clinton administration officials who worked on the early drafts of the report
said today that after their brief review of it on the Internet, it appears
largely unchanged.

"The key was Israel," one said, "and there they left the main conclusion, which
is that there was excessive force on the Israeli side, and human rights
violations on the Palestinian side as well."

On Colombia, the report concluded that while "the government's human rights
record remained poor," still "there were some improvements in the legal
framework and in institutional mechanisms."

The report for the first time explicitly discussed links between the United
States-backed Colombian security forces and paramilitary groups, whose attacks
are increasing, saying such collusion ranged from allowing the militia members
to pass through roadblocks to sharing intelligence and ammunition.

President Pastrana, who was in Washington today, said his government was
developing a strategy to crack down on such groups, including efforts to disrupt
their financing. He said conditions "are improving, though there is still much
work to be done in this area."

Despite a similarly grim portrait of conditions in Colombia last year, President
Clinton waived a series of human rights benchmarks mandated by Congress in order
for the military aid to flow.

Bush officials say their Colombia policy is still under review.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); RELIGION
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
CULTS & SECTS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); POLITICS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
RIOTS (67%); GOVERNMENT BONDS (66%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (63%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;
DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  PALESTINIANS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) STATE DEPARTMENT; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) SANGER, DAVID E; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (73%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); ISRAEL (94%); COLOMBIA (94%); INDONESIA (92%); TIBET (79%); SWITZERLAND
(78%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  INDONESIA;  COLOMBIA;  CHINA

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

He Bore Up Under Torture. Now He Bears Witness.

BYLINE:  By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1331 words

DATELINE: NDJAMENA, Chad


Apologizing for lacking a fan against the oppressive heat, Souleymane Guengueng
led a visitor inside his mud-brick home after church on a recent Sunday. He
settled in an armchair, near a gray filing cabinet, inside which he had
collected evidence of hundreds of cases of torture committed by the government
of this Central African nation in the 1980's.

He cut the figure of a most ordinary man: the threadbare gray suit of the
nondescript style favored by midranking civil servants; the thick, owlish
eyeglasses that emphasized his training as an accountant; the slight build that
suggested he ate just enough.

But on a continent where ordinary men are tortured, killed and forgotten without
a second thought, Mr. Guengueng, 52, has done something extraordinary: fought
back. After being unjustly imprisoned and tortured for two years in the late
1980's, he spent the next decade gathering testimony from fellow victims and
their families.

The evidence provided critical material for Chadian and international human
rights organizations to pursue a case against the country's former dictator,
Hissene Habre, according to Reed Brody, advocacy director of the New York-based
Human Rights Watch.

The case suffered a setback this month when the highest court in Senegal, Mr.
Habre's home in exile, ruled that he could not be tried there. Mr. Guengueng was
undaunted. "We are preparing for a new plan of attack to try him in another
country," he said.

Mr. Guengueng, meanwhile, has become perhaps one of the most famous torture
survivors on a continent that rights groups say accounts for 55 percent of
torture and mistreatment cases worldwide.

He has written for a Paris magazine and fields phone calls at home from rights
organizations in New York and researchers at Harvard. But it was only two years
ago that he got a telephone line, which now consumes a good chunk of his monthly
salary.

"I used to receive calls at my neighbor's across the street," he said. "But I
began thinking that I was getting involved in a serious business, and was it
fair to put my neighbor at risk? That's when I decided to get the phone. Now we
are two in this neighborhood to have phone lines."

Some of the 24 members of his family living with him chatted noisily in the
courtyard. But in his room the heat seemed to have put most occupants to sleep.
A cat lay stretched under a small table. The youngest of Mr. Guengueng's eight
children, Assing-Li, 5, lay on the floor on his belly.

The boy's name means "It's a Miracle" in Kim, the language of his ethnicity, Mr.
Guengueng said.

"After one was arrested," Mr. Guengueng recalled, "and after one spent that much
time in prison, one had assumed that we had all become impotent. He was really a
miracle of God."

The trouble began, to hear Mr. Guengueng tell it, with Chad's civil war in the
late 1970's. The Lake Chad Basin Commission -- for which Mr. Guengueng works to
this day -- moved its headquarters to neighboring Cameroon because of the
fighting here in the capital. Because many Chadian rebels passed through
Cameroon, Mr. Guengueng said, he was branded an opponent of the American-backed
President Habre.

And so, on Aug. 3, 1988, only days after he had undergone surgery to treat an
old wound suffered in a robbery, he was put in prison. Presumed dead by his
family, he remained there until December 1990, when Mr. Habre was overthrown by
the current president, Idriss Deby. He was kept in completely dark cells, or in
cells with intense lighting, sometimes alone, sometimes with 10 other men in
places built for one.

Some guards allowed prisoners to wash; others kept them unwashed for weeks, Mr.
Guengueng recalled. Guards tossed them rotten rice and poured water into the
cells.

"The drops of water that fell, the prisoners had to lick like dogs off the floor
or off their bodies," he said. "They even tried to stop us from praying. When we
prayed, Christians or Muslims, they thought we were asking God to kill Hissene
Habre."

As Mr. Guengueng spoke, one of his daughters came into the room, bearing a tray
of food and a washbowl. She placed the bowl under the table, rousing the cat,
despite the heat. Assing-Li, who refused to eat with anyone except his father,
tugged at Mr. Guengueng's arm.

One year after his release, with the improving rights situation, Mr. Guengueng
and others founded the Association of Victims of Political Repression and Crime.
With an accountant's meticulousness, he then began gathering testimony from
victims, widows and orphans.

"We interviewed more than a thousand people, but we had 712 very good files,
with testimony and photos," he said. "Because we are all created in God's image,
should all these people created in his image be silenced, forgotten? Was there
not something that we could do for the victims and their relatives to regain
their honor?"

His son kept pulling on his arm. The cat rubbed itself against Mr. Guengueng's
leg, purring. He kicked the cat away. The father and son began eating fish stew
with rice and millet.

Then, last year, in a case inspired by the one against the Chilean dictator
Augusto Pinochet, several rights groups led by Human Rights Watch filed suit
against Mr. Habre in Senegal -- arguing that he could be tried anywhere for
crimes against humanity and that former heads of state were not immune.

Mr. Guengueng and other victims traveled to testify in Senegal -- against the
wishes of family members who feared repercussions back here, because many of Mr.
Habre's former allies remained in power.

"My family, my friends told me I was wasting my time," he recalled. "My friends
told my wife she was stupid. Why didn't she stop me from going to Senegal?"

He would be destroyed perhaps, but not defeated. "When I left Chad for Senegal,
I had accepted the idea of dying. I thought when I return to Chad and get off at
the airport, they can cut off my head if they want. I would die a hero. That's
all I wanted out of life now."

When the case was thrown out this month in Senegal, whose courts ultimately were
not independent enough, Human Rights Watch and other groups said their new
strategy would be to get an arrest warrant and extradition request from Belgium
(one of Chad's victims is now a Belgian citizen) and put Mr. Habre on trial
there.

This could be done under the precedent set by the Pinochet case. If they
succeeded -- still a big if -- other African despots might then think twice
about abusing citizens at home and taking their shopping trips abroad in Paris
and New York.

Indeed, it is Mr. Guengueng's determination to apply these rules in Africa,
where the elite are generally considered untouchable, that makes his activism
extraordinary, say rights officials, who consider Mr. Guengueng the most
fearless of the survivors.

"Others tend to be more reticent," said Djekourninga Kaoutar Lazare, secretary
general of the Chadian Association for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
. "He has always been the most outspoken."

That is perhaps one reason his association has been able to deflect some of the
criticism for accepting a $5,000 gift from the current president, Mr. Deby. He
met with Mr. Guengueng's association in September, promising his support in the
Habre case.

Mr. Guengueng's daughter returned, with the news that one of his nephews had
crossed into neighboring Cameroon without identification papers. The border
guards were demanding a bribe of 300 local francs, or about 40 cents, to let him
return. Mr. Guengueng handed her a 500-franc note.

He made no apologies for accepting the presidential gift, which his organization
has used to rent an office. The money, he said, will not mute his criticism of
the government. Asked whether he believed the government was sincere in its
stated support of human rights, he said:

"Politicians have this in common: When they are pestered about human rights,
they react to international pressure. But at the same time they are doing the
opposite. It's the same with all African regimes. It's a daily struggle for us."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Souleymane Guengueng has helped rights groups file suit against
Hissene Habre, who as dictator of Chad in the 80's had him imprisoned. (Toru
Morimoto for The New York Times) Map of Africa highlighting Ndjamena: War in
Ndjamena in the 70's set the stage for arrests and torture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CIVIL SERVICES (77%); TESTIMONY
(77%); LITIGATION (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); JAIL SENTENCING
(73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); FAMILY (73%); ARRESTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%); ETHNICITY (63%); ACCOUNTING
(55%) TORTURE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: GUENGUENG, SOULEYMANE; ONISHI, NORIMITSU; HABRE, HISSENE

CITY: NDJAMENA, CHAD (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: CHAD (94%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (91%); SENEGAL (90%);
AFRICA (79%)

REGION: CHAD;  SENEGAL

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawsuit Says Exxon Aided Rights Abuses

BYLINE:  By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 827 words


A human rights group sued Exxon Mobil in federal court yesterday, accusing the
company of complicity in human rights abuses committed by state security forces
that protect its large natural gas field in Indonesia.

According to the lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Washington, the
crimes occurred during the latest campaign by the Indonesian military to quash
an insurgency by separatists in Aceh, an impoverished region of four million
people in western Indonesia.

Exxon Mobil, the world's largest oil company, shut down its Arun natural gas
operations in Aceh in early March, fearing for the lives of its employees after
a series of attacks. The company said on Monday that it was preparing to resume
gas production in Aceh, though it did not set a specific date.

The International Labor Rights Fund, an organization in Washington that
represents workers in other countries, brought the lawsuit on behalf of 11
villagers in Aceh who contend that over the last year, they and their family
members have been victims of murder, torture, kidnapping and rape at the hands
of the Indonesian military unit guarding Exxon Mobil's natural gas field. The
suit contends, for example, that Exxon Mobil provided barracks where the
military tortured detainees and lent heavy equipment like excavators that, the
suit says, were used to dig mass graves.

The case will most likely take years to move through United States courts. But
in the meantime, the suit adds to a growing, complex public discussion about the
responsibility oil companies bear for the measures used to protect their
projects in volatile but petroleum-rich countries.

"The only way to do this is to pick some of the worst cases as a vehicle for
what can be done," said Terry Collingsworth, a lead lawyer on the suit from the
International Labor Rights Fund. "If in fact we lose these cases, is that the
green light for companies to continue permitting these things to be done in
their name?"

In 1968, Mobil began operating the Arun gas fields, which are owned by the
Indonesian state oil company, Pertamina. After Exxon bought Mobil in 1999, the
merged company, which is based in Irving, Tex., took over the management of
Arun. The gas fields there, until their closing in March, provided the
threadbare Indonesian budget with about $1 billion in revenue annually.

The lawsuit contends that the Indonesian government sent the military to Aceh in
the late 1980's to put down an insurgency. But the practices enumerated in the
suit cover a period after the fall of the regime of President Suharto in 1998.

An Exxon Mobil spokesman said yesterday that the company had not been served
with the lawsuit and did not have confirmation that it had been filed.

After Exxon Mobil representatives reviewed a copy of the legal brief on the
fund's Web site, the company issued a statement rejecting the accusations.
"Exxon Mobil condemns the violation of human rights in any form," the statement
said. "As such, our company rejects and categorically denies any suggestion or
implication that it or its affiliate companies were in any way involved with
alleged human rights abuses by security forces in Aceh."

The lawsuit arrives just as the House of Representatives passed legislation that
would remove from United States stock exchanges any oil company doing business
in Sudan, whose government reportedly used oil revenue to finance a long civil
war rife with executions, slavery and the use of child soldiers.

This lawsuit is also the latest in a series of cases brought against oil
companies since the mid-1990's under the Alien Tort Claims Act, a law from the
late 1700's that allows foreign citizens to sue corporations in United States
courts for human rights violations, among other things.

Exxon Mobil now joins Royal Dutch/Shell, Chevron and Unocal, all of them facing
litigation in American courts on accusations they abetted and benefited from
human rights abuses by state security forces in nations like Nigeria and Burma.

Over the years, the Indonesian military gained a widely acknowledged reputation
for brutality as it suppressed rebellions in its vast archipelago. And the
accusations against it in the Exxon Mobil case, like the use of torture and
murder, have long been in the public realm. The suit contends that Exxon Mobil
looked the other way as the military terrorized Acehnese villagers. Furthermore,
it accuses the company of giving the military space and equipment for its
anti-insurgency campaign.

Mr. Collingsworth said a victory in the case and the financial damages the
plaintiffs seek would push Exxon Mobil and its shareholders to press the
Indonesians to refrain from human rights abuses.

"We're hoping we can get Exxon Mobil to integrate human rights concerns into
their very public concerns of their own security," he said. "And we're seeking
financial damages not just to help victims but also so that companies that do
this kind of thing are punished in the marketplace."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (96%); SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); NATURAL GAS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY
(90%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); TORTURE
(90%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (89%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); MURDER (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (76%); BUDGETS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (70%); MERGERS (60%);
POLITICS (60%); CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING (60%) GAS (FUEL);  SUITS AND LITIGATION;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  INDEPENDENCE
MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION;  MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS;  TORTURE;  KIDNAPPING;
SEX CRIMES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

COMPANY: EXXON MOBIL CORP (97%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOR RIGHTS FORUM (83%) INTERNATIONAL LABOR RIGHTS
FUND; EXXON MOBIL

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (97%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (97%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (97%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (97%)
SIC1381 DRILLING OIL & GAS WELLS;

PERSON: BANERJEE, NEELA

STATE: SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  ACEH PROVINCE (INDONESIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 19, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Tells of Taliban Massacres

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 586 words


Field commanders of the Taliban movement have been involved in the last year in
the massacres of several hundred civilians in areas where fighting continues in
northern Afghanistan, according to a report to be published today by Human
Rights Watch.

Victims have been mostly people of the Hazara ethnic group, who are largely
Shiite Muslims, the rights organization said. The Taliban, Islamic militants who
control most of the country, are Sunni Muslims and mostly ethnic Pathans.

The Taliban accuse the Hazara of collaboration with Shiite Iran and the armies
of the former mujahedeen alliance, once supported by the United States and now
backed by Russia. Taliban forces have been gradually driving the remnants of the
mujahedeen alliance out of Afghanistan.

The massacres were reported to have taken place in two areas where fighting has
been most severe in recent weeks -- in the Yakaolang district around Naiak and
around Bamian, a provincial capital that has changed hands twice in the last
five days -- lending urgency to calls by Human Rights Watch for action by the
United Nations. The Taliban have denied earlier reports of large-scale killing
in the area.

The rights organization said in its report, "Massacres of Hazaras in
Afghanistan" (available on the Internet at www.hrw.org), that the United Nations
should order an immediate investigation of the reported massacre sites.

Human Rights Watch, which has also published reports critical of the armed
opposition to the Taliban, urged the organization not to repeat the inconclusive
work done by the United Nations high commissioner for human rights in 1997, when
as many as 2,000 Taliban fighters were killed by opposition troops in
Mazar-i-Sharif, prompting a tit-for-tat Taliban massacre on the same scale,
mostly of Hazaras from that region, known as Hazarajat.

Since then, there have been repeated reports of harassment and killings of
Hazaras by Taliban forces. A substantial number of Hazaras also live in Kabul,
the Afghan capital. On the battlefield, two Hazara parties and their militias,
the Hizb-i-Wahdat and Harakat-i-Islami, have allied with the armed opposition to
the Taliban, which now calls itself the United Front.

In its report today, Human Rights Watch said the most recent massacre took place
in early January as the Taliban advanced toward Yakaolang. Taliban search
parties rounded up several hundred men from their houses and shot them, along
with some Afghan relief workers, by firing squad, witnesses said.

"The killings were apparently intended as a collective punishment for local
residents whom the Taliban suspected of cooperating with United Front forces,
and to deter the local population from doing so in the future," the rights
report said.

In May, Human Rights Watch said, an unknown number of people were killed on a
road between two northern towns in an area populated by Hazara Shiite and
Ismaili Muslims. Some of the men killed there had been in custody for four
months and may have been tortured, witnesses told Human Rights Watch.

"What has emerged from these cases, as well as prior events in Hazarajat and
northern Afghanistan," the rights report concluded, "is a pattern of efforts to
intimidate minority populations and to deter them from cooperating with the
United Front, through the arbitrary detention and summary execution of male
civilians."

The scope of recently reported killings, the rights organization said "could not
have been carried out without the consent and knowledge of senior Taliban
commanders."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Afghanistan highlighting Naiak and Bamian: Killing of civilians
was reported in areas around Naiak and Bamian.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RELIGION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); ARMIES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (77%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (77%); EYEWITNESSES (77%); ETHNICITY (72%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); UNITED NATIONS (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH;
UNITED NATIONS; TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A U.N. Paradox: Some on Rights Panel Are Accused of Wrongs

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 12


The United Nations Human Rights Commission, the focal point of debate among
nations on a range of political and civil liberties, is growing steadily less
free and tolerant in its membership, human rights groups say.

The 53-member commission, elected from and by the United Nations' 189 member
governments, begins its annual six-week session next Monday in Geneva. It will
be the first opportunity for the Bush administration to speak out on major
international human rights issues, including on how to deal with China, which
usually avoids criticism by mustering enough support to keep its record off the
commission's agenda.

As the meeting nears, several rights groups are warning that with each passing
year, the makeup of the commission, whose members are elected for staggered
three-year terms, becomes more problematic.

On Wednesday, Human Rights Watch plans to hold a a news conference in Geneva
where it will question commission members' attitudes toward rights practices.

Last week, U.N. Watch, a small group based in Geneva, compared the list of
current commission members with the annual "freedom index" compiled by Freedom
House, a New York group that monitors civil and political rights. It found that
about half the commission's member governments were in the lower half of the
index, which ranks countries on a scale of 1.1 for the freest, to 7.7 for the
most repressive.

Five members of the commission -- Cuba, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Vietnam
-- have 7.7 ratings. Only four countries on the commission -- the United States,
Canada, Norway and Portugal -- get a 1.1 ranking by Freedom House, closely
followed by 14 nations that are mostly from Europe, plus Japan, Costa Rica,
Uruguay, Mauritius and South Africa.

The commission censures governments for failing to abide by international rights
agreements, sends out monitors and exerts a powerful control over access to an
international platform to report on claims of abuses. A number of commission
members bar human rights monitors from visiting their countries.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%); FREEDOM HOUSE
(55%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%); SWITZERLAND (90%); JAPAN (79%); LIBYA (79%);
CANADA (79%); PORTUGAL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); NORWAY
(79%); EUROPE (79%); SYRIA (79%); MAURITIUS (51%)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colonel's Trial Puts Russian Justice to Test

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1796 words

DATELINE: ROSTOV-ON-DON, Russia


It was late last March 26 that a Russian Army colonel, Yuri D. Budanov, and
three soldiers left an encampment outside Chechnya's capital, Grozny, and
pointed their armored personnel carrier south into the village of Tangi, then
east on to a lane.

At the first house on that road -- No. 7, three rooms of plaster and brick
belonging to Vissa Kungayev -- the four stopped. They broke out AK-47's,
entered, seized 18-year-old Elza Kungayeva, and bound her in a blanket. Then
they took her to Colonel Budanov's quarters.

And there, as music blared above her cries, Colonel Budanov pummeled Elza
Kungayeva's face, cut off her clothes with a knife and, finally, pushed her onto
his cot and strangled her.

In the trial of Colonel Budanov, unfolding nearly a year later, none of the
events above are in dispute.

What remains very much in dispute -- not just in the courtroom, but on the
streets and in military circles -- is whether he did anything worth punishing.

The trial of Colonel Budanov, which resumes on Tuesday, is a Rorschach test of
Russian justice and society, a grisly image whose meaning depends entirely on
who is viewing it. Democrats see a test of whether a nation blind to Stalin's
mass slaughter can stubbornly continue to see no evil in Chechnya. Nationalists
see another plot by foreigners to humble Russia and impose their moral code.

The great sea of ordinary Russians, used to taking their cue from authority,
wavers. In a new poll by the Public Opinion Foundation, a respected Moscow
survey firm, half of those asked said Colonel Budanov should be set free
immediately; only 19 percent disagreed. The rest were unsure.

It is with these people that the outcome of the Budanov trial -- innocent or
guilty, fair or rigged -- will resonate.

"It's very important, this trial; it is important that this person -- if he's
indeed responsible for this -- that he be punished," Aleksandr Gelman, a
playwright and social critic, said in an interview. "It has a huge meaning if it
doesn't happen."

"In fact," he added, "it is this trial that will show how far we have come"
since the Soviet days, when the verdict was simply decided by the party and
relayed to judges to announce. "It's difficult," he said. "I don't envy the
judges."

Most dispassionate experts argue that the Russian military routinely commits
crimes against Chechen civilians with little fear of punishment. Human Rights
Watch, the international watchdog group, says it has documented thousands of
cases, from massacres in three towns last winter to kidnapping, looting, torture
and rape, to the disappearance of at least 100 Chechens last seen being seized
by Russian troops.

Russian officials just as routinely dismiss such accusations as overwrought or
plain wrong.

As of December, military prosecutors had brought just 35 cases, 11 of them
minor, against Russian soldiers for crimes against Chechen civilians.

The Budanov case is the exception. Beefy and burr-cut at 37, Colonel Budanov is
the highest-ranking officer to be accused of a crime against a Chechen civilian.
More than that, he is a rising military star -- twice decorated, twice promoted
early, commander of more than 100 tanks in the army's 160th Regiment, a fixture
of the war from its September 1999 beginning.

The Kremlin itself expressed outrage at Ms. Kungayeva's killing last March, even
dispatching officers to attend her funeral. The chief of the military's general
staff denounced Colonel Budanov as "scum."

But in the year since, attitudes have shifted. An initial accusation of rape,
documented by an autopsy, has vanished. Three soldiers who assisted in Ms.
Kungayeva's abduction and burial -- now key witnesses for the prosecution --
were pardoned in a general amnesty given soldiers last April.

The formal charges read in court when the trial opened early this month
incorporate Colonel Budanov's explanation of Ms. Kungayeva's death: that he
believed her a rebel sniper who had killed soldiers in his regiment two months
earlier, and that he killed her in an uncontrollable fit of revenge.

Colonel Budanov's lawyer, Anatoly Mukhin, said his client admitted strangling
Ms. Kungayeva, but in a state of "sickness which did not allow a person to
recognize the character of his actions and control them."

"There's a word for it: combat fatigue," he said. "Don't portray him as a maniac
and murderer who seeks blood. He came to Chechnya to perform his duty and his
military oath."

Lies, says the woman's father, Vissa Kungayev. "He was coming to me because he
had seen my daughter," he said in a telephone interview from Ingushetia, where
his family lives in a refugee camp. "He noticed her before."

There is a school of thought -- reflected in some newspapers, among some
politicians, on Rostov streets and on Internet chat lines -- that Colonel
Budanov is the true victim in this case, set up somehow by Chechen conspirators,
persecuted for doing his duty or handed to Western critics to silence
sermonizing on human rights.

Valentina I. Shchedrina, 62, held a banner aloft demanding Colonel Budanov's
freedom as she stood among maybe 75 protesters outside the courthouse. Her
son-in-law and daughter are serving in Chechnya, she said. "This is why I'm
here. But I don't pin any hopes on a just decision of this court."

On the day he seized Ms. Kungayeva from her home, Colonel Budanov had been
drinking -- celebrating his own daughter's second birthday.

According to an explanation of the charges read in court, Colonel Budanov and
his deputy began drinking vodka at lunch on March 26 in the officers' canteen at
their encampment, about a mile from the village of Tangi.

Colonel Budanov's lawyer, Mr. Mukhin, says his client drank about 250 grams of
vodka -- about six one-and-a-half-ounce shots -- and that there is no proof that
he was intoxicated.

The prosecution says that by 7 p.m. the two men were drunk.

The deputy decided to check the combat readiness of one company, the statement
says, by ordering three armored personnel carriers to open cannon and
machine-gun fire on Tangi.

When the officer in charge of the weapons hesitated, Colonel Budanov's deputy
took command himself, shelling and destroying a house on the village's
outskirts.

According to the statement, Colonel Budanov heard the gunfire and ordered the
shelling halted -- and then turned on the officer who had delayed the attack,
threw him to the ground and ordered him hogtied.

Then Colonel Budanov and his deputy hit and kicked the prone officer and
imprisoned him in an earthen pit. Two more beatings followed; the officer was
left in the pit overnight.

Sometime after 11 p.m., Colonel Budanov commandeered an armored personnel
carrier and three soldiers. According to the prosecutor's statement -- contested
at this point by lawyers for Ms. Kungayeva's family -- he told the three that
they were going to detain a female sniper.

After seizing Ms. Kungayeva and taking her to camp, the soldiers placed her on
the floor of Colonel Budanov's quarters, effectively a tent mounted atop a large
Zil flatbed truck. The colonel told them to stand guard outside.

What happened then is not clear. The statement says Colonel Budanov began
beating her, severely injuring her face and eyes, after she refused to answer
questions about rebel soldiers' movements.

Mr. Mukhin, the colonel's lawyer, said that in the days before, the colonel had
helped rescue two Russians enslaved by guerrillas and retrieved dead and wounded
comrades under fire from a hilltop besieged by rebels.

Regardless, the soldiers who entered the tent sometime after 3 a.m. found Ms.
Kungayeva dead, naked, her clothes in a pile on the floor. On Colonel Budanov's
orders, they buried her in a forest near the base.

Her father, Vissa Kungayev, had arrived home only minutes after she was
abducted. His alarm reached the regional Russian military office in Urus-Martan,
and then the main Russian base at Khankala, west of Grozny.

Investigators dug up Ms. Kungayeva's body about 30 hours later. An autopsy found
that her hymen had been ruptured and tissue in her rectum torn, causing
bleeding, "not long before the death (about one hour)." The medical examiner
took samples of vaginal fluids. The results have not been publicly reported;
Colonel Budanov's lawyer says there is no evidence that his client raped Ms.
Kungayeva.

In Chechen society, rape is seen as a worse offense than murder. Colonel Budanov
was not charged with rape. Investigators instead blamed one of the soldiers who
buried Ms. Kungayeva, saying he violated her corpse with the handle of his
shovel. The conflict with the autopsy's conclusion that the rape occurred while
Ms. Kungayeva was alive remains unexplained.

"There's a Russian saying that 'life is a kopeck.' I would even say that it is
the main Russian saying," Mr. Gelman, the playwright, said. "And while the
leadership, to some extent, reflects this mood in society, the leadership allows
itself to violate human rights because there is not a demand in society that
human rights be observed."

"This is gradually changing, but very slowly." Mr. Gelman believes this change
is why Gen. Vladimir Shamanov, the most famous commander of the Chechen war,
strode into the courtroom on the first day of Colonel Budanov's trial.

The general is accused by human rights groups of allowing his troops to run wild
through the Chechen town of Alkhan-Yurt in December, looting homes, raping
several residents and killing 17 to 40 civilians, by the estimate of Human
Rights Watch.

The Kremlin demanded an explanation, then awarded him a medal as a Hero of
Russia. "Russia cannot afford to toss aside such generals as Vladimir Shamanov,"
President Vladimir V. Putin said. In December, General Shamanov was elected
governor of Ulyanovsk Province with the Kremlin's backing.

On his day in the courtroom, Governor Shamanov had pinned his Hero of Russia
medal to his navy suit. The colonel sat in the iron-barred defendant's cage.

The governor thrust his hand through the bars in greeting to Colonel Budanov.
"Colonel Budanov is a real officer; he is a commander," he said. "He is a
Russian asset."

Abdullah Khamsayev, the Chechen lawyer for Ms. Kungayeva's father, was exiled by
Stalin in the 1940's to Kazakhstan, part of a mass deportation aimed at
Russifying Chechnya. He studied law -- and eventually became the deputy
prosecutor for the Soviet Union.

Now a trial lawyer, he said he took the Kungayeva case without pay. He says he
wanted to make a point.

"I wanted one soldier and one officer to be invited to this trial from every
regiment stationed in Chechnya, so that these servicemen would see with their
own eyes, at least once, that people are put into a cage for doing such things,"
he said. "And those who came to Chechnya to get rich, they would say, well, I
could find myself in the cage as well."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Col. Yuri D. Budanov being escorted from a court in
Rostov-on-Don, where he is on trial in the killing of an 18-year-old Chechen
woman. (Associated Press)(pg. 1); A man in Cossack military uniform was among
protesters who demanded the acquittal of Colonel Budanov. Most Russians seem to
feel similarly. (Michael Wines/The New York Times)(pg. 8) Maps of Russia
highlighting Tangi: Elza Kungayeva, 18, was abducted from her home in Tangi.
(pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%); TORTURE (83%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(78%); VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
VERDICTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (62%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (62%); SEX OFFENSES (60%); INTERVIEWS (60%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  PUBLIC OPINION;  TORTURE;  KIDNAPPING;  SEX
CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: WINES, MICHAEL; BUDANOV, YURI (COL); KUNGAYEVA, ELZA

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);  GROZNY (CHECHNYA)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Maneuvers to Avoid Debate on Its Rights Record in U.N.

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 18


China succeeded today in striking from the agenda of the United Nations Human
Rights Commission an American resolution calling attention to Beijing's human
rights record.

The procedural maneuver, which effectively bars all debate on China at the
annual six-week session of the commission in Geneva, was supported by Russia and
major Asian, African and Arab nations.

But human rights groups were quick to condemn the tactic, which only China
continues to employ. Only once in the last decade, in 1995, has China lost a
vote to preclude discussion.

"With this vote, every human rights victim in China, from tortured Falun Gong
practitioners to those imprisoned for advocating democracy, has been turned away
at the door, which among all others, should be open to them," said Xiao Qiang,
executive director of Human Rights in China, a New York-based organization.

The United States also failed to get support for a vote condemning Cuba in as
strong terms as Washington wanted. But a Czech-sponsored resolution passed that
mentioned political repression and urged Cuba to honor promises to be more
democratic. The resolution, backed by the United States, was a compromise.
American envoys dropped their calls for tougher condemnation in return for no
mention of the American embargo on Cuba.

In other action today, the human rights situation in Myanmar was declared
"unacceptable" and Iraq was condemned for "systematic and extremely serious"
abuses.

On China, the United States had proposed a relatively mild resolution that
credited China's advances in improving the lives of its people while also
pointing out areas still of concern in political, religious and civil rights.

"No country should consider itself beyond review," said Shirin Tahir-Kheli, the
leader of the American delegation, before introducing the resolution.

China mustered 23 votes in the 53-nation commission to kill debate before it
could begin. Though it lacked a majority, China prevailed when 17 nations voted
against its "no action" motion and 12 abstained. One nation, Congo, was absent.

China had the backing of India, Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia and Thailand, among
other democracies in the developing world. Voting against the Chinese motion,
and with the United States, were most European members of the commission as well
as Japan, Canada and Costa Rica. Other Latin American nations abstained, as did
South Africa and Korea.

The voting followed a traditional pattern, leading some Western diplomats to
conclude that the standoff between Beijing and Washington over the American spy
plane did not significantly alter the results.

China's ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, Qiao Zonghuai, did call
attention to the incident in a speech, however. Mr. Qiao said the United States
"had sent military planes to violate the sovereignty and people's right to
life." He also mentioned racially motivated riots in Cincinnati and accused the
United States of "rampant racial discrimination."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); TORTURE (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (76%); RACE & RACISM (76%); CULTS & SECTS (75%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); POLITICS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); RELIGION (70%); ESPIONAGE (69%); EXECUTIVES (68%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (60%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION;
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (89%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (56%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (98%); SWITZERLAND (91%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA
(79%); JAPAN (79%); MYANMAR (79%); MALAYSIA (79%); IRAQ (79%); COSTA RICA (79%);
AFRICA (79%); KENYA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); CANADA (79%); ASIA (79%); NORTHERN
ASIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); THAILAND (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

REGION: CHINA;  RUSSIA;  FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS;
AFRICA;  MIDDLE EAST

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Long-Range Justice Raises Fears for Sovereignty

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1027 words


From Augusto Pinochet to Slobodan Milosevic, the arm of the law is growing
longer and the world smaller for national leaders and others accused of
atrocities.

What is dawning, human rights lawyers say, is an age of justice without borders
-- and not everyone is happy about it.

The trend, while celebrated by human rights advocates, is being viewed by some
lawyers and governments as an alarming challenge to national sovereignty and a
potentially unpredictable political tool.

The case of Mr. Milosevic, the former Serbian leader who was handed over to an
international tribunal this week, more than any other "demonstrates that even
the highest government officials are vulnerable to international prosecution for
the most heinous human rights crimes," said Kenneth Roth, the executive director
of Human Rights Watch.

"It's a momentous occasion for Milosevic's victims, who might see a modicum of
justice done," said Mr. Roth, whose organization strongly supports what is
called "universal jurisdiction" for human rights offenses. "But it's also an
historic moment for the human rights movement," he added, "because it will begin
to force would-be tyrants to think twice before replicating Milosevic's
atrocities."

Some fear, however, that such a trend could have a paralyzing effect on
government decision-making and warn that there are no guarantees that such
prosecutions -- which are hopscotching borders in roundabout ways -- will be
even-handed, indicting the friends as well as the foes of great powers.

Nonetheless, there is a trend -- whether justice is pursued by international
tribunals, under national laws or by states and prosecutors claiming that some
crimes are so awful that the accused should have no place to hide.

There was Manuel Noriega, the dictator of Panama who was seized by the United
States in 1989, and convicted in 1992 of drug trafficking.  There is Augusto
Pinochet, the former Chilean strongman, who spent a year and a half in British
custody on a Spanish warrant before being allowed to return home, where his
legal problems continue. Hissan Habre, the former ruler of Chad, was under
arrest in Senegal until a new government turned him loose last year, but his
fate remains uncertain. Jean Kambanda, a former Rwandan prime minister, went to
jail for life last year for his role in his country's 1994 genocide, mostly of
ethnic Tutsi.

Others may have their days in court. Peru is demanding extradition from Japan of
its former president, Alberto K. Fujimori. A Belgian prosecutor is trying to
open proceedings against Saddam Hussein of Iraq, whose case is also being
studied by American officials.

Foday Sankoh, though not a head of state, will almost certainly face proceedings
in Sierra Leone for leading a particularly vicious rebel army against a
government in which he was a minister.

At the Yale Law School, Ruth Wedgwood, a professor of international law, said
the idea of universal jurisdiction first arose in 1919, in an abortive attempt
to put Kaiser Wilhelm on trial for World War I. "The U.S. was quite reluctant,"
Ms. Wedgwood said, in part because of the fuzziness of one of the charges,
"crimes against the principles of humanity," the predecessor to crimes against
humanity. "It's funny what a difference time makes," she said.

After World War II, the Nuremberg trials of Nazi officials were the century's
high point in the use of universal jurisdiction for war crimes. But after that,
this kind of law became a narrow specialist field, Ms. Wedgwood said.

Now, she calls it "a growth industry," revived in recent years with the
establishment of war crimes tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, and with the
impending opening of the International Criminal Court, perhaps within the next
two years.

That court will be the first permanent body charged with trying individuals for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The United States remains a
reluctant nation, and has opposed setting up a permanent international criminal
court, in part over fears that it could someday be used to prosecute its own
soldiers or leaders.

William Pace, convenor of the Coalition for an International Criminal Court,
said that the speed the movement for universal jurisdiction has picked up in a
decade is remarkable.

"Between 1989 and 1995," he said, "virtually every international affairs expert
promised us that there would never be a statute to create an International
Criminal Court, that it would take another 30, 50, 100 years."

"Equally, we have been told over the years that never will we see Milosevic
transferred to The Hague," he added. "One of the messages here is that patience
works. The era of impunity is being replaced by a new era of international law
and justice."

Hans Corell, the United Nations' legal counsel and a central figure in drawing
up plans for international tribunals, said the establishment of the
International Criminal Court will strengthen the hands of those who want to
bring an errant leader to trial.

"From now on, people know in advance that there is a court to which criminals
can be taken," he said.

But other legal scholars are disturbed by threats aimed at Yugoslavia by rich
nations, especially the United States, that money to rebuild the country would
be withheld until Mr. Milosevic was turned over.

And Henry A. Kissinger, writing in the current issue of Foreign Affairs, warns
against what he sees as a dangerous mix of law and politics in what he
acknowledges has become a growing movement for universal jurisdiction over the
last decade.

Mr. Kissinger, whom some strident critics want to see face trial for his
policies in Cambodia during the Vietnam War, writes that a universal system
"must not allow legal principles to be used as weapons to settle political
scores."

He sees a possible chilling effect on makers of foreign policy, who would have
to weigh whether they could be prosecuted for acting on behalf of what they see
as their nation's interests.

Mr. Kissinger himself was recently haunted by American involvement in Chile when
he was secretary of state almost 30 years ago, as a Paris judge tried to summon
him to answer questions in the Pinochet prosecution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); TRENDS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (74%); ARREST WARRANTS (74%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (69%); WAR & CONFLICT (66%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (60%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EXTRADITION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (56%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%) MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); SERBIA (92%); SIERRA
LEONE (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ (79%); SENEGAL (79%); CHILE
(79%); PANAMA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

CHILE COURT BARS TRIAL OF PINOCHET

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 901 words


A Chilean appeals court ruled yesterday that Gen. Augusto Pinochet, Chile's
former dictator, is not well enough to stand trial on charges that he covered up
the killings of political opponents by a death squad shortly after he seized
power in 1973.

It was a major victory for the 85-year-old retired general, who faced many more
months, if not years, of legal tests linked to more than 250 criminal complaints
that have been filed against him alleging human rights abuses during his 17-year
rule.

Human rights lawyers said they would appeal the 2-to-1 ruling to the Supreme
Court, but legal experts said it was highly unlikely that the high court would
reverse the decision.

The court decided that General Pinochet's health problems had contributed to a
dementia so severe that he could not defend himself in court.

The ruling confirmed a growing sense among legal scholars that the prosecution
of the former dictator had been losing momentum, owing to appeals and quiet
political pressures from civilian and military officials in the last several
months. And they predict that, if the ruling stands, General Pinochet will
almost certainly be spared trial on other suspected human rights violations.

Nevertheless, the general's legal problems over more than two years have had a
great impact on Chilean society -- opening the way for a public discussion of
the dictator's legacy, weakening the power of the military over the civilian
government and helping thousands of torture victims discuss and finally come to
terms with their anguish.

Internationally, legal precedents set during his arrests, first in London and
then in Chile, have been used by judges in several other countries seeking to
prosecute military officers and other leaders for human rights violations. They
are also now aiding Peruvian officials seeking the extradition of Alberto K.
Fujimori, Peru's former president, who is living in self-imposed exile in Japan.

Technically, the ruling yesterday is nothing more than a suspension of the
charges and may be reversed if General Pinochet's health improves. But the
former dictator, who wears a pacemaker, has diabetes and had several minor
strokes in recent years. A week ago, he was admitted to a military hospital for
treatment of diabetes, hypertension and circulatory problems.

The appeals court agreed with the defense argument that his strokes and heart
problems had caused mild dementia, a condition that Chilean law says impedes a
defendant from adequately defending himself.

General Pinochet remained a politically powerful figure in Chile until 1998.
Early that year, he stepped down as army chief and became a senator for life, a
move that granted him legislative immunity from prosecution. But during a
subsequent trip to Britain, he was arrested on a Spanish warrant involving a
variety of charges of human rights abuse.

Last year, after a 16-month detention outside London, he was released on grounds
of his failing health. But upon his return to Chile, he discovered that he no
longer was the domineering force he once was.

Chilean courts stripped him of his immunity, and he was indicted and put under
house arrest on charges that he was linked to the infamous "caravan of death."
That was a helicopter-borne death squad run by an army intelligence officer
allied to the general; it selected supporters of the president who died during
the coup, Salvador Allende, who were being held in various military posts in
October 1973 and then kidnapped or killed them without trial. Seventy-five
people died or are missing and assumed dead as a result of the squad's actions.

In the 17 years after the United States-supported coup General Pinochet led
against Dr. Allende, an estimated 3,200 people were killed or disappeared. Tens
of thousands more people were tortured or forced into exile.

General Pinochet has said he is innocent of all charges. But in recent months
his lawyers changed strategy, and moved to end the prosecution on grounds of
deteriorating mental health.

Allies of the former dictator said yesterday that they were content with the
ruling, but there was little celebration over a decision that may have ended the
general's most serious legal troubles on the basis of health rather than
evidence.

Luis Cortes Villa, president of the Pinochet Foundation, an institution
dedicated to promoting the general's legacy, said he hoped that the ruling would
finally end the prosecution. He expressed the desire that from now on "my
general will live in dignity and tranquillity."

Human rights lawyers were sharply critical of the decision, and charged that it
was a result of back-stage maneuvering by civilian and military officials to end
the prosecution. They said rumors over the weekend that the general was near
death were part of a orchestrated effort to influence the judges and prepare the
public for the decision.

"This ruling is the result of political pressures over the court," Eduardo
Contreras, a lawyer seeking General Pinochet's prosecution and imprisonment,
told reporters.  "But Pinochet will still go into history as having been
indicted on human rights charges."

President Ricardo Lagos, the first Socialist to govern Chile since Dr. Allende,
has said he will not intervene in the judicial process. Some of his aides have
reportedly told local reporters that it would be convenient for Chile's
faltering economy if the country was spared a divisive trial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Relatives of people who disappeared during the Pinochet
dictatorship protested in Santiago yesterday, above, against the appeals court
ruling barring his trial, while one of the general's supporters, right,
celebrated. (Associated Press)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
APPEALS COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ARRESTS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); DEMENTIA (88%);
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (87%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%);
VERDICTS (78%); POLITICS (77%); TORTURE (77%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (75%); ARMIES (74%); STROKES (73%); IMMUNITY (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (69%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (67%); HYPERTENSION (60%); DIABETES
(60%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); PERU (92%); JAPAN (79%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says Taliban Aren't Solely to Blame for the Afghan Disaster

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 12


Breaking ranks with most human rights groups and the American government, Human
Rights Watch said in a report today that the Taliban alone were not responsible
for a deepening disaster in Afghanistan.

Human Rights Watch, a New York-based organization, called for sanctions against
the armed opposition to the Taliban, and blamed Russia and Iran for giving the
opposition front significant military support.

"U.N. sanctions imposed on arms and fuel to the Taliban in December 2000 are
one-sided and strongly influenced by short-term Russian and U.S. interests, not
humanitarian goals," the report said.

The United States wants the Taliban to turn over Osama bin Laden, the Saudi
financier of Muslim militancy who is believed to be living under their
protection in Afghanistan. And Russia has accused the Taliban of aiding
separatists in Chechnya.

The conclusions of the report are largely in line with the thinking of experts
on Afghanistan in the United Nations secretariat, but those officials cannot
stray beyond the instructions of the Security Council and its most powerful
members.

While the new report, "Crisis of Impunity: The Role of Pakistan, Russia and Iran
in Fueling the Civil War in Afghanistan," clearly blames the Pakistani
government, military and intelligence agencies for arming and training Taliban
fighters, who now control more than 90 percent of Afghanistan. It also finds
considerable evidence of broad Iranian and Russian support for the opposition
United Front. Some Central Asian nations have assisted Russian efforts.

The forces now being aided by Russia are, interestingly, the remnants of the
mujahedeen coalition that drove Soviet troops out of Afghanistan in 1989.

"Russia has played a crucial enabling role in the resupply of the United Front
forces by arranging for the transportation of Iranian aid, while providing
considerable direct assistance itself, including logistical and support
services," the report said. "Military assistance to United Front forces has
crossed the Tajikistan-Afghanistan border with the active collusion of the
Russian government."

Military experts on Afghanistan say the opposition front has no hope of
regaining power, but is being armed solely to keep the war going and the Taliban
off balance. The Afghan economy has collapsed, public services are almost
nonexistent, and more than a million people face severe hunger, if not
starvation. Five million Afghans are already refugees, and this week the United
Nations high commissioner for refugees said it was increasingly difficult to
find help or homes for them.

The Human Rights Watch report says several members of the "six-plus-two group"
-- the six nations bordering Afghanistan, plus Russia and the United States,
which has been half-heartedly trying to negotiate an end to the war -- "are
providing military and material support to Afghan parties that have committed
gross violations of the laws of war."

United Nations officials have also reached that conclusion, and have said so in
reports to the Security Council. But the United States and Russia have, in a
rare show of solidarity, refused to take action against the Taliban's enemies.
The Taliban are under an arms embargo that also prohibits air traffic to the
landlocked country, except for religious or mercy flights. The new report calls
for a lifting of the ban on civilian air traffic.

Human Rights Watch, which has in the past drawn attention to abuses committed by
the opposition alliance as well as by the Taliban, whose restrictions on women
have brought international notoriety, again criticized both sides in today's
report. "Both the Taliban and the United Front have failed to ensure that the
fundamental rights of the Afghan population under their control are protected,"
it said.

The report backs recommendations by a panel of experts appointed by the United
Nations that effective border monitoring be set up around Afghanistan and that a
coordinating office be established to supervise the work. It says the greatest
immediate pressure should be put on Pakistan, since the Pakistani-Afghan border
will be the most difficult to police.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); TALIBAN (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (88%); AL-QAEDA (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
REFUGEES (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); ARMS TRADE (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (71%);
STARVATION (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;  CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;  ARMS SALES ABROAD

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECRETARIAT (56%); UNITED
NATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; TALIBAN
(AFGHAN GROUP); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) CROSSETTE, BARBARA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%);
ASIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  RUSSIA;  IRAN

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senate Committee Approves Ambassador for the U.N.

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 638 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, anxious to fill the post of United
States ambassador to the United Nations, approved the nomination of John D.
Negroponte for the job today.

After some tough questioning on his attitude toward human rights abuses when he
served as ambassador to Honduras in the early 1980's, the committee voted 14 to
3 in favor of the nomination.

The nomination now moves to the full Senate.

Senators said the United States needed an ambassador in New York as soon as
possible to mobilize international support for President Bush's campaign against
terrorism.

The position has been vacant since Mr. Bush took office Jan. 20, possibly
contributing to Washington's embarrassing failure to keep its seat on the United
Nations Human Rights Commission.

The United States, which remains hundreds of millions of dollars in arrears on
its dues, has also failed under President Bush to dominate the agenda at big
conferences like the racism conference in Durban last week.

Another incentive for moving Mr. Negroponte into place now is the expected
opening of the General Assembly later this month.

Republicans and moderate Democrats praised Mr. Negroponte's long record of
public service but three Senate liberals -- Russell D. Feingold of Wisconsin,
Paul Wellstone of Minnesota and Barbara Boxer of California -- said he had not
given satisfactory answers regarding his embassy's reporting of human rights
abuses and on his contacts with right-wing contra guerrillas.

Mr. Negroponte, pressed on various human rights cases in Honduras and on what he
discussed with the contras, told the Senate committee he could not remember.

Mr. Wellstone, the senator most strongly opposed to the nomination, said that as
ambassador in Tegucigalpa between 1981 and 1985 Mr. Negroponte had denied the
existence of government-sponsored killings in the Central American country,
contrary to evidence subsequently accepted by the Inter-American Court on Human
Rights.

"I just can't understand why you were not more outspoken," Senator Wellstone
said, "why you were not more public and why, even today, you seem to be
unwilling to acknowledge that the state was involved, that the government was
involved, that it was widespread that people were murdered."

Mr. Negroponte, 62, a career diplomat who has also been ambassador to the
Philippines and Mexico, replied: "Could I have been more vocal? Perhaps in
retrospect I could have been but that's the way I handled it."

But he again denied any knowledge that the government killed civilians or that
he tried to restrict or tone down reporting of human rights abuses to the State
Department.

Senator Boxer said she was worried that Mr. Negroponte wanted to ignore the
history of what the United States did in Central America. "It's just this
nagging feeling I have that you don't really want to look at this," she said.

She challenged him on his meetings with leaders of the contra guerrilla
movement, which the Reagan administration covertly financed in an attempt to
overthrow the leftist Sandinista government in neighboring Nicaragua.

Senator Boxer had campaigned for the Boland amendment, which made it illegal to
finance the contras.

"I certainly didn't discuss anything that would have been contrary to the Boland
amendment. The specific tenure of our conversations I don't recall," Mr.
Negroponte replied.

Senator Feingold said his objection to the nomination was based on the accuracy
of Mr. Negroponte's reporting to the State Department on human rights, a duty
mandated by Congress.

Republican senators supported the nomination and said it was time for the United
States to put the past behind it. The committee chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., a
Delaware Democrat, said he was willing to give Mr. Negroponte the benefit of the
doubt because he had not found enough evidence against him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Senate committee approved the nomination of John D. Negroponte
as ambassador to the United Nations despite criticism of his record. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
FOREIGN POLICY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); APPROVALS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LIBERALISM
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (70%); MURDER (55%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (87%); RUSS FEINGOLD (58%); BARBARA
BOXER (58%) NEGROPONTE, JOHN D

CITY: TEGUCIGALPA, HONDURAS (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); HONDURAS (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (91%); PHILIPPINES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Global Look at Racism Hits Many Sore Points

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 1


A conference on racism this summer could be one of the most explosive meetings
this organization has ever held, with moves afoot to cast globalization as a
racial issue and to demand reparations for the slave trade and colonialism.

Though the conference is still six months away, the agenda is already being
passionately debated, and an increasingly broader range of issues is falling
under the rubric of race.

The meeting -- to be held in Durban, South Africa, from Aug. 31 to Sept. 7 --
was first proposed by developing nations led by Cuba, and it was always expected
to have something of an anti-Western bias.

But the opportunity to air grievances rarely heard on an international platform
has been seized by groups in developing nations too, from China to Chile, that
want to force often hidden -- and extraordinarily sensitive -- issues into the
discussion.

Beyond consideration of the North-South hemispheric divide as a color line,
those issues include treatment of immigrants and asylum seekers in developed
countries, the caste system in India and contemporary slavery in Africa as well
as discrimination in Latin America and parts of the Caribbean against people of
African descent.

Governments in some regions have been fighting consideration of many of those
issues. But human rights groups, often linking through the Internet, have gained
more leverage than ever against the governments that have elbowed them out of
the spotlight in the past.

The aim, the human rights advocates say, is to demonstrate that racism is an
international phenomenon that manifests itself in many forms. And they point to
the full title of the event -- the World Conference Against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance -- to buttress their
argument. Two earlier meetings held in 1978 and 1983 were more narrowly focused.

"The last two conferences on racism were about foreign policy," said Gay J.
McDougall, executive director of the International Human Rights Law Group in
Washington. "The first one was on decolonization and the second one was on
apartheid. But this one is in everybody's back yard, and there's a lot of
nervousness about it."

Ms. McDougall is among those pressing for strong international action on the
slave trade and the legacy of colonialism on behalf of people of African descent
all over the Western Hemisphere. But she has also backed calls to put the Indian
caste system, which human rights groups say affects between 100 million and 200
million people, on the conference agenda, over the strong objection of the
Indian government.

Smita Narula, who has been studying caste for Human Rights Watch in New York,
said that "for Asia, caste has become coterminus with race inasmuch as it
defines the exclusion of a people based on their descent." But so far, she said,
Asian governments have succeeded in keeping the issue out of conference
documents.

Representatives of governments will begin a four-day meeting in Geneva on
Tuesday to discuss the conference agenda and the content of documents to be
issued in Durban. Some new issues have been assured a place in the conference,
and battle lines have been drawn for others in four regional meetings in France,
Senegal, Chile and Iran.

In Strasbourg, France, the issue of Europeans' treatment of Roma, or Gypsy,
people was put on the agenda by governments themselves. In Santiago, Chile,
strong lobbying by African-American groups gave new visibility to racial
discrimination in Latin America. And in Dakar, Senegal, where delegates were
very strongly in favor of reparations for the trans-Atlantic slave trade, the
new president of Senegal, Abdoulaye Wade, cautioned the conference against
looking only to history when examining Africa's problems. Ethnic intolerance and
the continuation of slavery are still issues.

"The big story for me," said Ms. McDougall -- who is also a member of the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and attended the
Santiago meeting -- "was the cross-regional discourse that was generated in a
new way among African-descended communities throughout the hemisphere, the
poorest of the poor."

When the meeting was over, she said, the topic of discrimination against black
Latin Americans, which was not in the draft of the regional platform, had been
added. "It was a recognition for the first time in a multilateral document in
Latin America that racism was an issue of current salience," she said.

The Tehran meeting, grouping the Middle East and Asia, was the most contentious,
and there was a move to revive something of the old cold war shibboleth of
Zionism as racism.

Though the word Zionism was not used, official delegations urged the Durban
conference to demand an end to the "foreign occupation" of Jerusalem and
characterized Israeli domination of Palestinian areas as "a new kind of
apartheid, a crime against humanity, a form of genocide, and a serious threat to
international peace and security."

Kishore Mahbubani, the author of "Can Asians Think?" and Singapore's ambassador
to the United Nations, said in an interview that "racism is a sunrise issue."

"It is a natural result of a shrinking globe," he added. "Races that in a sense
never had contact with each other are thrown together in close proximity in a
new neighborhood. The first sign of this is the new wave of immigrants."

But most controversial is an international movement to make concrete demands for
reparations for the trans-Atlantic slave trade and for some form of compensation
for centuries of colonialism.

Mary Robinson, formerly the president of Ireland and now the United Nations
commissioner for human rights, generally supports such demands, particularly in
finding some form of recompense for slavery. "That trauma is still there," she
said in an interview, "and it's deep, and it hasn't been properly acknowledged."

Mrs. Robinson said the conference could achieve concrete results just by urging
the enforcement of existing laws and international conventions against bias and
discrimination. "About 85 percent of measures that can be taken are already in
force or will be agreed on without difficulty," she said. "Then there will be a
number of issues on which political leadership will be needed.

"One of them will be how we find the language to condemn in full terms the evil
of slavery, returning to the issue of compensation for past practices.

"It may sound strange that we still have to do that, but in fact we need to
close off a period and say that this exploitation was in real terms a crime
against humanity when it took place and that it has had an effect into this
century. The more generous and open the condemnation is, the less I believe
there will be a push to focus on precise monetary compensation."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACE & RACISM (92%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); EMERGING MARKETS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); SLAVERY
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); GLOBALIZATION
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (69%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (52%) MINORITIES (US);
DISCRIMINATION;  THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (92%); ASIA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); CHINA (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); AFRICA (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); CHILE (79%);
NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (51%)

REGION: CUBA;  SOUTH AFRICA

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Needed: Freedom's Caucus

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Before the Jeffords Jump, the biggest surprise to hit the Bush administration
was the decision by 53 nations in the U.N. to throw the bothersome U.S. off the
Human Rights Commission.

We had 43 written commitments, insisted Secretary of State Colin Powell, but got
only 29 votes on the secret balloting, which for the first time in 50 years
denied us membership. Thus, 14 nations double-crossed us. Which were they?

Don't ask, was the blindsided Powell's reaction. He professed not to want to
know. Counterproductive and all that. And nobody pressed.

But of course we do know; $30 billion spent yearly on intelligence buys a few
intercepts. The list of the "faithless 14" begins with Angola and Burkina Faso
and ends with Syria and Venezuela.

The nations in between remain shrouded in Seventh Floor mystery at State because
China and France, which conspired against the U.S., should have voted for us.
There is an unwritten rule that permanent Security Council members must vote for
each other's candidacy on such groups. If it became public that the rule was
broken, the faithless member would lose much diplomatic leverage.

To throw nosy journalists off the scent, U.N. delegates explain that not all
votes are instructed by foreign ministries in national capitals, whose exchanges
can be read or overheard. Thanks to the U.N.'s unconscionable cloak of secrecy,
delegates in New York can easily be induced to switch their votes by a swap of
diplomatic favors or a promise of lucrative trade or more personal emoluments
with their capitals none the wiser.

In preventing the U.S. from again daring to question the human rights abuses in
China, France had to persuade its neighbors not to agree on a "lean slate" of
three nations to be elected from the "Western European and other" grouping,
which includes us. Accordingly, four nations competed; when our European allies
delightedly chose Austria over the U.S., we were out on our ear. (If Russian
tanks roll, call Vienna.)

The blame-America set here promptly suggested we deserved payback for opposing
the treaty to allow dictators to haul Americans into a global court. And
yesterday -- even as Chinese and Cuban Communists moved to strip human rights
groups like Freedom House of accreditation -- Amnesty International celebrated
the U.N. silencing of the U.S. by equating our use of land mines to protect our
troops in Korea with China's torture of its dissidents.

Our House of Representatives reacted in a measured way, not withholding our
arrears but signaling a hard look at next year's dues: No play, no pay. Most
Americans who care are disgusted with Western Europe's craven cave-in on human
rights after China's threat to "smash a rock" on brave Danes who dared a few
years ago to criticize its repression.

A more creative reaction to the domination of the U.N. by dictatorships,
oligarchies, kakistocracies and rogue nations would be to breathe life into a
parallel structure created with some fanfare but largely forgotten: the
Community of Democracies.

Of the 191 independent states in the world, over 100 can now be said to be
democracies, if you define the word loosely. Last year in Warsaw a convening
group of these free nations -- Chile, the Czech Republic, India, South Korea,
Mali, Poland, Portugal the U.S., South Africa -- began to organize. At the
urging of Mark Palmer and Mort Halperin, Madeleine Albright attended and spoke.

An interim meeting is scheduled in Washington next month, with a big whingding
in Seoul next year. A parallel U.N.? No; it called for a "democracy caucus"
within the U.N. to promote human rights, transparency and the rule of law.

A worry: Who needs another multinational bureaucracy, with officials in
limousines tearing up local parking tickets? Maybe the C.D. (as it will be
called) could be financed on a shoestring, its annual meetings bouncing from
free capital to free capital, with a minimal secretariat.  That would set an
example to the bloated U.N. The Bush administration has Under Secretary of State
Paula Dobriansky looking it over.

Perhaps the C.D.'s Freedom Caucus, with power to vote a repeat offender out of
the group, would be an international antidote to the U.N. commission now
poisoned by the world's hypocrites, despots and slave traders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CAUCUSES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(77%); TORTURE (77%); WRITERS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (60%); LANDMINES (60%);
ACCREDITATION (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) UNITED
NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES

PERSON: SAFIRE, WILLIAM

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (94%); EUROPE (93%); WESTERN EUROPE (92%);
FRANCE (92%); AUSTRIA (79%); BURKINA FASO (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); SYRIA
(79%); ANGOLA (76%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Records

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 164 words


To the Editor:

Re "Needed: Freedom's Caucus," by William Safire (column, May 31):

Amnesty International in no way "celebrated" the removal of the United States
from the United Nations Human Rights Commission.

We have applauded the United States for being among the few nations on the
commission willing to condemn the brutal human rights record of countries like
China.

At the same time, one of the reasons the United States was not re-elected to the
commission was that, while it preaches respect for human rights to the rest of
the world, it does not support such concrete embodiments of human rights as the
land mines treaty and the International Criminal Court.

Amnesty International is not "equating our use of land mines" with "China's
torture of its dissidents." Amnesty never compares or ranks the human rights
records of countries. We condemn human rights violations wherever they occur.

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Executive Director
Amnesty International USA
Washington, June 1, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LANDMINES (88%); TORTURE (88%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2001 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Central America Fallout Stalls U.N. Pick

BYLINE:   By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


John D. Negroponte has found himself in many sticky situations over the course
of his long diplomatic career. He worked on the peace agreement that ended the
war in Vietnam. He directed the State Department response to the Chernobyl
nuclear disaster. He tried in vain to keep United States troops in Panama.

And now this foreign service officer, who speaks five languages and has
hopscotched the globe for 40 years, finds his nomination to be ambassador to the
United Nations ensnared in the Senate over his role as ambassador to Honduras
when Central America was ground zero in the cold war.

Known as the proconsul there for his vast influence, Mr. Negroponte was the
point man in the Reagan administration's effort to back the contras' fight
against the leftist Sandinista government in neighboring Nicaragua.

The problem he faces now is a barrage of questions over whether he was so
determined to carry out United States policy that he turned a blind eye to human
rights abuses in the region.

Even when Republicans controlled the Senate by virtue of Vice President Dick
Cheney's tiebreaking vote, Mr. Negroponte's confirmation was not going to skate
through. Now, with the Democrats in charge, his fate has been drawn out further,
as lawmakers have put off hearings until they see classified documents on his
activities as ambassador.

"The questions that have been raised regarding Mr. Negroponte are serious ones,"
said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut. "I believe they need
to be fully and thoroughly reviewed by the Foreign Relations Committee."

Unless new information is disclosed, even some of Mr. Negroponte's Democratic
critics privately predict that he will quite likely win confirmation, but only
after a grilling by senators that makes clear their concerns about his record in
Central America.

As ambassador from 1981 to 1985, Mr. Negroponte worked closely with top Honduran
military officials at a time when the United States was using Honduras as a
staging ground for its fight against Communism in Central America. Although
considered more stable than its neighbors, Honduras was deeply troubled, and
some members of the United States-backed military were involved in the
kidnapping and killing of civilians.

Mr. Negroponte has denied knowing of such abuses. But an inquiry by the Central
Intelligence Agency several years ago found that serious rights violations in
Honduras were not properly reported to Washington during Mr. Negroponte's
tenure. Most of the report is blacked out, and the unclassified parts raise
questions about Mr. Negroponte without providing answers.

"Even his critics consider him very, very competent," said Jose Miguel Vivanco,
director of Human Rights Watch/Americas. "How could someone who is such a
skillful diplomat be so out of the loop?"

Mr. Negroponte's predecessor as ambassador to Honduras, Jack R. Binns,
encountered his own difficulties in sending word of human rights abuses back to
Washington. He was called back to the State Department by a superior and
discouraged from being so forthright in the reports that he sent through
official channels.

Mr. Binns said in an interview that he understood the pressure that Mr.
Negroponte might have been under to look the other way, but he does not excuse
it. "It seems to me fairly evident he misled Congress if he didn't actually
lie," Mr. Binns said of Mr. Negroponte's denials that he knew about abuses in
his posting.

A political adviser in the embassy at the time, Rich Chidester, who was critical
of Mr. Negroponte at the time but has moderated his views over time, asked:

"Should we have done more? Obviously. But I think it would have been tough for
anyone to have been ambassador during that period without controversy."

The position that Mr. Negroponte hopes to fill is not immune to controversy,
either. It may be based in Manhattan, but it has long been a most difficult
position, one that faces entrenched bureaucracy, complicated domestic political
considerations and an unwieldy diplomatic corps. People who know Mr. Negroponte
say he would bring to the job his own style, one that would be less
confrontational than Daniel Patrick Moynihan's, less high profile than Andrew J.
Young's and just as agenda setting as the recently expired term of Richard C.
Holbrooke.

Mr. Holbrooke's nomination was delayed 14 months as Senate Republicans
scrutinized his background and delayed a vote on unrelated procedural grounds.
The United Nations post has been vacant again, for five months. And the issue of
human rights could become even more sensitive if Mr. Negroponte is confirmed. He
would face the early task of ensuring that the United States regains its place
on the United Nations Human Rights Commission.

Backers of Mr. Negroponte say he will weather the current scrutiny of his record
in Honduras. "John has had a colorful career, but he isn't necessarily a
colorful person," a former boss said. "He is serious, dutiful and knowledgeable
about the world. I think he'll deal with this problem just like he's dealt with
all the others."

And the supporters maintain that the ambassador did raise human rights cases
when sufficient evidence surfaced, although they say he had to balance that part
of his job with the fight against the spread of Communism. They portray him as a
dutiful ambassador who carried out United States policy, albeit contentious
United States policy.

"An ambassador's job is to execute policy, not make it, so we can't blame him
for all the flaws in U.S. policy in Central America," said Michael H. Armacost,
president of the Brookings Institution and a former colleague of Mr. Negroponte
at the State Department.

Although more closely associated with Republicans than Democrats, Mr. Negroponte
has served under presidents of both parties. He joined the Foreign Service in
the Kennedy administration, worked at the National Security Council under
presidents Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan and served in ambassadorial posts
under Presidents Jimmy Carter, George Bush and Bill Clinton.

Mr. Negroponte, 61, retired as a diplomat in 1997 to become an executive vice
president at McGraw-Hill. But he was tapped this year for one last diplomatic
posting. If he gets the job, he will report to Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell, who was also his boss at the National Security Council in the Reagan
years.

Mr. Negroponte has many influential people pulling for him. He is an old friend
of the Bush family, having gone to Yale with one of President Bush's uncles and
having provided regular security briefings to his father when he was vice
president. Former Secretary of State George P. Schulz is backing the
appointment, as is Mr. Holbrooke.

Mr. Negroponte left Henry A. Kissinger's White House staff in 1973 because, he
said, he felt the deal that his boss had reached with Hanoi at the Paris peace
talks left America's allies in South Vietnam too vulnerable. But that breach has
been repaired, and Mr. Kissinger is backing the nomination, too.

Mr. Negroponte has survived tough confirmations before. When he was nominated to
be deputy assistant secretary of state for oceans and fisheries affairs in 1977,
a post for which he was later confirmed, he faced one senator who did not think
that he knew enough about fish. In 1989, when President George Bush put forward
his name as ambassador to Mexico, it was his involvement in the Iran-contra case
for which Mr. Negroponte had to answer.

His backers are eager to focus attention on his entire career, not just the four
years that he spent in Honduras. They point out that while based in Mexico City,
he played a critical role in laying the groundwork for the North American Free
Trade Agreement. And to soften his image as a hard-hearted cold warrior, they
note that he and his British-born wife, Diana, adopted five Honduran children
there.

He has also been deputy assistant secretary for East Asian and Pacific affairs,
assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and
scientific affairs, consul general in Thessaloniki in Greece and, early in his
career, an administrative assistant on the Africa desk.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 15, 2001



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about obstacles to Senate confirmation of John
D. Negroponte as ambassador to the United Nations misspelled the name of a
former secretary of state who supports it. He is George P. Shultz, not Schulz.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John D. Negroponte has hopscotched the globe for 40 years.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%); COLD WAR (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); VIETNAM WAR (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); POLITICS
(75%); LIBERALISM (74%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); CHERNOBYL NUCLEAR DISASTER
(72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%) APPOINTMENTS AND
EXECUTIVE CHANGES;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
FOREIGN SERVICE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (92%); DICK CHENEY (57%); CHRISTOPHER DODD (55%) BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES); NEGROPONTE, JOHN D; LACEY, MARC

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); NICARAGUA (93%); PANAMA (92%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (91%); UKRAINE (90%); VIET NAM (90%)

REGION: HONDURAS;  NICARAGUA

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Outlines the Abuse of Foreign Domestic Workers

BYLINE:  By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


When Juana Condori received the job offer back home in Bolivia, it seemed like a
dream come true -- fly in an airplane for the first time, live in the United
States, work for a diplomat.

But after arriving in Washington to work as a nanny and housekeeper, Ms.
Condori, now 33, began to feel like a prisoner. She said her employer, a
diplomat with the Organization of American States, forced her to work seven days
a week and did not let her leave the house unescorted. The diplomat's family,
she said, took her passport, did not give her a house key, did not let her
attend church.

During 16 months on the job, she said, she often worked 90 hours a week and was
paid $220 a month, a fraction of the minimum wage.

"I was really excited about coming here," she said, "but now I see you suffer a
lot in the United States."

Behind the glamour of Embassy Row are many unhappy stories like Ms. Condori's.
In the past decade, more than 35,000 domestic workers, almost all of them young
women, have received special visas to work for diplomats in Washington and New
York City, often working far longer hours for far less pay than they were
promised.

Human Rights Watch, the human rights group, is to release a report on Thursday
that accuses the United States government of doing too little to protect these
workers.

"These domestic workers come to the United States to escape poverty in their
countries of origin," the report states. "All too often, however, they become
some of the world's most disadvantaged workers held captive by some of the
world's most powerful employers."

The report, "Hidden in the Home: Abuse of Domestic Workers with Special Visas in
the United States," found that these workers' median workday was 14 hours and
that their median wage was $2.14 an hour, including room and board.

Human rights groups, immigrants rights groups and women's groups are seeking to
pressure the State Department and international organizations like the World
Bank and Organization of American States to do more to protect these workers,
who usually have little idea of their rights or where to turn for help.

In interviews, these workers spoke of being slapped, yelled at and sexually
assaulted. Some women have even filed lawsuits charging involuntary servitude,
saying they were barred from leaving their employers' houses.

Lydia Altamirano, who left college in Nicaragua to work for an official with the
Inter-American Development Bank, said she had to work every day for her first
three years in Washington, often until midnight when the family gave dinner
parties.

Hapsatou Sarr, a nanny and housekeeper from Mauritania, said she was never paid
during nearly eight months of working for a World Bank official. She said she
slept on the floor in a child's rooms. Her employer, she said, once slapped her
because she forgot to give him a fork.

She said that when she complained, the family often withheld food from her. She
was not allowed outside by herself, she said, and the official's wife listened
to her telephone conversations to make sure she was not planning to escape.

"I didn't know who to explain problems to," Ms. Sarr said. "I was feeling like I
was going to kill myself every day."

Many diplomats say that workers often exaggerate or fabricate abuses when they
file lawsuits.

Paul Reichler, the lawyer for Edmundo Jarquin, the diplomat sued by Ms.
Altamirano, said that her claims of overwork were false and that she was trying
to blackmail the family.

The Human Rights Watch report concluded that a major cause of abuses was the
special visa granted to these workers, which lets them remain in the United
States only while working for a diplomat. Thus, the workers know that they can
be deported if they quit.

"They can stay in the abusive situation or go back to their home country, which
typically has very poor economic conditions, or they can leave their job and
stay here undocumented," said Kimberley Propeack, a lawyer for Casa of Maryland,
an immigrants rights group.

The report recommends that Congress give the workers the right to get new jobs
if their employers violate wage and hours laws or abuse them. Noting that many
diplomats sign contracts promising 40-hour workweeks and the minimum wage of
$5.15 an hour, Human Rights Watch also said the government should make adequate
resources available to enforce those provisions.

"You would think that because these workers follow the rules and come to the
U.S. legally, the U.S. government would try to protect them from abuses," said
Carol Pier, author of the report.

The visas "become coercive tools on the part of the employer," Ms. Pier said.

Philip Reeker, a State Department spokesman, said, "We take this issue quite
seriously." He said the department was urging diplomats to comply with labor
laws and was notifying domestic workers of their rights when they applied for
visas.

Confronted by accusations that its employees have abused their housekeepers, the
World Bank requires its employees not to take away the workers' passports and to
sign contracts guaranteeing the minimum wage. The bank also requires its
employees and their domestic workers to attend seminars where the workers'
rights are explained.

"There is a difficulty because these are not our employees," said John
Donaldson, a World Bank spokesman. "They are employees of our employees. We
expect our employees to abide by U.S. law."

Advocates for immigrants praise the World Bank's moves, but say that the bank
and the International Monetary Fund should do more. For example, they said, the
organizations should interview domestic workers about whether there are abuses.

In addition to her claims of labor violations, Ms. Condori said that an
acquaintance of the family she worked for raped her, and that the diplomat,
Jaime Aparicio, would not contact the police or arrange for her to see a doctor.

She has charged him with violating wage laws, failing to provide her with
medical care and covering up for the rapist.

Through a lawyer, the Aparicios denied Ms. Condori's accusations about wages and
hours and said they had no knowledge of her rape claim.
Ms. Condori said she fled the Aparicio home and now cleans the house of a
business executive. She said she hoped to return to Bolivia, once she saw her
lawsuit through.

"I want to stay here until I make sure that the man who did this to me goes to
jail," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Juana Condori has sued her former employer, a diplomat with the
Organization of American States. (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMPLOYMENT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PRIVATE HOUSEHOLD EMPLOYMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); WOMEN (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
MINIMUM WAGE (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%);
INTERVIEWS (77%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (76%); IMMIGRATION (75%);
AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (69%); DEVELOPMENT
BANKS (65%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (64%); SEX OFFENSES (60%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (60%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (60%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%); LITIGATION
(50%) DOMESTIC SERVICE;  FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC COMMUNITY;  WOMEN;  LABOR;  WAGES
AND SALARIES;  WORKING HOURS

COMPANY: INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (81%)

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%)
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; STATE DEPARTMENT

INDUSTRY: NAICS921130 PUBLIC FINANCE ACTIVITIES (81%); NAICS521110 MONETARY
AUTHORITIES - CENTRAL BANK (81%); SIC6082 FOREIGN TRADE & INTERNATIONAL BANKING
INSTITUTIONS (81%)

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BOLIVIA (92%); NICARAGUA (79%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

CRITIC'S CHOICE/Film;
No Rose-Colored Glasses In Lands Ravaged by War

BYLINE:  By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Column 5; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg.
18

LENGTH: 604 words


If you're searching for rich, complicated reality in movies instead of the usual
escapist fluff, you need look no further than the Human Rights Watch Film
Festival. The most morally engaged, socially far-reaching annual film series to
play New York, the festival, which opened its 12th season last night with a
benefit screening of "Kiss of the Spider Woman," offers a different kind of
global tour, conducted without the usual rose-colored glasses and tourist
distractions.

Tonight, the documentary-heavy festival at the Walter Reade Theater will have
two screenings of Stephanie Black's "Life and Debt," which begins a weeklong
commercial run tomorrow at Cinema Village. Both screenings of the film, which
examines the economic woes of Jamaica, will be prefaced by a live musical
performance by Ziggy Marley.

The themes of most of the festival's selections are predictably heavy, and many
deal with war, oppression, injustice and intolerance. One of the most remarkable
selections, "Jung (War): In the Land of the Mujahedin," by the Italian
filmmakers Alberto Vendemmiati, Fabrizio Lazzaretti and Giuseppe Petitto,
follows the building of a hospital in war-torn Afghanistan. Working under
grueling conditions in a country reduced by 20 years of war to a near-wasteland,
where education has all but ceased and millions are hungry, a team of
international health workers construct and begin operating the institution with
medical supplies trucked in from Italy.

But this small triumph of human cooperation and ingenuity seems dwarfed by the
immensity and savagery of the holy war being waged by the Taliban. The movie is
casually gruesome. Countless innocent civilians, many of them children, have
been mutilated by land mines that litter the countryside, and the camera doesn't
flinch before the sight of children with stumps for limbs and doctors performing
amputations on the newly injured. This gripping film, once seen, is
unforgettable.

B. Z. Goldberg, Justine Shapiro and Carlos Bolado's film "Promises" is a
portrait of Jerusalem and its environs viewed through eyes of seven articulate
children and their families. The film is essentially a study of indoctrination.
Whether Palestinian or Israeli, most of the subjects are passionately convinced
of the righteousness of their side of the struggle. Watching these bright,
attractive youngsters, you have an uncomfortable feeling that the seeds of
future violence have already been carefully sown and that these very same
children may end up killing each other as adults.

When the festival concludes on June 28, it will have shown 38 films and videos
from 15 countries. A number of the films focus on the Middle East. From Lebanon
comes "Around the Pink House," a postwar reconstruction comedy-drama. "The
Closed Doors," from Egypt, is set during the Persian Gulf war and examines the
psyche of an Islamic teenager torn between incestuous longings for his mother
and the lure of religious extremism. Rassul Sadr Ameli's "Girl in the Sneakers"
has been called an Iranian "Romeo and Juliet."

The closing-night film, acclaimed this year at the Sundance Festival, is Sandi
Simcha Dubowski's video documentary "Trembling Before G-D." The film examines
the anguished plight of Hasidic and Orthodox Jews who come out as gays and
lesbians and whose sexuality is unequivocally and bitterly condemned by their
religious communities.

The Human Rights Watch Film Festival runs through June 28 at the Walter Reade
Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center. Admission: $9; $5 for Film
Society members; $4.50 for 65+ at weekday matinees. Information and schedule:
(212) 875-5600.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Afghan girl in "Jung (War): In the Land of the Mujahedin." (
Human Rights Watch)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FESTIVALS (92%); FILM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MOVIE REVIEWS (78%); DRAMA
FILMS (78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (78%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (78%);
FUNDRAISING (76%); FAMILY (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); VISUAL ARTISTS (73%);
DESERT STORM (72%); LANDMINES (72%); TALIBAN (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%);
POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (71%); HOSPITALS (71%); MUSIC INDUSTRY (70%); RELIGION
(64%); THEATER (58%) MOTION PICTURES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH FILM FESTIVAL;  REVIEWS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: HOLDEN, STEPHEN

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (76%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
LEBANON (79%); EGYPT (77%); MIDDLE EAST (76%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Leaders Urge Powell to Attend U.N. Racism Conference

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 10


A group of American civil rights leaders is pressing Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell to go to a United Nations conference on racism and discrimination this
summer to make a strong showing for the United States at a time when the Bush
administration has been withdrawing from some international activities.

In a letter sent to Secretary Powell on Monday, the Leadership Conference on
Civil Rights, a broad coalition of 180 civil rights and human rights groups,
asks him to aid "the global effort to eradicate the vestiges of racism, root and
branch."

The letter urges him to lead a strong delegation to the conference in Durban,
South Africa, which starts on Aug. 31, and to give the conference more generous
support than the $250,000 budgeted by the Clinton administration before it left
office.

The executive director of the leadership conference, Wade J. Henderson, said in
an interview that there were several reasons to view the conference and a
high-level American delegation as important.

"We're asking the secretary to lead the delegation, because we feel that his
presence itself is a signal to the rest of the world the importance that the
United States places on this conference," Mr. Henderson said, "and that there is
a global agenda."

Some voices in the administration and private groups in the United States have
questioned whether the United States should attend, contending that the agenda
is unbalanced and incendiary.

Secretary Powell said on June 20 in a Senate hearing that issues like viewing
Zionism as racism and compensation for slavery could derail the conference.

State Department officials said no decisions on participating had been made,
although the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Mary Robinson,
has met twice with Secretary Powell on the issue.

Some United Nations officials fear that the United States may not attend at all
or may send a low-level delegation. Private American rights groups will be out
in force, however, at a parallel unofficial conference, also in Durban.

"Powell's presence could help to influence the U.S. delegation to participate
with a more open mind," Mr. Henderson said. For civil rights leaders, he added,
"this is an important opportunity to try to use the U.N.'s stage as a way of
reflecting back on what the United States both said and did in policies related
to race. We want to use the international forum as a way to address our domestic
agenda."

The planning for the meeting, formally the United Nations World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, has
already caused disagreements within and among various countries, including
within the American government, human rights groups and United Nations officials
said.

Nations have repeatedly failed to produce an agreement on what the conference
aims should be.

In preparing an agenda and a declaration for the conference, some countries have
sought language that others see as thinly veiled references to Israel that echo
the anti-Zionist language of some United Nations documents of the 1970's.

Wording that was ultimately approved by planners is still provocative to some
countries. One provision states, "Theories of superiority of certain races and
cultures over others promoted and practiced during the colonial era continue to
be propounded in one form or another even today." That rankles in some Western
capitals.

In Africa and among some African-American organizations, there is pressure to
concentrate the conference on seeking repayment for colonialism and reparations
for the trans-Atlantic slave trade of the 18th and 19th centuries.

Secretary General Kofi Annan, a Ghanaian, has cautioned against making the
conference a rehash of history rather than an examination of current problems.

In Lusaka, Zambia, on Monday, he told a meeting of African leaders, "While
Africa and Africans have suffered terribly in the past few centuries from
slavery and colonialism and people of African descent still suffer
discrimination in many societies, we cannot hide the fact that today some of our
own societies are also disfigured by ethnic hatred and violence."

He said the conference should produce "a document that looks unflinchingly at
every society in the world" and "builds on the past but does not become a
captive of it."

Mr. Henderson and Karen K. Narasaki, executive director of the National Asian
Pacific American Legal Consortium, part of the leadership conference, said in
interviews the broad scope of their coalition -- encompassing groups that
represent women, minority groups and gay and disabled people, among others --
gave them standing at the conference with an equally broad array of foreign
human rights groups.

For example, the coalition has a close relationship with organizations of
untouchables, known as Dalits, in India, who fear they could be barred from
traveling to Durban by the Indian government, which contends that the scope of
the conference does not cover their interests.

The Dalit leader, Martin Macwan, a recipient of two American human rights
awards, works closely with the leadership conference, Mr. Henderson said. "The
rubric of 'related intolerance,' it seems to us, incorporates them," he added.

Ms. Narasaki said the diversity of her consortium and the larger leadership
conference also reflected a successful marriage between civil rights and human
rights interests.

"We know the Department of Justice, and the human rights agencies know the State
Department, where we have a lot less experience," she said. "Because of the
breadth of our coalition, we have expertise on every issue."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); BUSINESS LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); EXECUTIVES (73%) UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); CROSSETTE, BARBARA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 5, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Says Macedonians Killed Civilians in Revenge

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1716 words


That night's newscast showed Ljube Boskovski, the hard-line Macedonian minister
of the interior, planted behind a stone wall in the village of Ljuboten,
surrounded by soldiers and the sound of gunfire. He was there, the newscast
said, as part of a military operation to sweep the village of the ethnic
Albanian "terrorists" who had planted the antitank mines that had killed eight
Macedonian soldiers two days before.

On the day of the newscast, Aug. 12, seven ethnic Albanians were killed in
Ljuboten. But nearly a month later, no evidence has emerged that those people,
or three others also killed from the village, were anything but civilians.

In a detailed report to be issued today, Human Rights Watch accuses the
overwhelmingly Slavic forces of Macedonia's government of summary execution of
civilians, arson and torture. The operation over that weekend, the report says,
"had no military justification and was carried out for purposes of revenge."

By the standards of a decade of war in the Balkans, the number of dead around
Ljuboten was not high. But the killings were the worst single loss of life in
six months of low-level warfare in Macedonia. They were also the clearest and
bloodiest example yet of the cycle of revenge that prolonged other Balkan wars.
NATO recently embarked on what is intended to be a one-month mission to calm the
Macedonian conflict.

In an interview, Mr. Boskovski, perhaps the most outspoken proponent of a
military solution to the insurgency, sought to distance himself from what
happened in Ljuboten. He said that he arrived only at 4 p.m. that Sunday, after
the military operation had ended, and that he did not direct the operation.

But he also maintained that it was "stupidity" to think that the ethnic Albanian
rebel force -- which calls itself the National Liberation Army -- was not in
Ljuboten that weekend, even though he said he had no idea if those who died were
fighters or civilians. He also attacked Human Rights Watch, which investigated
the incident, calling it an "international mercenary organization."

"They accuse me of being present there and watching when civilians were
murdered," Mr. Boskovski said. "That is a monstrous accusation."

"Who would bring a camera with him if he wanted to do something like that?" he
asked.

The United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague, charged with investigating
allegations of war crimes in all of former Yugoslavia, has sent investigators to
Macedonia to decide whether to begin a full investigation into what happened in
Ljuboten and who might be responsible.

"It's important to understand that he doesn't have to witness the people being
killed to have some responsibility for what happened," said Peter Bouckaert, a
senior researcher for Human Rights Watch who wrote the group's report on
Ljuboten. "It was done by troops under his authority in an action in which he
was intimately involved."

Mr. Bouckaert said the killing of civilians in Ljuboten could be a dangerous
precedent for Macedonia's future. The peace deal signed on Aug. 13 by the
Macedonian and ethnic Albanian parties in Macedonia's government grants ethnic
Albanians many of the greater civic rights the rebels say they have sought. NATO
has 4,500 troops in Macedonia collecting arms from the ethnic Albanian rebels so
that the political part of the peace deal can proceed. But no one is sure that
the deal will hold, particularly, in Mr. Bouckaert's view, if a government
minister like Mr. Boskovski is seen as condoning attacks on civilians.

"As in all guerrilla conflicts, the question of who is a civilian and who is a
fighter is a thorny one. Many rebels live in Albanian villages, and government
officials often argue that their status as combatants is a matter of putting on
a uniform.

Ljuboten, home to about 3,000 ethnic Albanians and a handful of Slavic
Macedonians, lies about five miles north of the capital, Skopje, and is
surrounded on three sides by Macedonian villages and to the northeast by the
Skopska Crna Gora mountain, where the rebel army is active.

It was on the mountain that on Friday morning, Aug. 10, the two antitank mines
exploded a few miles from Ljuboten, killing eight Macedonian soldiers. Two days
earlier, 10 Macedonian soldiers had been killed in another ambush. Emotions were
running high among the nation's police officers, soldiers and reservists.

Almost immediately that morning, police checkpoints sealed off Ljuboten, and
shelling began. The Human Rights Watch report says that Haxhi Meta Xhavit, about
70, died "apparently from shock or heart failure" when his home was hit by a
shell.

Early that evening, after a lull, the shelling resumed. A villager, Fazil
Duraku, 25, said he saw a panic-stricken boy, Erxhan Aliu, 6, die in the
shelling. "There were two or three people in one spot, and this boy was trying
to go toward them," he said. "The shell landed maybe the distance of one
palm-width away from him, and it threw him into the air." On Friday evening, he
said, "We went to our basement because the shooting didn't stop all night."

On Saturday, villagers said, the government continued its shelling, and many
villagers were blocked by the police from fleeing Ljuboten. But it was not until
Sunday that Macedonian soldiers swept into the village in search of what the
government said were terrorists in the area.

In a house across from a Macedonian Orthodox Church, the Jusufi family heard an
explosion and crash at the front metal gate about 8:20 a.m. Rami Jusufi, 33,
went to lock the door. A burst of machine gun fire bored through as he clicked
the lock. The rest of the family -- including his 58-year-old father, Elmaz,
confined to a wheelchair -- could do nothing but pour iodine on the three bullet
wounds of Mr. Jusufi, who spent the next several hours bleeding to death. "In
the last half-hour, he started breathing slower and slower," his father said.
"And then he just faded away."

One man, Aziz Bajrami, 66, was himself shot and lost two sons on that Sunday.
Sitting with his left hand bandaged in a house in the Albanian quarter of Skopje
two weeks later, Mr. Bajrami described an atmosphere of chaos and fear as the
soldiers entered the village, firing into houses and setting cars, houses and
barns ablaze. He said he hid in the basement of a neighbor, along with three of
his sons and eight female relatives. The police found them, he said, shot into
the basement, stole jewelry from the women and marched the men to a spot where
perhaps 10 other Albanian men, most of them young, lay on their stomachs.

"I heard one soldier go up to my son and kick him in his head," Mr. Bajrami
said. "When they kicked him in the head, they shot me in the hand. Then my son
stood up because of the pain. He tried to run, and they all opened fire on him."

He said the police shot his son, Sulejman, 22, at least twice more before
ordering Mr. Bajrami and his cousin, Muharrem, 68, to leave.

"They said, 'You old men go home,' " Mr. Bajrami said. "We got up, quickly, and
I ran into a little door. Then I heard two shots. I was behind the wall and went
into the garage. They killed my cousin. It was only me left."

Two days after the attack, foreign journalists went to Ljuboten, where the
bodies of Sulejman and Muharrem Bajrami still lay, each shot repeatedly, in the
back and in the head. On a nearby ridge lay three more bodies, including another
of Mr. Bajrami's sons, Xhelal, 24, along with the Jashari brothers, Bairam, 33,
and Kadri, 31, who had arrived on vacation from Austria 10 days before.

The three had been shot, witnesses said, fleeing a house that Macedonian forces
had fired at with rocket-launched grenades.

Later that week, a plumber named Bejtullah Qaili, 43, ended a search for his
missing brother at the Skopje morgue. His brother, Atulla, 32, one of more than
100 men arrested in Ljuboten on that Sunday, had apparently been beaten to
death, his skull crushed, eyes black and swollen shut, cigarette burns on his
arm, his testicles blackened from blows. Most of the arrested were released and
all are now accounted for, though roughly a dozen remain in prison, including a
13-year-old boy.

"I wouldn't feel as bad if he was one of the guys who fought," said Mr. Qaili,
who added that he had to pay $670 in bribes to have the body released. "If he
was a soldier, he would have died for a cause."

Family members of the dead contend that none of them belonged to the rebel army.
None were armed, and none wore a uniform or combat boots.

"It is significant that the government has not presented any credible evidence
that there was an N.L.A. presence in Ljuboten, such as confiscated N.L.A.
weapons or uniforms," the Human Rights Watch report says.

Guerrillas held positions in the mountains outside Ljuboten in August, and had
been in the village as recently as June, meeting with foreign reporters. One
explanation put forward by outside monitors of what happened in Ljuboten is that
government forces saw firing from the mountain and believed that it came from
inside the village.

Mr. Boskovski, the interior minister, said he had no doubt that the rebels were
in Ljuboten, and that they had attacked Macedonian civilians, a contention that
has been widely reported in the Macedonian press.

"It is the easiest thing to make accusations today and to put an equal sign
between the aggressor and the victim," he said. --------------------

Delay on Rights Vote
By The New York Times

 SKOPJE, Macedonia, Sept. 4 -- The Macedonian Parliament failed to vote today on
a package of constitutional changes to expand rights for the country's ethnic
Albanian minority, dragging out the debate and forcing a delay in NATO's phased
weapons collection operation.

The package of changes is part of a Western-brokered agreement that is to lead
to an end to the fighting. Ethnic Albanian rebels are waiting for Parliament to
vote before they hand over the second portion of the 3,300 weapons they have
agreed to give to NATO forces.

The president and prime minister have endorsed the plan and have called on
legislators to support it, but Macedonian Slav politicians criticized it as
flawed and a capitulation to terrorism. The delay is a setback for the NATO task
force of 4,500 troops, which is in Macedonia for a narrowly defined mission of
30 days to collect and destroy the rebel weapons.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Aziz Bajrami, above, lost two sons in the attack on Ljuboten,
and was himself shot in the hand. Ljube Boskovski, the interior minister of
Macedonia, says the killings were part of a military operation.; Relatives
gathered on a hillside in Ljuboten, Macedonia, after finding the bodies of three
Albanian men. (Photographs by Andrew Testa for The New York Times)(pg. A6) Map
of Macedonia highlighting Ljuboten: Ten ethnic Albanians from Ljuboten have been
killed recently. (pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); INTERVIEWS (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); LANDMINES (76%); WITNESSES (75%); ARSON (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%);
TERRORISM (71%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (60%); MURDER (56%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  ARSON;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; BOSKOVSKI, LJUBE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (51%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (95%); ALBANIA (94%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC);  LJUBOTEN (MACEDONIA)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 10, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

After the Race Conference: Relief, and Doubt Over Whether It Will Matter

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Sept. 9


The diplomats scattered like the wind today, flying out of this port city with a
27-page action plan to combat discrimination and a staggering sense of relief
that the United Nations conference on racism accomplished anything at all.

But victims of racism and intolerance around the world might be forgiven for
wondering whether those printed stacks of promises will make much difference to
ordinary people.

This conference grabbed headlines with its divisive debate over Israel's
treatment of Palestinians and the bitter wrangling over a European apology for
slavery.

The meeting also produced a plan on Saturday that calls on governments to ensure
that Gypsies get equal access to education, that minorities are guaranteed
religious freedom, that people with AIDS have access to services and that police
agencies do not engage in racial or ethnic profiling, among other things.

The plan, adopted by 163 nations, is not legally binding. The United Nations
will appoint a panel of five experts to help countries carry out the plan and to
review progress to encourage officials to keep their commitments.

Human rights activists say that if governments follow through on even some of
the suggestions, such as embarking on publicity campaigns to promote racial
tolerance or teaching children about Africa's contributions to world history, it
will help improve understanding across racial and ethnic lines.

"If governments would really put in place what they agreed to here, the world
would be a much better place," said Reed Brody, the director of advocacy for
Human Rights Watch.

Whether governments will actually make good on these commitments is far from
certain. During the conference, many countries used their political muscle to
ensure that they would not have to deal with prickly issues of race or
discrimination.

India successfully lobbied fellow nations to prevent any mention of caste
discrimination. Before walking out of the conference over criticism of Israel,
the United States objected to any discussion of reparations for the descendants
of African slaves. Others refused to consider gays as victims of discrimination.

While many presidents and foreign ministers delivered eloquent speeches
condemning racism and intolerance, few were willing to publicly address
discrimination within their own borders.

"These are very difficult issues, and every government feels vulnerable, and
every government has things to hide and be ashamed of, so there's a collective
discomfort," said Michael Posner, the executive director of the Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights in New York.

Some Western officials have already dismissed the conference as useless and
counterproductive. The Canadian foreign minister, John Manley, questioned why
the meeting was necessary at all since officials seemed to be doing little more
than exchanging platitudes or attacking Israel, whose delegates also abandoned
the meeting.

"It hasn't been a good experience for the world community," Mr. Manley said last
week. "It has not been a good experience for the United Nations and I hope we
don't have to see this happen again."

Condoleezza Rice, President Bush's national security adviser, today criticized
the conference for being too focused on the past and said that a debate about
reparations was best avoided.

"I think reparations -- given the fact that there is plenty of blame to go
around for slavery, plenty of blame to go around among African and Arab states,
and plenty of blame to go around among Western states -- we are better to look
forward and not point fingers backward," she said on the NBC News program "Meet
the Press."

Though some have criticized the Bush administration's decision to walk out of
the conference as a pretext to avoid the reparations issue, she defended the
move. "This conference spent far too much time in trying to condemn Israel and
single it out," she said. "I think the United States made the right decision to
leave."

But diplomats from Europe and Latin America disagreed.

Brazil's secretary of state for human rights, Gilberto Saboia, said the
international community has an obligation to grapple with past injustices.

"Slavery has been a tragedy for millions of people for centuries and continues
to have consequences," said Mr. Saboia, who helped negotiate the final document
on the issue.

"It doesn't mean we have to remain locked in the past," he added. "But we need
to understand that past to address the present and to address the future."

With or without American participation, for the thousands of Africans, Gypsies,
Kurds and others who gathered here last week, the conference provided an
unprecedented opportunity to raise their concerns before the world.

Jyothi Raj, a Dalit, or member of the group in India once known as the
untouchables, said she was disappointed that caste was not on the agenda. "We
are not getting justice as we should," said Mrs. Raj, who said she is not
allowed to enter temples in her village because she is considered unclean.

Still, Mrs. Raj said the conference was a big success for the Dalits.
"Everywhere people are talking about Dalits," Mrs. Raj marveled. "We are feeling
connected. We are not alone. We are battling together."

Blacks from the Americas and across the continent said they felt similarly when
they shared experiences. Many were disappointed when European diplomats refused
to apologize explicitly for the slavery, but they cheered the expression of
profound remorse and the acknowledgment that the slave trade "should have always
been" a crime against humanity.

Now, many blacks are mobilizing to seek reparations, to start scholarship funds
or to create monuments to enslaved ancestors.

"We have never had the opportunity to gather together from every country," said
Alioune Tine, a human rights activist from Senegal, who led a caucus of Africans
and blacks in the Americas. "Now there is enthusiasm and commitment to remind
states to meet their international obligations. That is the next step."

Mary Robinson, the United Nations commissioner for human rights, said no one
should underestimate the importance of bringing so many people together or the
difficulty governments faced in reaching an agreement to fight racism.

When negotiations over slavery and the Middle East threatened to break down last
week, she said she feared the whole meeting would collapse. "We were hanging by
a thread," Mrs. Robinson said in an interview today.

Mrs. Robinson, who is the secretary-general of the conference, has been sharply
criticized for not resolving the sensitive issues around the Middle East and
slavery before delegates arrived here. She acknowledged today that the
conference would have been less tumultuous if such issues had been settled
earlier.

But the important thing, she said, was that delegates managed to cobble together
an agreement to fight racial discrimination in the end.

"We got a result and I think it will be very positive for human dignity," Mrs.
Robinson said. "I'm not under any illusions. It won't make a difference just
because we had a conference. It will be a long, long haul. But in the end, I
think it was a truly remarkable achievement. Let history judge."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (92%); RACE & RACISM (92%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ETHNICITY (78%); RACIAL PROFILING (77%); SLAVERY
(77%); LOBBYING (75%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (74%); APPOINTMENTS (74%); POLICE
FORCES (73%); EXECUTIVES (64%); RELIGION (54%); HISTORY (51%) UNITED NATIONS
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SOUTH AFRICA
(92%); UNITED STATES (79%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: DURBAN (SOUTH AFRICA);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexican Ruling May Let Spain Try Argentine

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Jan. 12


In a decision that could change international law, a federal judge ruled today
that Mexico can extradite a former Argentine navy officer to Spain to face
charges of human rights abuses against Spaniards under Argentina's military
dictatorship two decades ago.

If Mexico decides to do it, the extradition of the accused man, Ricardo Miguel
Cavallo, could be unprecedented in the annals of international law, human-rights
experts say. They know of no other case in which a person accused of human
rights violations in one country was sought for trial in a second nation and
extradited by a third, on the principle that the laws governing crimes against
humanity know no borders.

Mr. Cavallo was the director of Mexico's national motor-vehicle registry when
the accusations against him became public. He was arrested while trying to flee
for Argentina in August. If he indeed committed crimes under the Argentine
junta, he almost certainly would have been covered by an amnesty granted by
Argentina's government.

The case against Mr. Cavallo is based on the testimony of five survivors of
Argentina's military junta, which jailed and killed tens of thousands of its
opponents between 1976 and 1983. They say they knew him as "Serpico," an officer
who helped run the torture chamber at the mechanics' school of the Argentine
Navy. Under the junta, more than 5,000 people disappeared into that chamber, and
most were never seen again. Their bodies were dumped in rivers and buried in
clandestine graveyards. Human rights groups say the junta killed as many as
30,000 people.

The warrant for Mr. Cavallo's arrest on charges of torture, kidnapping,
terrorism, car theft and forgery was signed by the same Spanish judge, Baltasar
Garzon, who sought last year to extradite Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator
of Chile, on charges of genocide.

In the Pinochet case, England -- where the former general was living under house
arrest -- declined to send him to Spain. In March, after being detained for 16
months, General Pinochet was allowed to fly home to Chile, where his lawyers are
now fighting to keep him from standing trial on homicide and kidnapping charges.
A Chilean judge indicted him in December, but Chile's Supreme Court dropped the
charges. The former dictator, 85, was tested today in a hospital in Santiago to
see if he was mentally fit to stand trial.

The federal judge in Mexico City who issued today's ruling, Jesus Guadalupe
Luna, said the courts of Spain could try Mr. Cavallo on charges of genocide and
terrorism, but not for specific acts of torture, because too much time had
passed. In his 728-page decision, excerpts of which were read aloud to Mr.
Cavallo today as he stood in a barred cell in a judicial hearing room, the judge
rejected arguments posed by Mr. Cavallo's lawyers and Argentine authorities, who
said no one should be tried abroad for crimes committed in his native land.

Mexico's new government has 20 days to weigh the order allowing the extradition
of Mr. Cavallo to Spain. The decision rests with Mexico's new foreign minister,
Jorge Castaneda.

"The foreign minister has said that Mexico would commit itself to strengthening
the international human rights regime," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, executive
director of the Americas division of Human Rights Watch. "Now is the opportunity
to show that he is serious by extraditing Cavallo."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a Mexico City cell, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a former
Argentine military officer, listened yesterday to a court ruling that could
clear the way for his extradition to Spain to face charges of torture and other
crimes. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); TORTURE (90%); NAVIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY RULE
(89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ARREST
WARRANTS (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%);
TESTIMONY (77%); VEHICLE THEFT (74%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (71%); AMNESTY (70%); LARCENY & THEFT (68%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%); COUNTERFEITING (63%) EXTRADITION;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  TORTURE

PERSON: CAVALLO, RICARDO MIGUEL; GUADALUPE LUNA, JESUS (JUDGE); WEINER, TIM

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (93%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%); ARGENTINA (95%); CHILE (94%); SPAIN (93%)

REGION: ARGENTINA;  SPAIN;  MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Slavery Triumphs

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Led by Communist China and Communist Cuba, and with the connivance of French
diplomats currying favor with African and Arab dictators, the U.N. threw the
United States off the Human Rights Commission.

As an added thumb in the eye to defenders of human rights, the world body in
effect replaced us with Sudan, where human beings are bought and sold and
torture is a way of life.

Why? Not because of any U.S. straight talk about meaningless treaties on land
mines or sea bottoms or air warming. And not, as Senator John Kerry said
yesterday about the triumphant anti-Americans, because the world now finds "a
lack of a sense of honesty" in the U.S. government.

The real reasons for slapping us in the face are obvious and immediate: first,
to punish the U.S. for daring to ask the 53 nations of the U.N. group to
criticize China's record of repression. And second, to humiliate the U.S. for
opposing the commission's recent vote blaming Israel for the war started by
order of Yasir Arafat.

The U.N. nations did not enjoy being shown up publicly to be a pack of
hypocrites in approving a dictatorship's offense and condemning a democracy's
self-defense. The enraged Communists and their fellow U.N. travelers seized
their chance to show who decides how freedom is to be restricted and morality is
to be measured.

The sneak diplomatic attack caught Colin Powell and our State Department asleep.
Of the 53 nations voting, the dumbfounded Powell claimed he had "43 solid
written assurances" of support for the U.S. But only 29 voted to keep us on the
commission.

Who were the 14 nations that supposedly assured us of their support and then
double-crossed us to elevate a slave trader into the seat we were forced to
vacate? Secretary Powell professed to be too proud or too busy to ask: "I'm not
going to spend any of my time trying to break into what was essentially a secret
vote to try to find out what happened."

That's even worse than being caught napping. Powell's job is to know which
nations will stab us in the back in return for some Chinese trade or Arab oil
preference or Security Council vote. If our career diplomats in Geneva and New
York are out to lunch, and if our intelligence agency is justifying its budget
by turning its headquarters into a movie set, then who will make public the
"essentially" secret vote that fighters for human rights need to know?

Here is a challenge for journalists. Who will piece together and break the
complex story behind the stealthy ousting of the overconfident Americans? More
than a hundred diplomats were privy to the plot; can nobody be induced to reveal
the truth? What payoffs were promised by our European allies -- especially
France, Austria and Sweden, now elected to the U.N.'s sanhedrin of hypocrisy --
that the Bush administration prefers not to know about?

A few news organizations, including The Times, still invest in international
investigative reporting. Among agencies, The A.P. offers hope; Reuters, though
spread wide, rarely digs deep; and Agence France-Presse, in position to get this
story, is likely to pass. TV will cover it in depth five years after it has
appeared in print.

Perhaps the lapdog press in Beijing or Havana will provide an outlet for a
little boasting by its political masters, thereby embarrassing our see-no-evil
secretary of state by providing the delicious details of diplomatic duplicity.

But the Congress need not wait to read how China, Cuba and their slave-trading
ally Sudan took the U.S. to the cleaners. Although Senate Foreign Relations is
somewhat compromised by the Helms-Biden deal to pay the U.N. $581 million in
back dues, the House has yet to authorize the payment.

The House is scheduled to vote this week on the State Department authorization
bill that contains our back U.N. dues plus an additional $67 million to rejoin
Unesco after 17 years.

The black caucus is curiously silent. But Congress should suspend its final
payment until it gets detailed answers from State or C.I.A. or a vigilant press
about who were "the faithless fourteen" nations -- and for what commercial or
political advantage they swapped their votes by selling out the fundamental
rights of human beings.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); LANDMINES (76%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (70%); WRITERS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); JOURNALISM (62%);
BUDGETS (61%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
PALESTINIANS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%) SAFIRE, WILLIAM; ARAFAT, YASIR

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (94%); SUDAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); FRANCE (79%); SWITZERLAND (76%)

REGION: CHINA;  CUBA;  FRANCE;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's 'Undesirables'

BYLINE:  By Fang Lizhi and Robert L. Bernstein;  Fang Lizhi and Robert L.
Bernstein are co-chairmen of Human Rights in China.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 453 words


As the International Olympic Committee considers whether to select Beijing as
the site of the 2008 Olympic Games, it must retreat from its tired, rather
disingenuous excuse that the Olympics are about sport, not politics.

If Beijing is chosen to play host to the Olympics, the decision will be a
feather in the cap of the Chinese government. But this decision would also
ensure a continued wave of human rights abuses against China's "undesirables" --
dissidents, the mentally ill, the homeless, street children and the unemployed.

Every city that vies for the Olympic Games wants to make itself as presentable
as possible, both to the International Olympic Committee and to the
international audience that attends the competition. Unfortunately, whenever
China has prepared for international attention, it has conducted street sweeps
by the police to clear "undesirables" from sight. Journalists reported that such
sweeps increased in February, when 17 inspectors from the International Olympic
Committee visited Beijing.

What happens to those taken into custody? Some are taken to psychiatric
hospitals run by the police, which are flourishing these days because of a
crackdown on the Falun Gong. Journalists and human rights groups have documented
that these hospitals torture prisoners with drugs and electrically charged
acupuncture.

China also sends prisoners to custody and repatriation camps; there are 700 to
800 camps in China. More than two million citizens -- mostly small business
owners, dissidents and the poor -- now languish in them. Up to 20 percent of the
inhabitants are street children under 16. No one in these camps is charged with
any specific crime, or brought before a judge, or represented by counsel.

Stays in these camps can last from days to months, and conditions are horrific.
Water is filthy. Sanitation and medical care are completely inadequate. Beatings
and sexual abuse are routine.

Finally, if the Olympics comes to China, the crackdown on dissidents is likely
to continue or get even worse. Ding Zilin, a professor at People's University in
Beijing, founded Tiananmen Mothers after her son was killed during the 1989
Tiananmen Square demonstrations. Because she has called upon the authorities to
account fully for the killings of unarmed demonstrators, she has lost her job,
and so has her husband. They are under virtual house arrest; visitors from the
outside are not permitted.

China should be considered for the Olympics, but only if it commits to ending
the abuses. If the I.O.C. chooses China without addressing these human rights
violations, it will be condoning not only the abuses of the past, but the future
incarceration or torture of thousands of Chinese citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (97%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SPORTS &
RECREATION EVENTS (90%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CHILD POVERTY (89%); TORTURE (89%); CORRECTIONS
(87%); CHILDREN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HOMELESSNESS (75%);
UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (75%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (75%); ARRESTS (73%); HOSPITALS
(72%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%); HOUSE ARREST (71%); MENTAL ILLNESS (70%); SEX
OFFENSES (68%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE (66%); SMALL BUSINESS (50%); JUDGES (50%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  OLYMPIC GAMES;
OLYMPIC GAMES (2008)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (94%) HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA;
INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE

PERSON: FANG LIZHI; BERNSTEIN, ROBERT L

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (95%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (95%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%)

REGION: CHINA;  BEIJING (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guatemalan Court Sentences 3 Soldiers for 1998 Murder of Bishop

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 617 words


In a verdict human rights advocates hailed as a bold strike against official
impunity, a Guatemalan court sentenced three military men to 30 years in prison
yesterday for the 1998 murder of a Roman Catholic bishop. The panel also ordered
that three other high-ranking officers be investigated for possible complicity.

Bishop Juan Gerardi, 75, who led the Archbishop's Office on Human Rights, died
when his skull was crushed with a concrete block two days after releasing a
report that blamed the military for most of the 200,000 killings in Guatemala's
36-year civil war. Prosecutors had argued that he was killed to prevent any
trials over wartime atrocities.

Disrael Lima, a retired colonel and former head of military intelligence, was
found guilty along with his son, Capt. Byron Lima, and Sgt. Major Jose Obdulio
Villanueva, a former presidential bodyguard. Their lawyers plan to file an
appeal.

"The verdict that this was an extrajudicial killing means it was a political
crime," said Frank La Rue, the director of the Center for Human Rights Legal
Action, which this week filed a lawsuit accusing former junta leaders of
genocide. "There is still a long way to go to get justice in Guatemala, but this
is a good step and a brave step."

The verdict, which a three-judge panel issued in a courtroom packed with human
rights advocates, diplomats and members of the clergy, also resulted in a
20-year sentence for the Rev. Mario Orantes, a priest who helped cover up the
murder. A fifth defendant, the cook at the bishop's residence who was said to
have allowed the killers into the house, was acquitted.

News of the verdict buoyed many local and international human rights groups that
have long tried to bring to justice the military officers who waged a bloody war
against leftist insurgents and civilians alike.

International rights groups also hailed the verdict as an important step forward
after the accords that ended the civil war in 1996. Many important reforms of
the legal system have yet to be carried out, they said, and the bishop's murder
case was seen as a critical test.

"This is an important decision because so many Guatemalans said if justice
cannot be attained in such a high-profile case, what hope is there at all for
the justice system in Guatemala," said Tracy Ulltzeit-Moe, a researcher with
Amnesty International.

The three years leading up to the trial had been marked by death threats against
prosecutors, judges and witnesses, forcing several to seek asylum overseas.
Shortly before the trial began in late March, a hand grenade was tossed into the
home of Judge Jazmin Barrios.

Tight security surrounded the trial as more than 110 witnesses came forward with
testimony that indicated military officials' growing fears about Bishop
Gerardi's investigation into atrocities committed during the civil war. Their
testimony pointed to the military's presidential bodyguard unit, a group that
has long been accused of domestic spying and other abuses since the end of the
war.

A former member of the presidential detail said the military tapped the bishop's
phone during the months that he was preparing his report. A homeless man who
slept outside the seminary where the bishop lived testified that military
officers had paid him to report on the bishop's movements and that they later
enlisted his help in altering the crime scene.

Defense lawyers, who had unsuccessfully argued that their clients had alibis for
the night of the murder, accused the court of caving in to pressure and bribes
from rights groups.

As he left the courthouse, Captain Lima continued to maintain that he was
innocent.

"I am a good soldier," he said. "I'll continue to fight to prove our innocence."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); SENTENCING (92%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); MURDER (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); JUDGES (78%);
LIBERALISM (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
LAWYERS (75%); ACQUITTAL (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); APPEALS (68%); POLITICAL
ASYLUM (60%) SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE
AND MILITARY FORCES;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  THREATS AND THREATENING
MESSAGES

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; GERARDI, JUAN (BISHOP); LIMA, DISRAEL; LIMA, BYRON;
VILLANUEVA, JOSE OBDULIO; ORANTES, MARIO (REV)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (97%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fox Urged to Uphold Pledge on Justice Reforms

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


In the basement of a federal police barracks in Mexico City nine years ago, a
dozen officers nearly beat the life out of Alfonso Martin del Campo, according
to the officer who led the questioning.

They forced Mr. del Campo to sign a prepared confession to the killings of his
sister and her husband. He immediately repudiated it. But his confession, if
that is what it was, has been upheld three times by Mexican courts, where
statements extracted by torture are legally admissible.

Now 35, Mr. del Campo is in the eighth year of a 50-year sentence, and there are
many similar cases in the Mexican justice system.

In Mexico, torture and the concocting of confessions have long been a crude but
effective tactic for an untrained and overwhelmed police force. For President
Vicente Fox, the problem of how to attack lawbreakers without breaking the law
remains paramount in a nation where 95 percent crimes are never solved.

Mr. Fox has promised an end to the traditions of torture and impunity. He has
also promised to review the cases of three "prisoners of conscience" named by
Amnesty International, the human rights group, as Mexico's most prominent
victims of trumped-up political charges. In a report to be published on Tuesday,
Amnesty is urging Mr. Fox to carry out those promises and to begin by revamping
the justice system. In Mexico, Amnesty says, "allegations of torture are hardly
ever properly investigated, and those responsible are virtually certain never to
face justice."

In the countryside, unofficial political bosses have long ruled villages by
force and fear. Soldiers have taken law enforcement roles at the federal and
state levels, and when they torture people, they are judged by military courts,
which rarely produce justice in such cases, Amnesty says. "Impunity for human
rights violations in Mexico is endemic," the group writes.

Although the report differs little from previous assessments of human rights in
Mexico, Amnesty U.S.A.'s Latin American advocacy director, Andrew Miller, said
some factors had changed, if only on the surface, since Mr. Fox took office.

"The discourse has gotten a lot better," Mr. Miller said. "The climate is
friendlier. Concrete improvements. We haven't seen that."

Mr. Fox and his aides have pledged "to put Mexico at the forefront of the world
movement toward the protection of human rights, a place it should have always
kept," in the words of Foreign Minister Jorge G. Castaneda.

Mr. Fox's special ambassador on human rights, Mariclaire Acosta, whose
assignment includes ending torture, acknowledged that terminating the practice
would require "enormous political will" and "an overhaul of the justice system."

The will may be there. But Mr. Fox's government has so far not found the way,
said William F.  Schultz, executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A. "It
is imperative that words translate into definitive actions that produce
immediate and tangible results," Mr. Schultz said.

Amnesty International's "prisoners of conscience" in Mexico include Brig. Gen.
Jose Francisco Gallardo of the army and two farmers, Rodolfo Montiel and Teodoro
Cabrera.

General Gallardo was arrested in November 1993 on charges that he had slandered
the armed forces by criticizing military abuses against civilians. The charges
were dismissed a year later. Yet he remains in prison.

Mr. Montiel and Mr. Cabrera protested wildcat logging by local political bosses.
They were imprisoned in May 1999 on gun and drug charges, despite official
findings that they had been tortured and framed. There are no signs that Mr.
Fox's government is moving to free them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (76%); MILITARY COURTS (76%); SENTENCING (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(67%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (66%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
TORTURE;  CRIME AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (91%) FOX QUESADA, VICENTE (PRES); WEINER, TIM

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (92%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Macedonians Kidnapped By Guerrillas Tell of Abuse

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: SKOPJE, Macedonia, Aug. 11


A human rights group released detailed interviews today it conducted with road
workers kidnapped by Albanian guerrillas this week in which the workers say they
were tortured, forced to perform sexual acts on each other and had initials
carved into their backs.

"He asked everyone for their names," one of the kidnapped men told a researcher
with Human Rights Watch. "He started carving in my back. I didn't know what he
was writing, but it was for about five minutes. It was painful, but I couldn't
move."

Television images of the five kidnapped men shocked and angered many in
Macedonia earlier this week. The more detailed accounts, widely reported here
today, came at a moment of increasing violence between the Macedonian Army and
the ethnic Albanian guerrillas, known as the National Liberation Army.

On Monday the leaders of the two main ethnic communities -- the majority
Macedonian Slavs and the minority ethnic Albanians -- are scheduled to sign the
peace agreement they initialed on Wednesday. The agreement would be the first
step toward the arrival of 3,500 NATO troops to disarm the guerrillas.

But that signing remained a question mark against a backdrop of rapidly
escalating fighting.

Late Friday night an eighth Macedonian soldier died from a mine incident earlier
that day just five miles north of the capital, Skopje. There were reports of
firefights as well as attacks by government helicopter gunships at the same
place.

Today the government reported that the insurgents continued to attack army
positions in the northern village of Radusha in fighting that it said was aimed
at control over Skopje's water reservoir. The government said that five police
officers had been wounded there over the last day.

On the other side, Albanians reported intense shelling of villages northeast of
the city of Tetovo, where much of the fighting has taken place. A local rebel
commander who goes by the nickname Leka said in an interview that the shelling
had been going on over the last 24 hours.

He said that an 11-year-old Albanian boy from the village of Slatino was killed
by one of the shells today and that a number of other Albanian civilians had
been injured, some seriously.

"It's madness," he said in an interview by mobile telephone. "There is something
mad with people giving the orders."

On Friday night hundreds of Slavic Macedonian demonstrators returned to the
center of Skopje, some marching on the United States Embassy to protest what
they say is Western bias in favor of the Albanians. Some threw rocks, but they
were turned back by security forces.

Meantime, Peter Bouckaert, a senior researcher with the New York-based Human
Rights Watch, said that the kidnapping of the five road workers represented "an
increasing pattern of illegal detentions and kidnappings" by the rebels.

He said there had been 14 confirmed cases of abductions of Slavic Macedonians
since late July. The International Committee of the Red Cross has also requested
information from the rebel group about abducted Macedonians, including eight
from fighting earlier this year.

"We are gravely concerned about the safety of Macedonians being detained by the
N.L.A. in the face of this brutal incident," Mr. Bouckaert said, referring to
the abduction of the road workers.

They have refused to speak with foreign reporters, but two of the five abducted
men talked in detail to Mr. Bouckaert on Friday.

Mr. Bouckaert said that three of the men, who work for a road construction
company, were abducted along the highway that runs from Skopje to Tetovo at
around 8 a.m. on Tuesday. Two more were detained several hours later and all
were released after 7 p.m. after a harrowing ordeal of torture, beatings and
sexual abuse.

The abductions took place as Albanian guerrillas were preparing to ambush a
convoy of Macedonian soldiers. That ambush was carried out the next day and 10
soldiers died.

The workers were digging holes for road signs that Tuesday along the same
stretch of road where the attack took place.

One of the men, identified only as a 23 year old whose first name began with the
letter D, said he was beaten with a spade on his knees so hard that the cuts
went to the bone. The captors carved the letter D into his back and forced him
to perform oral sex on one of his friends, according to the testimony.

At one point, the captors put each of the men inside different bunkers and beat
them. One man "started kicking me in the chest and asking what size shoe he was
wearing," the man said. "I told him 45 and he kicked me again and told me he
would kick me until I got the right number.

"I went down from 45 until I got to 42. He kicked me again and said, 'O.K., you
got it right.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Macedonian released by rebels who kidnapped him shows the
first letter of his name carved on his back. (Andrew Testa for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(86%); DISARMAMENT (78%); ETHNICITY (74%); ARMED FORCES (74%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(70%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(67%); HELICOPTERS (50%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (50%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
TELEPHONES (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: FISHER, IAN

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (98%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED
STATES (79%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC);  ALBANIA

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 3, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Israel Threaten Boycott of U.N. Conference on Race

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1168 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Sept. 2


Israeli and American officials warned today that they might walk out of the
United Nations conference on racism here, saying that diplomatic efforts aimed
at eliminating criticism of Israel from conference documents seemed to be
bearing little fruit.

The officials accused Palestinian and Arab delegations of using the conference
as a platform to smear Israel.

The remarks by the Americans and Israelis came after a coalition of rights
groups meeting here separately presented a report that attacked Israel as "an
apartheid regime" that had committed "racist crimes against humanity, including
ethnic cleansing and acts of genocide" in its treatment of Palestinians.

The rights groups submitted the report to the United Nations Human Rights
Commission as delegates considered the wording of their declaration against
racism, but it is unlikely that the governments would adopt such charged
language.

Still, the report and its call for international sanctions against Israel were
sharply criticized by the Israeli foreign minister, Shimon Peres, who described
it to reporters in Tel Aviv as "an outburst of hate." And delegates here said
the document only inflamed tensions, making sensitive negotiations even more
difficult.

"We are reaching a stage that we have to reconsider our participation, to
consider whether to walk out of this conference," Mordechai Yedid, the Israeli
Foreign Ministry's deputy director general for international organizations, said
here tonight.

"We are doing our utmost," said Mr. Yedid, who is leading the Israel delegation.
"We would like to make sure this conference succeeds. The question is, if there
is political will by the Palestinians and their supporters. Our feeling is,
there is no political will."

An American delegate, Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, said
the United States was also considering abandoning the conference. Mr. Lantos
said that he had met with the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, with foreign
ministers and with dozens of delegates, but that little progress was being made.

Mr. Lantos said his team was working hard to resolve the dispute. But today, he
said, when he spoke to Secretary of State Colin L. Powell by telephone, he
advised him that the United States should withdraw if the talks remained
deadlocked.

"If the conference fails, it will fail because the extremists are attempting to
torpedo the conference," Mr. Lantos said in an interview. "This inflammatory
language of the NGO's is reflective of the divisive, discriminatory and hostile
climate created by the Arab extremists at this conference." It was NGO's --
nongovernmental organizations -- that filed the report today to the United
Nations rights commission.

The dispute has completely overshadowed this conference and angered its
organizers and many delegates, who gathered to promote racial tolerance and
international understanding. The meeting, which ends on Friday, is to produce a
declaration against racism and a program of action to prevent future
discrimination. Many people here still hope to reach some consensus.

The parallel meeting of civic and human rights groups has attracted an array of
single-issue parties, ranging from the Untouchables in India to groups
representing Gypsies and transsexuals, as well as the mainstream human rights
groups.

The United Nations meeting welcomes their views, and Mary Robinson, the United
Nations high commissioner for human rights, addressed the parallel meeting last
week.

But the coalition's grab-bag report, incorporating many groups' pet views, put
the official meeting in a bind by including the severe criticism of Israel.

So far there is little to suggest an imminent resolution, despite the efforts by
negotiators from the United States, Norway, South Africa and the United Nations.

The conference's officially proposed documents are not nearly as critical of
Israel as the report prepared by the civic groups. But even the United Nations'
draft documents condemn what they describe as the "racist practices of Zionism"
and "the emergence of racial and violent movements based on racism and
discriminatory ideas, in particular the Zionist movement, which is based on
racial superiority."

So far, officials from the Arab countries have refused to back away from such
language. Amr Moussa, secretary general of the Arab League, reiterated today
that Arab countries would not stop describing Israel as a racist nation.

"Israeli leaders have said that Arabs are scorpions and that they multiply like
rabbits," Mr. Moussa said in his speech today. "Some religious persons in Israel
accuse all Palestinian people of being terrorists. Can there be more serious
racism than this? Yet we are told that we should not speak out on this, and
forget.

"We, as Arabs, condemn what has happened to the Jews and would stand side by
side with the Jewish people to prevent it from happening again," Mr. Moussa
said, referring to the Holocaust. "Yet we want to prevent it not only from
happening to them, but from happening to anybody. The conference should not be
selective in the kind of racism it focuses on."

The polarization has been evident in tension among the thousands of people
taking part in private meetings on the periphery of the conference.

Last week members of Palestinian and Jewish groups shouted at each other during
competing rallies. And late Saturday, about 25 Jews walked out of the meeting in
which the NGO's adopted their scathing criticism of Israel. The last straw, said
Rabbi Abraham Cooper, was when someone suggested removing a section protesting
bias against Jews.

"Every single Jew in the audience got up and walked out," said Rabbi Cooper, who
is the associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center for Holocaust Studies in
Los Angeles. "This document is the worst anti-Jewish document since the end of
World War II."

Shawqi Issa, a spokesman for the Arab caucus of civic groups, defended the
document and said most groups supported it.

"What is apartheid?" asked Mr. Issa, who belongs to the Palestinian Law Society.
"What is ethnic cleansing? Look at what is happening in the West Bank. It's the
same as it was in South Africa. The house demolition, the removing of trees, the
attempt to empty areas of Palestinian inhabitants -- we say that is ethnic
cleansing."

Several large international rights groups, including Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International, protested the use of words like genocide in describing
Israel. Members of those groups, who took part in drafting the coalition report,
fear that the plight of many people, including Gypsies, Kurds and Tibetans, will
now be overlooked.

"The use of intemperate and inaccurate language to describe Israel is going to
cast a shadow on the whole document," said Reed Brody, the advocacy director for
Human Rights Watch. "Our position is that Israel commits serious abuses,
including extrajudicial executions, torture and arbitrary arrests, and should be
criticized for its record.

"But the use of the term genocide is not appropriate."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mordechai Yedid, of Israel's Foreign Ministry, said yesterday
that documents at a United Nations race conference reflected anti-Semitism.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (92%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (75%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); HATE CRIME (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE
RESOLUTION (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST
RACISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ANTI-SEMITISM;  JEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (88%); SHIMON PERES (74%) SWARNS, RACHEL L; YEDID, MORDECHAI;
LANTOS, TOM (REPR); PERES, SHIMON (MIN)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2001 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture Charge Pits Professor Vs. Professor

BYLINE:   By CECILIA VALDES

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 2030 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Sept. 7


Felipe Aguero says the nightmarish evening in late September 1973 is forever
fixed in his mind. Then 21 and a student at Catholic University, Mr. Aguero had
been arrested for having leftist pamphlets in his car five days after the
military coup led by Gen. Augusto Pinochet. At the National Stadium in Santiago,
a hood was put over his head, and he was stripped, burned and beaten, he said.
When his captors allowed him to dress, the hood came loose for a moment, and he
caught a glimpse of one of his torturers.

Fifteen years later, Mr. Aguero, by then a professor, was at an academic
conference in Santiago. Among the 15 or so professors at the table, Mr. Aguero
said, was the face he saw that night. "I never forgot that face," Mr. Aguero
said in a telephone interview from Miami, where he now lives.

The face that Mr. Aguero said he remembered belongs to Emilio Meneses, a
prominent and popular professor of military studies at the Institute of
Political Science at Catholic University in Santiago. Mr. Aguero, who teaches at
the School of International Studies at the University of Miami, said he was too
shaken to confront Mr. Meneses at the 1988 conference and didn't make any
accusation until February this year, prompted by a more open atmosphere in
Chile.

Mr. Meneses said he was shocked by the charges. He denies torturing Mr. Aguero
or anyone else. "I had no relation of any kind with Professor Aguero's
interrogation or stay in the stadium," Mr. Meneses said in a written response to
questions from The New York Times. "I did not know him then, nor did I see him."
Mr. Meneses said he did spend about three weeks as a naval reservist at the
stadium at the time, but his job was to process arriving prisoners and he was
too far away to hear or see any abuse. Only weeks after he left the stadium did
he hear word of the torture and murder, he said. In May, Mr. Meneses filed suit
in Chile, accusing Mr. Aguero of libel, a crime punishable there by three years
in prison.

"What is really at stake is the right of any person to be considered innocent
unless demonstrated otherwise in court," Mr. Meneses wrote in his response.
"Nobody is above this essential principle no matter how much he or she may have
suffered or endured."

The case, which was first reported in the United States by the Chronicle of
Higher Education, has shaken the academic world here and abroad. In April more
than 200 scholars in the United States from schools like Harvard, Georgetown,
Duke and Notre Dame and in Japan, Latin America and Europe signed a letter
supporting Mr. Aguero. They promised to boycott academic conferences attended by
Mr. Meneses.

In Chile, scholars say the academic world has made little public reckoning for
the cooperation some members gave to the military regime. After taking power,
General Pinochet put military officers in charge of the universities, and they
fired professors with dissident political beliefs. Many students and professors
were killed, jailed or sent into exile. Catholic University in particular became
the president's brain pool, churning out experts who helped the military create
a free-market economy, hobble unions, rewrite the constitution and overhaul the
education and health systems.

After General Pinochet stepped down as president in 1990, a human rights
commission documented 3,197 cases of people who were killed or disappeared at
the hands of security forces.

But Chileans have begun publicly confronting the country's history of torture
only in the last couple of years, after General Pinochet, who remained head of
the army until 1998, was first arrested on human rights charges in London.
Dozens of cases against other former military officers are working their way
through Chilean courts, although this summer one of the courts declared General
Pinochet mentally incompetent to defend himself. And last year, as a result of a
national commission that included the armed forces, human rights organizations
and the Roman Catholic Church, the military admitted human rights abuses and
turned over information about the whereabouts of some victims' bodies.

Now, scholars say, it's academia's turn. "Catholic University needs to do a
serious and responsible internal debate," said Carlos Huneeus, a professor at
the institute who is also an expert on General Pinochet's 17-year rule. "It
needs to take a look at its history, admit the mistakes and take responsibility
for collaborating with the military regime."

At Catholic University, the divisions are reflected in an open letter to
academics from the political science department's student council. Some students
feel Mr. Meneses should be fired and others think he should stay until proved
guilty, while a third group says he should be judged only on his academic
record, which is not in question.

As for the professors, some have sided with Mr. Aguero, while others, including
Mr. Huneeus, insist that Mr. Meneses should not be condemned unless the
allegations are proved. Manfred Wilhelmy, a professor at the institute, said:
"Meneses should be given the benefit of the doubt. I don't think Catholic
University should respond to isolated accusations or try to be a substitute for
the courts."

In April, Mr. Meneses was given four months of paid leave to give him time to
clear his name, according to a letter the university sent him. The leave was
extended indefinitely last month as a result of an unrelated case. This year the
former military attache at the American embassy in Chile, Col. Mark Mayer of the
Air Force, sent a letter to the commander in chief of the Chilean Air Force
accusing Mr. Meneses of soliciting two American military contractors for
payments to lobby for them. They were what was then the McDonnell Douglas
Corporation and the Lockheed Martin Corporation, and they were competing for a
contract to sell fighter jets to the Chilean Air Force. Mr. Meneses, whose
university chair is paid for by the defense ministry, has denied the allegation.

The university's Secretariat General is investigating the lobbying charge. The
university rector, Pedro Pablo Rosso, who will finally decide what happens to
Mr. Meneses, declined to comment.

Mr. Aguero, who left Chile in 1982 and earned a doctorate in political science
from Duke University, said he debated for years about what to do. He ran into
Mr. Meneses frequently at academic conferences after the meeting 13 years ago,
but he avoided contact, overcome with shame and fear.

"It was ridiculous," he said. "I was embarrassed about seeing him, when it was
he who should have been ashamed about himself."

Mr. Aguero said he had finally found the resolve to confront Mr. Meneses this
year after details about the torture of a family friend who later died, Eugenio
Ruiz Tagle, came to light.

Three former prisoners accused the second in command of the Chilean Air Force,
Gen. Hernan Gabrielli, of torturing Mr. Tagle and others. This was the first
time someone so high in the military and on active duty had been charged with
human rights violations. (General Gabrielli brought a libel suit against the
prisoners, but it was dismissed; five cases brought by other former prisoners or
their families are still pending. Under Chilean law, the statute of limitations
on the crime of torture is five years, which has long passed.)

Mr. Aguero said that when he learned about Mr. Tagle's suffering -- his nose was
smashed, his ears were sliced off and his back was broken in several places --
he decided that he shared responsibility for those torturers who had escaped
punishment. "I am a silent accomplice," he said.

In February he sent a confidential letter to the director of Mr. Meneses'
department, Alfredo Rehren, and it soon found its way into the Chilean press.

Mr. Aguero said there was other evidence that Mr. Meneses did more than just
process prisoners at the stadium's entrance. Francisco Justiniano, who is a
lawyer in Santiago and was a prisoner at the stadium around the time that Mr.
Aguero was there, said he saw Mr. Meneses, whom he knew as a fellow student at
Catholic University, inside the stadium, waving a gun and barking orders at
prisoners. "He identified me, called my name and made me stand in front of the
prisoners," Mr. Justiniano said, although he added that he did not see Mr.
Meneses abuse anyone.

Mr. Meneses denied Mr. Justiniano's account, and he insisted that Mr. Aguero was
mistaken. Indeed, witnesses' testimony is notoriously unreliable only hours
after an event, let alone years later. Mr. Meneses says he was at the stadium as
part of a navy team that questioned arriving prisoners about their identity and
when and where they were arrested. After being called to service during the
state of emergency, Mr. Meneses wrote, "I was liable to be court-martialed if I
refused my assignment." He said his team couldn't see into the stadium bowl
where those arrested were kept or into the rooms above the stadium where they
were tortured.

"It was impossible to hear the loudspeakers, screams or any other indication of
torture of prisoners assigned to me," Mr. Meneses said in his written response.
He said he didn't hear about the abuses until several weeks after leaving the
stadium and didn't believe them at first. "Full realization of what happened
came only several years later," he said.

Jose Zalaquett, a Chilean human rights lawyer, said in an interview: "Meneses's
explanations about the stadium are absurd and ridiculous. He was in the critical
place at the critical time yet he saw nothing."

The statement that he had no knowledge of any torture is also what prompted many
professors abroad to sign the letter supporting Mr. Aguero.

"I felt Meneses' account about the stadium, describing it like a resort where he
never saw any human rights violation, needed at least a moral sanction,"
Patricio Navia, a professor at New York University, said in an interview. He
wrote the letter and sent it to his friends, and soon it was broadly circulating
in academic circles.

The letter says at one point: "We reject the complacent and self-congratulatory
mode in which Meneses has referred to his participation as 'interrogator' of
detainees in the National Stadium. We are deeply disturbed that a person who
acknowledges having participated in interrogations in the National Stadium is
today teaching young university students."

But Mr. Meneses said he was being convicted without a fair hearing: "Those
academics have every right to support Aguero's sorry experience, but they are
absolutely wrong in condemning another person without a trial in a proper
court."

Tens of thousands are estimated to have been tortured during General Pinochet's
reign. An estimated 12,000 people were detained at the National Stadium, most
enduring some form of torture, until the center was shut in November 1973 in
preparation for a qualifying match for the World Cup soccer championship, said
Carmen Luz Parot, who is filming a documentary about the stadium. Dozens of
prisoners were executed, including the American journalist Charles Hormann, a
case that inspired the movie "Missing."

Mr. Aguero said he had ended up there after being detained with a fellow
Catholic University student, Fernando Villagran. The two men were first taken to
an air force base and beaten during interrogation, he said. A sympathetic air
force captain, Jorge Silva, learned they were to be shot and took them to the
stadium to spare them from death, he said in a television interview.

Mr. Aguero said he had entered a terror-filled world, with prisoners crowded
into the bleachers by day. Rooms above the stadium were converted into torture
chambers and holding cells. The place reeked of decaying corpses, he said, and
there was frequent machine-gun fire.

Mr. Aguero is fighting the libel suit by seeking to prove that his charges
against Mr. Meneses are true, said Ciro Colombara, one of Mr. Aguero's lawyers.

"If the army, the Catholic Church, the medical community have acknowledged their
role in human rights violations, the university should do the same," Mr. Aguero
said. "Its role is to pursue the truth. I do not feel the higher authorities at
Catholic University are up to the moral standard to face this responsibility."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: September 13, 2001



CORRECTION: An article in Arts & Ideas on Saturday about Emilio Meneses, a
Chilean professor who was recently accused of torture during the military coup
in Chile in 1973, misstated the New York University affiliation of Patricio
Navia, who wrote a letter denouncing Mr. Meneses. Mr. Navia is a graduate
student, not a professor.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Felipe Aguero, above, says he was tortured in the National
Stadium, shown at right after the coup in Chile in September 1973, and caught a
glimpse of one of his torturers. He says he encountered the man, Emilio Meneses,
at an academic meeting 15 years later. Mr. Meneses was at the stadium but denies
torturing anyone. (Top left, Cindy Karp/Black Star; bottom left, Claudio
Perez/I.M.A.; near left, Marcelo Montecino/I.M.A.)(pg. B11); Soldiers guarding
prisoners in Chile's National Stadium after the 1973 coup that toppled Salvador
Allende's socialist government. (Marcelo Montecino/I.M.A.)(pg. B13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (90%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(77%); LITIGATION (77%); ARRESTS (77%); LIBEL & SLANDER (77%); INTERVIEWS (73%);
MILITARY RULE (72%); COUPS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (67%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (63%) TORTURE

COMPANY: CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION (51%)

ORGANIZATION: CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY (SANTIAGO, CHILE); UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI

PERSON: VALDES, CECILIA; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); MENESES, EMILIO; AGUERO,
FELIPE

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (95%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); JAPAN (79%); EUROPE (79%); LATIN
AMERICA (54%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Group Cites a Setback in Haiti

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 26


In Haiti, respect for human rights and the rule of law has fallen to its lowest
point since democratic rule was restored in 1994, according to a report by
Amnesty International, to be released on Thursday.

The rights setback comes on top of Haiti's many other problems, which include a
political stalemate, withering poverty and the freezing of foreign aid.

The report warns that freedom of expression is elusive in Haiti and that some
critics of the government have been singled out for physical attack by people
claiming to be loyal to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

The report also faults the police, judges and courts for being unable to
guarantee security and justice, especially citing the hundreds of people killed
after a military coup toppled Mr. Aristide in 1991. The coup came just seven
months after he was elected in Haiti's first national democratic elections.

According to Amnesty International, the problems now are not nearly as grim as
the terror that swept the nation in the years immediately after the coup. Still,
the human rights group argues, they put at risk the gains made since a
multinational force restored Mr. Aristide to office in 1994.

The next year, Mr. Aristide turned over power to a hand-picked successor, but he
was elected again last year, in November. Much of the international community
boycotted the campaign, withholding election observers, out of lingering
concerns over fraudulent local and parliamentary elections in 2000.

"There has been significant progress, but it is threatened now," said William F.
Schulz, the executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A. "It is a
situation that threatens to unravel at a far faster pace."

"I'm afraid if the concerns we raise are not addressed," Mr. Schulz added, "then
Haiti may well slip back into the kind of human rights disaster that it has
experienced for much of its history."

In the months after the killing of Jean Dominique, a popular radio commentator,
in April 2000, other journalists have been threatened and several radio stations
have been attacked. The death of Mr. Dominique is still unresolved, and
according to the report, the judge investigating it briefly resigned, saying
that he had been stymied by political pressure and threats. He returned after
receiving government reassurances.

Members of opposition political parties have also been harassed and threatened,
the report said, often while the police do nothing to stop groups claiming to be
supporters of the coalition in power, Lavalas.

This summer, when armed men attacked several police stations, the government
arrested 41 people, mostly members of opposition groups, only to release them
without their being charged.

The government has successfully prosecuted several dozen soldiers and officials
who carried out two of the country's worst massacres, but the courts continue to
be crippled, the report said.

Leslie Voltaire, a member of Mr. Aristide's cabinet, denied there was any
repression of public opinion.

"We have many radio stations around the country and you can hear anything on
them," Mr. Voltaire said. "I think freedom of expression is a right."

Mr. Voltaire, who is the minister for Haitians living abroad, said that the
government was committed to strengthening the judicial system and that it had
undertaken training programs for the police and judges.

"We have inherited some structures that are not that easy to change, because you
need the education of police and judges," he said.

He said that the biggest roadblock to progress had been the continuing standoff
between Lavalas and the Democratic Convergence, a loose coalition of opposition
parties. Mr. Voltaire said Lavalas was willing to allow new elections for seven
Senate seats that were disputed by the opposition and international observers,
and to permit elections ahead of schedule for the other seats.

But opposition groups have doubted Mr. Aristide's sincerity, saying that
whatever concessions he made were done in order to free up about $500 million in
foreign aid that had been frozen for years.

"The situation is pretty dismal overall," said James Morrell, the research
director for the Center for International Policy, a nonprofit group based in
Washington that monitors human rights and helped Mr. Aristide during his exile.
"You can only take a very limited degree of hope from these latest moves,
because the twists and turns in the past have not led to a fundamental
improvement."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); COUPS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
ELECTIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); RULE OF LAW (90%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (90%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%); POLITICS (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); MARTIAL LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); JOURNALISM (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); POLICE FORCES (75%); MILITARY
RULE (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); BOYCOTTS (72%); EXECUTIVES (70%);
ARMED FORCES (69%); ELECTION MONITORING (68%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (61%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  CRIME AND CRIMINALS;  COURTS;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;
COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: ARISTIDE, JEAN-BERTRAND (PRES); GONZALEZ, DAVID

COUNTRY: HAITI (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: HAITI

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 22, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Paramilitaries Adjust Attack Strategies

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: BARRANCABERMEJA, Colombia, Jan. 21


Block by block and house by house, gunmen from Colombia's surging right-wing
paramilitary army are waging a fierce urban battle against leftist rebels in
this grimy northern industrial center in a conflict that is usually fought in
the countryside.

In Colombia's brutal civil war, paramilitary gunmen have usually fought leftist
guerrillas in dusty, isolated hamlets, often massacring unarmed villagers
accused of providing rebels with supplies. But in the last few weeks, the United
Self-Defense Forces of Colombia have retooled for urban warfare in this city of
300,000, abruptly changing strategies in the new environment, say human rights
workers and the combatants themselves.

Instead of mass killings, the paramilitaries have, for the most part, been
selectively killing rebels. Instead of terrorizing residents, the paramilitaries
are paying handsomely to rent houses in battleground neighborhoods, as well as
for supplies and information that can be used against the rebels.

And in contrast to warfare in the countryside, human rights groups say, the
militia members are killing fewer people than the rebels, who have responded to
the threat in neighborhoods they long controlled with a furious assault on those
they accuse of supporting the paramilitaries.

"In a rural zone, it's very different," said a commander who goes by the name
Lexor and who has about 240 paramilitary fighters in Barrancabermeja. Like most
of those interviewed on both sides, he spoke on condition that his nom de guerre
be used.

"In a rural zone, you can shoot where you want, and there's no problem," he
said. "Here you can't because there's a civilian population in the middle, and
our war is direct. Very direct."

That is not to say it is not brutal. Already, 38 killings have been registered
since Jan. 1, a pace that would give Barrancabermeja 637 homicides for the year.
That would top the 567 last year, a rate nearly 20 times that of New York City.

Barrancabermeja (pronounced Bah-RAHN-kah-ber-MEH-huh) is, in fact, the most
violent city in Colombia. The country has been racked for 36 years by a conflict
that pits two rebel armies against the government and the outlawed
paramilitaries, which draw resources from large landowners and drug-trafficking.

Lying in the middle of rich oil deposits on the banks of the muddy Magdalena
River, Barrancabermeja has always had a frontier reputation, a city of hardy
adventurers and tough oil workers from Colombia's largest refineries. It is also
in the heart of Colombia's second largest rebel group, the National Liberation
Army, which was born in 1964. Its guerrillas always operated urban cells, and
the largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, also had a
presence here.

Now, the city is being fought over because the government is considering, as a
basis for peace talks, allowing the National Liberation Army to control a
2,000-square-mile zone in the jungles and cattle ranches across the Magdalena
River in Bolivar province.

The paramilitaries, who in the last two years pushed their way into the region,
oppose such a move. They say they are simply protecting the region from becoming
what the southern Caqueta province became when the government created a similar
zone two years ago for the larger rebel group: a safe haven for rebels to hide
kidnapping victims, initiate attacks and cultivate coca.

Government officials, villagers and experts on the conflict contend, though,
that the paramilitaries here are getting revenues from the regional production
of coca -- the raw material used to make cocaine -- and they do not want to lose
it.

Barrancabermeja, the only large city in the region and an important juncture for
everything from coca leaves to contraband gasoline, has strategic importance for
the armed bands.

"Barrancabermeja is the heart of Colombia; here we pump out all the energy we
need," said Lt. Col. Hernan Moreno, commander of the New Granada Battalion in
Barrancabermeja, which is sending specially trained urban commandos into the
neighborhoods to restore order. "The takeover of power is thus of prime
importance to these armed groups."

The paramilitaries gained their first significant stronghold in December, taking
over a neighborhood the rebels had held. The fighting is now taking place in
impoverished neighborhoods in the city's northeast and southeast, communities of
wooden and cinderblock homes. With lush vegetation and the chirping of tropical
birds, the neighborhoods look peaceful.

But, especially when darkness masks the movement of armed men, combatants
carrying everything from AK-47's to handguns and bombs go after their quarry.

"In the rural area, they fight mountain to mountain; here, it's block to block,
house to house," said Eduardo, a 22-year-old rebel. "There are some comrades
from the country who come here and say, 'Man, we can't fight here. It's too
hard.' "

The paramilitary gunmen are just as fierce, placing black hoods over their faces
as they enter rebel strongholds looking for targets.

"We don't have any problem with the subversion because, you know, we go in with
everything we have and there's no way for them to beat us back," said Lexor, the
paramilitary commander. "As for the deaths, well, there have to be deaths. To
clean all this, you have to have them. We are here because people were so tired
of the subversion. The idea is to take Barrancabermeja, piece by piece."

When there's a lull, young men in jeans and designer shirts keep vigil on street
corners and hillsides, jabbering on cell phones and walkie-talkies. Along one
narrow, dead-end street in one rebel stronghold is a small brick house that
serves as the home and headquarters of a rebel leader who is called Yan. Slight,
with wire-rim glasses and dressed in a pressed button-down shirt, Yan looks like
a college student. In fact, he said he was a university-trained systems engineer
who joined the rebels three years ago.

"They began to pass out out pamphlets, announcing their arrival," he said of the
paramilitary as he sat at a kitchen table, a bodyguard at his side. "They
started to justify, to kill people who are collaborators of the guerrillas. They
started to give money to young people to join the paramilitaries. They offered
$250, $300."

Yan's version of events is that the rebels are protecting residents from
paramilitaries. "That's why we have arms," he said. "We don't let them come here
and kill them."

The paramilitaries make the same claim. "They said, 'Please, we need the
presence of the Self-Defense Forces,' " said Julian, the paramilitary leader in
Bolivar Province.  "These were in places that did not have a chance of free
speech, free movement."

Human rights workers tell a different story.

"The paramilitaries are co-opting people, as many as they can, buying people and
their services," said Francisco Campos of Credhos, a human rights group in
Barrancabermeja. "They're neutralizing communities and organizations to gain
their sympathy. If they don't get support, they just want to make sure they stop
the rebels from having support."

Human rights organizations, including United States-based Human Rights Watch,
and church workers say the military has played a role by -- at the very least --
passively allowing paramilitary gunmen to wage war here. The military says it is
vigorously pursuing paramilitaries as well as rebels.

Indeed, at night the military's urban commandos enter dark, dangerous
neighborhoods in Humvees and tanks. Armed with flak jackets, helmets and
high-powered rifles, they enter pool halls, cantinas and homes, searching for
weapons. The soldiers are always on edge, knowing an ambush is a possibility.

"In an urban zone, if there are shots, I am prohibited from shooting unless we
have a clear target right in front of us," said Colonel Moreno. "There have been
cases where we've had to move out after being shot at."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Special forces search Barrancabermeja, Colombia, for explosives
and firearms on an evening patrol. (Robert Stolarik for The New York Times) Map
of Colombia shows the location of Barrancabermeja: In Barrancabermeja,
paramilitaries have focused on fighting rebels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (89%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HOMICIDE
(76%); CITIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (67%); NARCOTERRORISM (64%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (50%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (50%); PEACE PROCESS (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF COLOMBIA (57%)

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BARRANCABERMEJA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 23, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Of Human Wrongs

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The "Commission on Human Rights" is the group of 52 nations that decided in
Geneva last week that China -- while torturing and killing members of the Falun
Gong, raping Tibet's culture and imprisoning foreign nationals -- was not to be
censured in any way.

At the same time, the U.N. group, turning to the uprising of Palestinians as
well as Hamas-Hezbollah terrorism, found Arabs blameless and called on Israel --
which is not permitted to sit on the commission -- "to desist from all forms of
violation of human rights." Because diplomatic hypocrisy rarely rises to such a
level, let's examine who stood with whom on these votes.

Supporting the United States on the attempt to urge China to stop its oppression
were most European nations, Canada and two South American countries.

Approving China's brutal internal crackdown were its Communist allies in Vietnam
and Cuba, Arab and African bastions of democracy from Libya and Syria to Algeria
and Liberia, as well as China's ally Pakistan and intimidated neighbor India.

Abstaining -- knowingly blocking pressure on China -- were a dozen nations
including Mexico (Vicente Fox thinks of business first) and Colombia, where
paramilitary forces literally chop up rebels with chainsaws (and whose
president, Andres Pastrana, constantly has his hand out for U.S. aid).

Here is the anti-Israel lineup: 50 nations. This includes France, where Jacques
Chirac is fearful of speaking out against Syria's occupation of France's
abandoned ally, Lebanon.

Only two nations refused to blame Israel for Arafat's war: the United States and
Guatemala. (Who's the Israeli ambassador to Guatemala? Make that man foreign
minister.) The 50 nations siding against Israel called for "international
protection" of the warring Palestinians, thereby encouraging Arafat to continue
his violence.

Against this background consider Israel's response to Arafat's escalation to
mortar attacks on Israeli villages. If mortar shells landed on U.S. soil from
Canada or Mexico, and either of those governments tacitly approved such attacks,
the U.S. would take military cross-border action to wipe out the mortar
positions and end the bombardment.

That's what Ariel Sharon ordered. The punitive raid was not "reoccupation" of
Gaza land that Israel wants no part of. The local Israeli commander, the morning
after that night's response, asked for a delay until nightfall to more safely
withdraw his troops; perhaps to protect them, he then said his force might stay
"days, weeks, months."

That prompted the usual State Department even-handwringing from Colin Powell,
criticizing both mortar escalation and the "excessive" raid. Worse, to Israelis,
their subsequent pullback appeared to be on American orders, which I'm told it
was not.

That miscommunication gave Sharon a black eye in the media, but in the following
day's phone conversation with President Bush, the prime minister recalled that
as a general he also had occasionally said the wrong thing to the press; sources
here confirm there was no acrimony in the call. (Sharon is "Arik" to Powell,
"Ariel" to Bush.)

His strategy, it seems to me, is to apply the Powell Doctrine of
disproportionate military response to the warring Palestinian leadership --
while now easing economic pressures on the Palestinian people. The hope is to
build bottom-up pressure on the swaggering warriors from suffering working
people.

That requires a fierce answer to Arafat's undeclared war. As Americans painfully
learned in Vietnam, when one side fights to win and the other side fights to
settle, the side fighting to win wins.

Sharon will end the war when he convinces Arafat -- or the silent Palestinians
misled by him for so long -- that a war against Israel cannot be won. Nothing
silences guns like the prospect of no victory. If this is not the time for
peacemakers, history can still honor the war-enders.

To begin the war-ending process, Israel needs an unwavering ally in the Security
Council and in Geneva to demonstrate to Arab dictators and queasy abstainers
that no "international force" of human-rights hypocrites will intervene to help
defeat the Jews.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); TERRORISM (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(77%); HEZBOLLAH (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); HAMAS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); ARMED FORCES (65%); RIOTS (62%) PALESTINIANS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%); HAMAS (57%); HEZBOLLAH (57%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (50%); JACQUES CHIRAC (50%) SAFIRE, WILLIAM; ARAFAT,
YASIR; SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (90%); XIZANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); ISRAEL (96%); CHINA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (94%); GUATEMALA (93%); CANADA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); TIBET (92%);
FRANCE (92%); MEXICO (92%); SYRIA (92%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); LIBYA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); VIET NAM (79%); EUROPE (79%); LIBERIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Awful Task: Assessing 4 Roles in Death of Thousands

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, April 26


The bulky neo-Classical Palace of Justice in the heart of Brussels suggests a
yearning for order and rules, but anarchy and bloodletting on a staggering scale
are the focus in one of its courts.

An unlikely quartet of accused are lined up in the dock. One is the former
mother superior of a Roman Catholic convent, Sister Gertrude, and next to her is
Sister Maria Kisito, both wearing the beige and brown habits of their
Benedictine order. Beside them are a physics professor, Vincent Ntezimana, and a
businessman, Alphonse Higaniro.

All four face charges of complicity in multiple murders during the frenzy in
Rwanda in 1994 in which an estimated half million civilians were shot, hacked or
beaten to death.

What makes the scene in this somber, marble-clad courtroom so unusual is that
for the first time, a jury of 12 citizens is judging people accused of war
crimes in another country. Until now, military or civilian magistrates have
decided such cases.

Moreover, the suspects are not politicians, or military or police officers.

They have all pleaded not guilty.

The trial, which opened on April 17 and is expected to last until the end of
May, has stirred wide interest among lawyers and human rights advocates, who see
it as opening a new chapter in the use of human rights law.

It goes well beyond the legal precedent established with the arrest of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, Chile's former dictator, in Britain at the request of Spanish
authorities. He was eventually released for health reasons and returned to
Chile.

"This case is clearly a big step in applying the principle that justice has no
borders and that every country has the right and the moral duty to investigate
the worst atrocities," said Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights Watch.

The trial also carries great political significance for Belgium, Rwanda's former
colonial master. Although victims' relatives filed complaints as long ago as
1994, the issue of whether a trial should be held has been divisive.

Supporters of a trial maintain that Belgium bears a special responsibility for
the killings in Rwanda. When the Hutu majority began its bloody rampage against
the Tutsi minority (and after 10 Belgian soldiers were killed), Belgium pulled
out of the United Nations peacekeeping force there. That led to the withdrawal
of the rest of the force, easing the way for the killers.

Further, after the genocide ended and a Tutsi-led government took office,
members and supporters of the violent Hutu government fled to Belgium.

It took a Belgian parliamentary inquiry, agitation by human rights groups and
six years of unrelenting work by the investigating judge, Damien Vandermeersch,
to bring the case to trial. At one point, the judge accused the attorney
general's office of obstructing his work. Others accused the influential
Christian Democrats of trying to block a trial in which nuns were implicated.

But the political mood changed last year, when the new prime minister, Guy
Verhofstadt of the Liberal Party, visited Rwanda and apologized for Belgium's
failure to do more to prevent the slaughter.

Now the trial is seen as a way not only to repay a moral debt to Rwanda's
victims, but also to revive credibility in Belgium after scandals over
corruption and an inept judicial system. "The government wants to improve the
country's image and restore faith in its institutions, no doubt about it," said
Dirk Rambour, a lawyer representing relatives of Rwandan victims.

Now, the government is sparing no efforts on the trial. The court has called
more than 170 witnesses, many of whom will be brought from Rwanda, Burundi and
elsewhere at the expense of the government, which will also pay most legal fees.

The proceedings in Brussels are running parallel to other trials dealing with
the Rwanda genocide, one of the worst atrocities of the 20th century.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, set up by the United Nations in
Arusha, Tanzania, has so far convicted eight people; among its 44 detainees,
nine are on trial, most them high-ranking former officials. In Rwanda, 4,500
people have been tried, with close to 100 executed. More than 100,000 people
await trial there.

While the four defendants here are not among the presumed architects of the
genocide, their trial is likely to disclose new details and is drawing much
public attention.

The defendants, who had been living in Belgium and are not in detention, are
charged under Belgian laws that allow trials here for people accused of war
crimes elsewhere. The laws, adopted to carry out rights conventions that the
country has ratified over the years, give Belgium some of the most sweeping
powers anywhere to try international crimes.

Although the four did not act in concert, all are accused of collaborating with
the Hutu militias as they killed civilians in Butare, in the south.

Sister Gertrude, 42, born Consolata Mukangango, and Sister Maria Kisito, 36,
born Julienne Mukabutera, are accused of betraying 5,000 to 7,000 people who had
sought sanctuary at their convent. The refugees, many of them women and
children, had arrived from the surrounding hills after killings had begun there.

Prosecutors said the two Hutu nuns, instead of providing refuge for the
persecuted in church tradition, drove the Tutsi out of the compound and then
stood by as Hutu militiamen began the massacre. The nuns are also accused of
informing the militia that some refugees had fled to other nearby buildings,
including a health center. Sister Maria Kisito is accused of providing jerrycans
of gasoline that the death squads used to set fire to a garage in which 500
people were hiding.

Professor Ntezimana, 40, is accused of drawing up a list of Tutsi employees and
students from the University of Rwanda for the killers. He is also charged with
responsibility for the deaths of at least seven Tutsi, including a colleague,
his wife and their children.

Ndoba Gasana, a teacher from Kigali who leads a rights group and is the brother
of the professor's slain colleague, appeared deeply moved after testifying.
"This trial is a public recognition of so much suffering," he said. "I will tell
others at home about what happens here so it may comfort them also."

Mr. Higaniro, 52, the fourth defendant, is accused of inciting killings by
calling on his factory staff to "finish the cleaning" of Tutsi.

In the first days of the trial, the 12 jurors and their 12 alternates have been
given a crash course in Rwanda's ethnic divisions and turbulent history by a
number of expert witnesses. "The jurors will have to overcome a great cultural
barrier to understand a situation unlike any they have ever known," said Alison
Des Forges, a rights advocate who is to testify.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Brussels, for the first time, a civilian jury is weighing
charges against people accused of involvement in massacres elsewhere, in this
case Rwanda. The defendants, who pleaded not guilty, are Sister Maria Kisito,
left, and Sister Gertrude; Alphonse Higaniro, below left; and Prof. Vincent
Ntezimana. (Photographs by Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); RELIGION (90%); CHRISTIANS
& CHRISTIANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); LAWYERS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); MAGISTRATES (77%); JUDGES (77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); HOMICIDE
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); CIVIL WAR (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%);
POLITICS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(72%); GENOCIDE (68%); ARMED FORCES (68%); PEACEKEEPING (66%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(62%); MURDER (57%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE;  NUNS

ORGANIZATION: ;ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KISITO, MARIA (NUN); GERTRUDE (NUN); HIGANIRO,
ALPHONSE; NTEZIMANA, VINCENT (PROF)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (94%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (94%); CHILE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bombing Adds Leverage to Colombia Bill Bolstering Military

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 27


A hotly debated anti-terrorism bill that would give Colombia's public security
forces broad new powers is poised to gain ground after four people died last
week in a bombing outside a Bogota university.

To detractors -- among them the United Nations, human rights groups and at least
two United States congressmen -- the legislation would undermine basic rights,
insulate the military from outside scrutiny and possibly spawn new paramilitary
groups. Passage of the bill, they argue, would signify that Colombia's leaders
are more committed to waging war than supporting a peace process that has broad
international backing.

To Colombia's military and its supporters, the legislation is seen as a
necessary and logical step.

The attack on Friday was the third major bombing this month in one of Colombia's
three most important cities. The attacks have killed 12 people and sparked fears
that subversive groups have resorted to indiscriminate bombings in urban areas.

Debate over the proposal has already prompted angry words, with one key
supporter, Senator Enrique Gomez, saying that by opposing the legislation, human
rights groups and the United Nations are helping Colombia's leftist guerrillas.

In an interview, Mr. Gomez accused Anders Kompass, the Colombia director for the
United Nations high commissioner for human rights, of "representing the
guerrillas here, by the things that he says and what he has done."

The bill, first drafted by Senator German Vargas and approved by the Senate,
would allow security forces to detain suspects up to seven days without charges,
to press civilians into quasi-military service and to arrest people who have
been singled out by fellow citizens as criminals or subversives.

The bill exempts members of security forces from being investigated if
accusations of violations surface during operations against "criminal
organizations." It places responsibility with the military, instead of
government officials, for autopsies and investigations of rebels and criminals
killed in combat.

And it stipulates that a military affairs ombudsman would investigate violations
by security forces and take over investigations now carried out by other
entities in the government's ombudsman's office.

Now being debated in the lower house, the legislation has surprised experts
inside and outside the country because it comes at a time when President Andres
Pastrana's government has gone to great lengths to portray the military as
seriously committed to breaking ties with right-wing paramilitary groups.

Colombia has received $1.1 billion from the United States in mostly military
assistance after some members of the American Congress were assured that
Colombia was making progress in human rights. The European Union recently
pledged an additional $300 million in social spending after receiving similar
assurances.

"To me, this is a radical departure from the direction we had hoped that the
Colombian government would go in," said Representative Bill Delahunt, a
Massachusetts Democrat who sits on the International Relations Committee. Mr.
Delahunt and Representative Sam Farr of California wrote a letter to several
leading members of the Colombian Congress, saying future aid could be
jeopardized if the bill passed.

Military officials have bristled at the criticism, arguing that Colombia needs
the legislation because current law has allowed a flurry of unproved charges
against security forces and hamstrung military operations. "Colombia is a
democratic state to the extreme," said Gen. Fernando Tapias, head of the armed
forces, "and is combating a grave problem with peace legislation."

Mr. Kompass, whose office raised concerns in letters to Mr. Pastrana and the
Congress, said that if the legislation passed, Colombia would be in violation of
international rights agreements it had signed.

"We always hear this complaint from the military, that it cannot be more
effective in combat against the guerrillas because its hands are tied," he said.
"If this becomes law, it would place Colombia in a position that is contrary to
the commitments in the area of rights."

However, the author of the bill, Senator Vargas, said his goal was not to
curtail rights. "We are trying to have a framework to confront a situation that
is not normal," he said.  "We pretend to have a legislation as if we were
operating in Switzerland, but we are in Colombia."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); LEGISLATION (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); AUTOPSIES (77%);
LIBERALISM (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
INTERVIEWS (72%); APPROVALS (71%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); PEACE PROCESS
(71%); EUROPEAN UNION (63%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (55%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: WILLIAM D DELAHUNT (89%); SAM FARR (56%) DELAHUNT, BILL (REPR); FARR,
SAM (REPR); FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (88%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); GERMANY (54%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkey's Choice: European Union or the Death Penalty

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, May 29


On some days, after he was beaten and raw sewage was pumped into his darkened
cell in a former morgue, Celalettin Can would cower on the putrid floor and pray
for the hangman to call his name.

"Death is not the most difficult thing," said Mr. Can, who said he had been
repeatedly tortured while awaiting execution for membership in a left-wing
terrorist group. "Within the psychology of being tortured, death becomes a
secondary fear. Sometimes you pray for death. Staying alive is the hardest
thing."

Mr. Can, 45, escaped the gallows when his sentence was reduced for procedural
reasons. Two years ago, after 19 years on death row, he was released into a
twilight existence in which he has no legal rights and can be returned to prison
for the most minor offense.

The death penalty remains on the books in Turkey, though no one has been
executed since 1984 as successive governments observe a self-imposed moratorium.
But the debate over whether to abolish it is intensifying, and the outcome will
play a decisive role in determining whether Turkey joins the European Union.

Most European countries have abolished the death penalty, and the European Union
requires members to ban it.

In the United States, one of 87 countries still using it for common crimes, the
debate is framed by moral arguments about inequalities and injustices in
application.

In Turkey the roots of the dispute are political: the politics of the prisoners
themselves, of Turkey's European Union candidacy, of right-wing nationalists who
say they want a unified country and of progressives who say they want a
democratic one.

A parliamentary commission began debate last week on 51 proposed constitutional
amendments needed for Turkey to join the European Union. They cover volatile
matters like reducing the military's political role and granting cultural rights
to the Kurdish ethnic minority.

Though it is less sweeping in terms of remaking Turkey, the death penalty could
turn out to be the sticking point. As a price for the coveted European Union
membership, the governing coalition agreed grudgingly to abolish the death
penalty. But no date was set, and the political will to do so has been
questioned.

The opposition of the coalition's right-wing partner, the Nationalist Action
Party, could block the reform package. The party's leaders openly object to
ending the death penalty for crimes against the state, a category that embraces
a wide spectrum of political activity.

Roughly half of the 47 people now on death row were convicted of political
crimes, according to human rights advocates. A handful were members of
right-wing groups, but most either supported the rebels who seek a separate
state for Turkey's roughly 12 million Kurds or were part of left-wing
organizations that advocate overthrowing the state or are viewed with great
suspicion by the political and military elite.

"We consider there are some risks in abolishing the death penalty for crimes
committed against the state and nation," Sevket Bulent Yahnici, deputy chairman
of the Nationalist Action Party, said in an interview. "Within the party we have
concerns about abolishing the death penalty completely."

Party leaders argue that ending the death penalty would allow Abdullah Ocalan,
the Kurdish rebel leader sentenced to death for treason in 1999, to go
unpunished, eliminating a deterrent to other separatist groups.

Opposition also comes from within the military and the police, which have both
suffered heavy casualties from clashes with Kurdish rebels and left-wing
extremists.

"We do not accept any good will for those who want to divide this country and
pull down our flag," said Mehmet Guner, director of an organization for families
of soldiers and police officers killed in the line of duty. "Ending capital
punishment should not be a precondition to enter the European Union. If they
like us, they better accept us the way we are."

But rights advocates and international organizations see the opportunity to end
the death penalty as an important step in cleaning up broader problems in a
country where torture remains prevalent and the justice system is regarded as
often arbitrary and politically tainted.

Abolishing the death penalty is also supported by the leading business
organization, the Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association. The
group issued a 10-point blueprint for reform last week that included canceling
capital punishment except in times of war.

Capital cases are heard by panels of three judges, and defendants can be
convicted and sentenced to death by majority vote. Convictions are reviewed by
the Supreme Court and must be ratified by Parliament before an execution is
carried out. Parliament has not acted on a case since 1984, when two political
prisoners were executed.

Political trials occur in state security courts where acquittals are rare. Eren
Keskin, director of the Istanbul chapter of the national Human Rights
Association, said she has not seen an acquittal in a political case in 17 years
as a defense lawyer.

"Even when the testimony comes from torture, with medical reports proving the
torture, no one is acquitted," she said in an interview.

Criticism of the death penalty comes from less predictable quarters, too. Nejat
Oztaskent, a retired army colonel who served as a military prosecutor and a
senior judge for 45 years, said too many defendants were sentenced to death for
political beliefs, without sufficient evidence or reliable witnesses.

"It is true murder to give capital punishment for political reasons," Mr.
Oztaskent said in an interview. "How can you condemn someone to death on
transitory political terms that you create?"

Turkey has had some notable executions. Adnan Menderes, a former prime minister,
was hanged in 1961 after a military coup. And Mr. Ocalan's death sentence has
drawn sharp warnings from European human rights courts and organizations that he
must not be executed.

The government recognizes the danger swirling around Mr. Ocalan's sentence and
seems unlikely to execute him or anyone else so long as its European Union
membership hangs in the balance.

Still, Turkey's human rights record is unflattering, and critics contend that
executions are carried out regularly, not at the prison gallows but through
extrajudicial killings by the police and paramilitary groups of people who have
not been arrested or convicted.

"Abolishing the death penalty would not solve the problem," Bakir Caglar, a law
professor at Istanbul University who defended the government in the European
Court of Human Rights for seven years before resigning, said in an interview.

Turkey has proven deaf to criticism of its rights record in the past, but the
prospect of closer economic, military and cultural ties with Europe may prove
enough to persuade the politicians to enact many changes, including erasing the
death penalty from the books.

Until then, the march goes on, even if the official executions do not. Earlier
this month, an appeals court upheld the death sentences of 31 Islamic extremists
convicted of inciting a crowd to set a fire that killed 37 intellectuals
attending a conference in the Turkish town of Sivas in 1993.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Celalettin Can, who spent 19 years on death row until his
conditional release two years ago, on a rooftop near Bayrampasa Prison in
Istanbul. (Staton R. Winter for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (91%); TORTURE (90%); EUROPEAN
UNION ACCESSION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(88%); POLITICS (86%); CAPITAL CRIMES (76%); SENTENCING (75%); CORRECTIONS
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (67%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (62%); TERRORISM (56%); ETHNICITY (50%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;
KURDS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%) EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: FRANTZ, DOUGLAS

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (96%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); UNITED
STATES (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (79%)

REGION: TURKEY

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

American Human Rights Worker Survives Attack in Guatemala

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


A researcher for the human rights group Amnesty International was attacked in
Guatemala at a hotel during a failed kidnapping attempt, her colleagues said
today.

The researcher, Barbara Bocek, an American investigator with Amnesty
International, which is based in London, was assaulted on Monday night in
Guatemala City as she concluded a trip during which she looked into reports that
local human rights advocates were being persecuted, her colleagues said.

"The assault that was suffered by an Amnesty International delegate at the end
of the mission to Guatemala is yet another example of the dangers faced on a
daily basis by human rights activists in the country," said an Amnesty
International official who asked not to be identified.

"The attempted kidnapping of the Amnesty International delegate fortunately
failed and resulted in no serious physical harm," the official said.

Although violent crime is a severe problem in Guatemala City, the capital,
Amnesty International officials said they were convinced that the attack was an
attempt to interfere with Ms. Bocek's research. But they offered no evidence to
support that claim.

The incident occurred as the Central American nation had been confronting
difficult issues of accountability stemming from Guatemala's 36-year civil war,
which ended in 1996.

In a verdict seen as a bold move against official impunity, a Guatemalan court
last week sentenced three military men to 30 years in prison for the 1998 murder
of a Roman Catholic bishop, Juan Gerardi. Two days before his death, Bishop
Gerardi had released a report that blamed the military for most of the 200,000
wartime killings.

In addition, a group of Mayan survivors of the military's antiguerrilla drive in
the early 1980's, last week sued a former president of Guatemala, Efrain Rios
Montt, who is now the president of the Congress.

A spokeswoman for Amnesty International, Karen Schneider, declined to provide
details of the incident involving Ms. Bocek, citing security concerns. Ms.
Bocek, who has since returned to Washington, was not available for comment.

The Guatemalan newspaper Siglo XXI reported today that Ms. Bocek answered her
hotel room door and was knocked unconscious with a blunt object. The newspaper,
which cited Guatemalan government sources, said other members of Ms. Bocek's
delegation found her hotel room door open and reported her missing.

Security agents later found Ms. Bocek gagged and under the influence of a drug
on the steps near a hotel exit, the newspaper said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ASSAULT & BATTERY
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); MURDER (78%); MISSING PERSONS (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (77%); SENTENCING (73%); EVIDENCE (73%); AMNESTY
(73%); PRISONS (70%); VERDICTS (70%); JAIL SENTENCING (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(68%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (68%); ARMED FORCES (65%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (64%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (64%); RELIGION (50%) KIDNAPPING;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; BOCEK, BARBARA

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (88%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (58%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Legalizing Abuses in Colombia

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 557 words


The human rights record of Colombia's army has improved somewhat in recent
years. In part this is because its abuses have been privatized -- paramilitary
groups with close links to many members of the armed forces are now committing
the bulk of the murders of civilians. But a new law that has passed Colombia's
Congress and awaits the signature of President Andres Pastrana would give the
military dangerous new powers over civilians and lessen the possibility that
officers would be held accountable for abusing them.

Mr. Pastrana seems likely to sign the law this week. That would be a grave
mistake that would jeopardize American Congressional support for Washington's
extensive aid to Colombia's military.

Colombian officials and indeed much of the nation endorse expanded powers for
the military because guerrilla abuses are increasing. Yesterday Human Rights
Watch accused the nation's biggest guerrilla group, the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia, or FARC, of serious abuses, including executions of
civilians, hostage-taking, the killing of medical workers and the use of child
soldiers. Last year, according to Colombian human rights groups, the FARC killed
nearly 500 civilians. Most were people the FARC accused of helping the army or
paramilitaries.

The horrific abuses by the FARC and other guerrillas are driving Colombians --
especially those whose income puts them at risk of kidnapping -- to endorse
draconian responses, such as the new security law. This reaction is misguided.
While more moderate than a previous version, the bill still contains
undemocratic and potentially abusive reforms. It would make authorities such as
mayors and governors subordinate to military commanders. The bill would also
give the military the ability in many cases to authorize raids, arrest civilians
and in some cases carry out investigations. The law is inconsistent with the
Colombian Constitution, which bars the military justice system from
investigating civilians.

The new bill would also contribute to the impunity of the armed forces, by
placing a two-month time limit on the ability of civilian authorities to open
investigations of crimes committed in the course of military operations. Another
part of the security law says that when people are arrested in the act of
committing crimes, the military need only inform judges of their capture,
instead of bringing them before the courts. There is no possible case to be made
that either change would help the military win the war. Allowing officers to
wait to produce detainees is an invitation to mistreat prisoners. The right to
appear before a judge is partly designed to discourage abuses.

Congress and the Clinton administration approved a large hike in military aid to
Colombia last year at least in part because the administration promised that the
aid would go to a reformed Colombian military. Now that the money is flowing,
Colombia's army has apparently decided that it can get away with shaking off
oversight. President Pastrana evidently feels he needs to placate the military,
another indication of the worrisome power of the armed forces. The House
Appropriations Committee will meet this week to budget money for Colombia.
Congress and President Bush should make it easier for Mr. Pastrana to kill the
bill by promising to cut military aid if he signs it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); PRIVATIZATION (90%); ARMIES (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); MURDER (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HOSTAGE TAKING (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (76%); APPROVALS (76%); CHILD SOLDIERS (73%); JUDGES (65%)
EDITORIALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(56%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Renew Relationship With Military In Indonesia

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


The Bush administration plans to renew some American ties to the Indonesian
military, the most powerful institution in the sprawling Southeast Asian country
but one fraught with human rights abuses.

The decision is part of an effort to cement stronger ties with Indonesia, one of
the most important but unstable countries in the region, after the relatively
smooth coming to power of the new president, Megawati Sukarnoputri, whose ascent
was supported by the military.

The Pentagon once had longstanding ties with the Indonesian military, dating
back to the early days of the cold war. But relations have been circumscribed
since the early 1990's over human rights abuses.

Critics of the plan to revive ties say America's past training of Indonesian
troops did little to prevent the widespread abuses, in particular those that
accompanied the secession of East Timor from the country three years ago.

In re-establishing military ties, the Bush administration says it would like to
help ensure the stability of the country, a vast archipelago that has been riven
by separatist movements.

Indonesia is seen as pivotal for the stability of Southeast Asia and,
administration officials say, has assumed new significance as the broader region
stumbles through an unexpected period of economic downturn and political
uncertainty.

In a special gesture, the United States trade representative, Robert B.
Zoellick, was dispatched on a detour from India to Jakarta, the Indonesian
capital. He arrived there today to discuss a range of issues beyond his usual
trade portfolio. Next month, the Pentagon plans to send Adm. Dennis C. Blair,
the United States Pacific commander, to begin plans for re-engagement with the
army.

But as the administration moves forward, senior members of Congress and human
rights groups warn that the Indonesian military has shown little interest in
serious reform. They fear that Mrs. Megawati, a proud nationalist, will give the
military a free hand in crushing a new secessionist rebellion that has been
building in the province of Aceh.

Gareth Evan, a former foreign minister of Australia who is now the president of
the International Crisis Group, which specializes in conflict prevention,
acknowledged last month that many of Australia's efforts to train a more
professional Indonesian military had "helped only to produce more professional
human rights abuses."

Senior Bush administration officials say, however, that they will take a
step-by-step approach that will allow them to exercise a positive influence. The
army, they argue, stayed mostly on the sidelines during the crisis when
President Abdurrahman Wahid was removed from power.

"The military has acted with honor and correctness during the transition to
democracy," a senior administration official said. "We think that now is the
time to think of re-engagement. They have behaved well for the most part."

Administration officials say they plan to stop short of training the Indonesian
military and of selling it weaponry, both of which are banned under
Congressional restrictions. But officials said they had asked Congress to
consider some flexibility so that junior Indonesian officers could be trained in
operations like peacekeeping and disaster relief.

But Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont and the author of much of the
legislation that circumscribes any relationship with the Indonesian military,
said he was concerned that the administration wanted to rush ahead.

"They want operational contacts, search and rescue, fisheries patrol, nonlethal
arms sales, high-level meetings," Mr. Leahy said. "I think that's moving very,
very quickly."

Michael Jendrzejczyk, a spokesman for Human Rights Watch, said it was "premature
to move toward significant re-engagement with the military." He added that Mrs.
Megawati needed to demonstrate a willingness to seek accountability for the
abuses committed by the military in Aceh, East Timor and other restive areas.

In shaping their policies, administration officials said they would not go
beyond the Congressional constraints. But they also emphasized that now was the
time for the United States to seize an early chance to promote a model of
military professionalism in an institution whose formal role in politics was
terminated during the Wahid era.

During his visit to Jakarta, Mr. Zoellick invited Mrs. Megawati to the White
House in early September, signaling the administration's willingness to embrace
her.

As they map their course in Indonesia, the administration is guided at its most
senior levels by Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz, who once served
as ambassador to Indonesia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ARMIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); COLD WAR (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS (67%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (66%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (65%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(51%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: DENNIS BLAIR (58%); ROBERT ZOELLICK (58%) MEGAWATI SUKARNOPUTRI (PRES);
BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PERLEZ, JANE

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (93%); ASIA
(93%); AUSTRALIA (92%); INDIA (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 19, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
Colombia's Courts: Between a War and a Hard Place

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1171 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia


HUMAN rights groups celebrated last month when a retired general, Rito Alejo del
Rio, was arrested. Accused of having organized illegal right-wing militias in
the mid-1990's, he could become the first general to be tried in a civilian
court for involvement with the paramilitary groups that have ravaged the country
for 20 years.

But the optimism was soon tempered when the civilian defense minister, Gustavo
Bell, called the arrest "exaggerated and unnecessary." An influential newspaper
columnist, Plinio Apuleyo Mendoza, charged that the attorney general's office
was "infiltrated by the subversives," meaning leftist rebels. Under pressure
from the country's new attorney general, Luis Camilo Osorio, three top
prosecutors known for attacking the paramilitary structure resigned.

On Aug. 5, Mr. del Rio was released from custody, though the charges were not
dropped. But the growing chorus in his defense underscores the obstacles
prosecutors here face in bringing military officials to justice. They are
difficulties investigators across Latin America know all too well -- legal and
political hurdles that allowed many military officials suspected of murder to
walk free.

But unlike Argentina, Chile, Peru and other Latin American countries, which
began dealing with the ghosts of the past after turmoil and dictatorships ended,
this is a nation still at war, with two leftist insurgencies challenging the
government and an illegal paramilitary force attacking villagers suspected of
collaborating with rebels.

In some ways, the situation goes beyond a Latin American model. Russia has been
reticent to punish soldiers involved in massacres in Chechnya. The United States
was equally reluctant to prosecute troops for the 1968 massacre of 500 civilians
at My Lai in Vietnam. Only one soldier, Lt. William L. Calley Jr., served time
in prison, despite clear evidence of the involvement of other troops.

Indeed, while Colombia's democratically elected government is sensitive to
concerns about paramilitary-military ties voiced by human rights groups as well
as officials in Washington and Europe, the idea of going after top military
officials while conflict rages is highly unpopular among influential sectors of
Colombian society, notably the army and the upper class. Witness the response to
the arrest of Mr. del Rio -- who is lauded as an effective military strategist,
even if he was forming paramilitary groups in war-torn Antioquia Province from
1995 to 1997, as prosecutors contend. Those political realities are coupled with
a weak central government and an underfinanced judicial system that lacks
political clout.

"Every time the civilian authorities, the attorney general's office and the
local judges have been able to make some progress on investigations of human
rights violations involving military officials, then you have all sorts of
pressure," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas Division of Human
Rights Watch. "There is the whole campaign mounted by the leadership of the
army, questioning not only the need to investigate those crimes, but also
sometimes openly accusing the attorney general's office of being infiltrated by
members of the guerrillas, to be acting for political reasons, totally
ill-founded arguments."

President Andres Pastrana, on whose order Mr. Del Rio was cashiered from the
army in 1999, has insisted that his government is aggressively going after
paramilitaries. More than 300 paramilitary members have been arrested in the
last year, and investigators are uncovering the group's financial network. In
addition, hundreds of officers and soldiers have been dismissed, though it is
unclear how many had ties to the outlaw group. A handful have faced criminal
charges.

"This proves, in spite of the generalizations and unjust accusations, that the
national authorities are dedicated in the fight to curbing the growth of this
phenomenon," Mr. Pastrana said in a speech last month.

But the fact remains that civilian cases against military officials face delays,
and threats and violence against investigators and judges, as well as political
maneuverings by supporters of defendants.

THE best known of these cases -- and possibly the most thoroughly documented --
is that of Gen. Jaime Humberto Uscategui and other military officials who are
accused of allowing paramilitaries to attack Mapiripan, in southern Colombia, in
July 1997. In a five-day orgy of violence, they killed at least 30 villagers,
decapitating and dismembering them in a rampage that has come to characterize
this country's many massacres. The gunmen, it was found, had traveled from the
north, which would have required stops in airports controlled by the army.

"What happened in Mapiripan was prepared by the military, of that there is no
doubt," said Luis Guillermo Perez, a lawyer from the Lawyers Collective in
Bogota who has helped gather evidence in the case. "This was not just simply
General Uscategui. High military officials are also responsible for helping
coordinate the trip."

The crux of the case against the general was that he had ignored calls and faxes
from a judge in Mapiripan, Leonardo Ivan Cortes, about the impending massacre.
"Everyone knew that the paramilitaries were in town, that they were going to
start killing," said one survivor, Bladimiro F. Cortes, the judge's brother.
"Everyone knew from the first hours what was going to happen, and no one did a
thing."

A colonel, Hernan Orozco, came forward to say that he had received Judge
Cortes's urgent pleas and had passed a warning on to the general. Documents were
uncovered proving that the general knew about the dangers in Mapiripan.

But General Uscategui was never tried in a civilian court, as Colombian law
allows. Instead, in February, a military tribunal gave him 40 months for failing
to act, and he was later released for time served. Colonel Orozco was found
guilty of the same charge, which human rights groups warned could silence other
whistle-blowers.

Legal setbacks have also characterized the only civilian proceedings related to
Mapiripan, the case against another colonel, Lino Sanchez, and two sergeants who
face charges for having collaborated with the paramilitaries who arrived in
Mapiripan.

The judge, Lesther Gonzalez, has faced anonymous death threats. And there are
less dramatic obstacles, like an overbearing case load that has her involved in
more than 200 proceedings. Lawyers for the defense have repeatedly delayed the
trial. The delays mean that the case had the possibility of being dropped
because, in a legal twist, a statute of limitations may be reached.

Survivors of Mapiripan are dismayed, wondering why no one is facing judgment for
the killing spree that destroyed their village. Marcos Bustos, 80, who survived
the massacre but who believes his missing son was killed by paramilitaries, is
among those who cannot forget.

"It was horrible, there was terror, despair, fear, panic," Mr. Bustos said.
"Everyone ran. Or they left in canoes on the river. The town was left alone."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rebels and paramilitaries were both active in the area where, in
the fall of 1999, at least 21 Colombian villagers were killed. (Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ARRESTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMIES (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
LIBERALISM (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); CIVIL WAR (79%);
EVIDENCE (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%);
WRITERS (70%); MURDER (58%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (55%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); ARGENTINA (79%); VIET NAM (79%); CHILE (79%); EUROPE (79%); NORTH
& SOUTH AMERICAS (50%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Dictators, Only Punishment

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 159 words


To the Editor:

Stephen D. Krasner (Op-Ed, Jan. 15) argues that the International Criminal Court
is "the wrong instrument" for addressing large-scale war or crimes against
humanity. His opposition is based on two flawed assumptions.

He asserts that national judicial processes are more effective than
international ones. In fact, the new International Criminal Court assumes the
same thing, and recognizes the jurisdiction of national courts to try these
cases, except where such courts are unable or unwilling to do so.

Then, using the example of Yugoslavia, Mr. Krasner argues that criminal
prosecutions will cause despots to cling longer to power.  To the contrary,
recent experience strongly suggests just the opposite: that indictments
marginalized and hastened the departures of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic in
Bosnia and Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia.

MICHAEL POSNER
Executive Director, Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights
New York, Jan. 16, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%);
PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%) LAWYERS COMMITTEE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS;
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: POSNER, MICHAEL; KRASNER, STEPHEN D

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Massacre's Strange Fallout

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 22


He seemed to be the perfect officer for the beleaguered army.

The son of a colonel. Graduate of the most demanding military courses. Service
with a Colombian battalion in the Sinai Desert. A combat soldier who excelled in
infantry courses at Fort Benning, Ga. His peers, in fact, said they believed
that he would one day become a general.

Instead, Lt. Col. Hernan Orozco's career ended on Feb. 12, when a military
tribunal sentenced him to three years in prison for not having done enough to
prevent the killings of dozens of villagers by paramilitary gunmen in 1997.

Some officials celebrated the verdict, saying Colonel Orozco's conviction, along
with that of Gen. Jaime Humberto Uscategui, underscored the commitment to
rooting out human rights violators in the military.

But Colonel Orozco protests his sentence, arguing that he has spoken out about
abuses as few other officers have, providing hard evidence and risking his life
and his family's welfare to tell the truth.

"I was the only officer of those who were investigated who showed that he did
something to prevent what happened at Mapiripan," he said in an interview this
week.

Human rights groups, which have long contended that paramilitary gunmen have
worked with military units in fighting leftist rebels, agree, saying that the
case was a travesty and that Colonel Orozco's conviction's will only discourage
other officers from coming forward.

"He tried to be the honorable new man, respecting human rights by informing on
his superiors," said Robin Kirk, who researches Colombia for Human Rights Watch,
of New York. "The message this sends to junior officers is keep your mouth shut
or you'll be made to pay."

Court records and testimony show that in July 1997 Colonel Orozco informed
General Uscategui that gunmen had entered Mapiripan, a southern village, a
warning that was ignored. In the next five days, the paramilitary forces killed
at least 30 villagers, decapitating and dismembering them and throwing the
bodies in a river. The military arrived after the gunmen had left.

Later, investigators from the attorney general's office exposed how some
military officials had not only turned a blind eye to the massacre, but had also
cooperated with the paramilitary groups. Colonel Orozco provided much of the
documentation and testimony that implicated General Uscategui and others.

The convictions were handed out at a time when President Andres Pastrana's
administration is trying to demonstrate that it is aggressively chasing
paramilitary groups and severing their ties to the armed forces.

Critics argue that the efforts have yielded few results and that the convictions
of Colonel Orozco and General Uscategui, who received a 40-month term for one of
the bloodiest slaughters, mean little.

"It's halfhearted, and it's a very small step," said Michael Shifter, an expert
on Colombia at the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington group. "But I don't
think anyone should be fooled to believe that this amounts to significant
progress."

In his interview, Colonel Orozco, 40, said he believed that all along he would
be found not guilty. He is appealing his conviction. "They condemned me for
denouncing a general and, by extension, for offending the generalship," he said.

His involvement in the case began on July 15, 1997, when he was a major
temporarily commanding the Joaquin Paris Battalion in a rebel-infested region.
That day, Judge Leonardo Ivan Cortes of Mapiripan telephoned Major Orozco to say
paramilitary gunmen had appeared. Colonel Orozco testified that he relayed that
message by phone to General Uscategui, who oversaw the Seventh Brigade in the
city of Villavicencio, and that he followed up early the next morning by faxing
a detailed report to the general. General Uscategui never responded, the
investigation showed.

Colonel Orozco now says he did not contact General Uscategui again because he
assumed that the general would act when he was ready. He also said he became
preoccupied with other matters because officers from the Second Mobile Brigade
told him on July 14 that rebels were expected to attack another town. Colonel
Orozco sent more than 100 soldiers to that town.

Government investigators learned that after the killings ended on July 20
General Uscategui ordered Colonel Orozco to alter the fax that he had sent. The
investigators found the original fax months later, leading Colonel Orozco to
cooperate. "It was time to say the truth," Colonel Orozco said. "So I gave them
the truth -- late -- but it was the truth."

His testimony and documents indicated that the intelligence officer of the
Second Mobile Brigade, Lt. Col. Lino Sanchez, helped coordinate the paramilitary
units' arrival. Colonel Sanchez, records show, approached the police before the
attack on Mapiripan to request the use of police helicopters to transport the
gunmen. The police refused.

Investigators also said two sergeants let planes carrying more than 100
paramilitary gunmen land at a military-controlled airport at San Jose de
Guaviare. The sergeants and Colonel Sanchez face trials.

Colonel Orozco said he hoped to leave Colombia with his family. He said he could
not forget his superiors' failures. "The desire to help the paramilitaries
expand," he said, "led my fellow officers to betray me and for the high command
to give me the cold shoulder."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lt. Col. Hernan Orozco has been convicted for not having done
enough to stop a massacre of villagers. He said he had alerted his superiors.
(Robert Stolarik for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); ARMIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); TESTIMONY (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY
COURTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); VERDICTS (76%);
CORRECTIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(74%); LAWYERS (72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%);
INTERVIEWS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (68%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (63%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY
FORCES;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  WHISTLE-BLOWERS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: USCATEGUI, JAIME HUMBERTO (GEN); OROZCO, HERNAN (COL); FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  MAPIRIPAN (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Court to Embrace

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 162 words


To the Editor:

William Safire (column, April 9) charges that the treaty establishing the
International Criminal Court allows for prosecutions "for an undefined crime of
'aggression.' "

In fact, the new court will have immediate jurisdiction over only three crimes:
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The crime of aggression is subject to future negotiations, and unless states
individually ratify an agreed definition, the court will have no jurisdiction
over it.

Nor is the court likely to start political prosecutions against Americans and
Israelis, as Mr. Safire suggests. In cases where the Security Council does not
act, the court is limited to situations where national courts are unwilling or
unable to prosecute their own citizens.

The United States should embrace the International Criminal Court as an
institution that will strengthen the rule of law and human rights.

WILLIAM ZABEL
Chairman, Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights
New York, April 10, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); JURISDICTION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); RULE OF LAW (67%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; LAWYERS
COMMITTEE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SAFIRE, WILLIAM; ZABEL, WILLIAM

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             101 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China and the U.N.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 176 words


To the Editor:

In "Of Human Wrongs" (column, April 23), William Safire does not mention that
the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the 53-nation group that declined to
consider a United States resolution criticizing China's human rights record,
passed resolutions condemning human rights violations in Cuba and Russia. In
fact, the China resolution was the only "country resolution" that wasn't taken
up and passed by the commission.

Without co-sponsors, the American effort was seen as just another dispute in an
already fractious relationship between Washington and Beijing, an argument over
"American values" versus "Asian values," not a question of whether or not
international standards are being violated.

As a member of the United Nations, Israel could have co-sponsored the China
resolution and used its influence to help pass it. It joined all of America's
other "unwavering" allies in declining to do so.

JOHN KAMM
San Francisco, April 23, 2001

The writer is executive director of the Dui Hua Foundation, a human rights group
focused on China.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) DUI HUA FOUNDATION; UNITED NATIONS; UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: KAMM, JOHN

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (57%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (57%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: CHINA;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             103 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 5, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Found to Violate Rights in Ulster Cases

BYLINE:  By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 4


The European Court of Human Rights ruled today that Britain violated the human
rights of 10 members of the Irish Republican Army and two civilians shot to
death by security forces in Northern Ireland in the 1980's and early '90's.

Provoking a surge of anger from unionist politicians and others who support
British control of the province, the court ordered the British government to pay
$14,000 in compensation, as well as tens of thousands of dollars in court costs,
to the families of each victim.

The ruling did not go so far as to say that the killings, in four police and
army operations from 1982 to 1992, were illegal. But the 7-to-0 ruling by the
court in Strasbourg, France, held that in failing to investigate the killings
properly or to provide adequate inquests, the government violated the right to
life as guaranteed by Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The decision is a scathing criticism of the government's ability to be fair in
investigating the deaths of republicans -- who favor an end to British control
of Northern Ireland and have often used violent means to try to attain it -- at
the hands of its own forces in the sharply divided province. In defense of the
current policy, the Northern Ireland secretary, John Reid, said it was "worth
noting that the home secretary recently announced a review of inquest
procedures."

At 10 Downing Street, a spokesman for Prime Minister Tony Blair said he would
have no comment until the government had studied the decision.

Reactions in Northern Ireland were, as always, emotional and sectarian.
Referring to the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the British police force in Northern
Ireland, a spokesman for Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political wing, said, "British
policy, the R.U.C. and their legal and judicial systems stand indicted before
the world."

The ruling is "the single most important legal judgment in 30 years of
conflict," added the spokesman, Gerry Kelly.

Reaction from unionist groups outraged. "It now seems common practice, as far as
the European courts are concerned, to pander to militant and undemocratic Irish
Republicanism," said Ken Maginnis, a member of Parliament from the Ulster
Unionist Party.

The Police Federation, the union that represents officers from the Royal Ulster
Constabulary, said it was outraged. "If I.R.A. members are killed in action
carrying out a murderous deed, they will be rewarded with a lump sum or
pension," a spokesman said. "There really is no justice."

The ruling concerned instances in which the constabulary or troops killed I.R.A.
members or suspected members in Northern Ireland. In the best-known case, eight
men from the Irish Republican Army and a civilian bystander were killed by
waiting soldiers in a barrage of gunfire as they prepared to start a bomb and
gun attack on the constabulary station in Loughgall, County Armagh. That
incident was the I.R.A.'s worst loss of members since the Troubles, as the
battle over Northern Ireland is known, began more than 30 years ago.

In its ruling, the European court found that the inquiry on the incident was
flawed because of the close ties between the investigating officers and the
security forces who had conducted the operation. The inquest was flawed, the
court ruled, because, among other problems, many details were kept secret from
the victims' families and because the soldiers who fired the fatal shots were
not required to attend as witnesses.

Nor did the investigations or inquests into the other incidents -- in which
three men who were known or suspected to be I.R.A. terrorists were shot and
killed -- meet the standards for fairness. In several cases, the inquests were
never completed.

Relatives of those killed said they had finally found a degree of justice, after
all these years. "It means the inquest system is fundamentally flawed and that
the R.U.C. cannot carry out independent investigations into incidents they are
actively involved in," said Roisin Kelly, whose brother Patrick died in the
Loughgall shooting.

"It's not just about these four cases," Ms. Kelly said. "It's the impact on all
other lethal force cases that have been carried out in the North."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%);
ARMIES (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); COURT COST FINES (78%); POLITICS
(78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
INDICTMENTS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (84%)
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%) LYALL, SARAH

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE
(79%)

REGION: NORTHERN IRELAND

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             105 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Turkey: European Court Cites Abuses

BYLINE:  By Suzanne Daley (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 71 words


The European Court of Human Rights has found Turkey guilty of widespread human
rights abuses arising from its 1974 invasion and 27-year occupation of northern
Cyprus.

The court said Turkey had violated 14 articles of the European Human Rights
Convention, including the right to life, the right to liberty and security and
the right to freedom of thought. The case was brought by the Cyprus government.
Suzanne Daley (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); LITIGATION (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (93%) EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: DALEY, SUZANNE

COUNTRY: CYPRUS (94%); TURKEY (94%); EUROPE (94%)

REGION: CYPRUS;  TURKEY

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             110 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Courts Become Arbiters Of Global Rights and Wrongs

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1634 words


Last year, five Chinese natives sued the former Chinese prime minister, Li Peng,
in an American court for his role in the Tiananmen Square crackdown that killed
hundreds of civilians in Beijing.

While visiting the United Nations in September, President Robert Mugabe of
Zimbabwe was served with a civil suit saying he ordered killings, torture and
terrorism in his country and seeking $400 million in damages.

In Brooklyn, a federal judge is considering legal claims of Canadians and
Israelis in addition to Americans against a French railroad that transported
people to Nazi death camps.

Those and many other kinds of cases reflect the growing use of the American
legal system to judge rights and wrongs all over the globe.

The trend, which began in the mid-1980's and has been accelerating in recent
years, is strongest in human rights cases. But it extends to other areas of the
law, like business claims under American antitrust, securities and racketeering
laws and criminal prosecutions of foreign terrorists captured abroad.

"The cold war paradigm was the United States as global policeman," said Gregory
J. Wallance, a lawyer at the international law firm, Kaye Scholer in New York,
who has written about the trend. "The post-cold-war paradigm is the United
States as global attorney."

Some of the cases are essentially symbolic, ending in huge civil verdicts that
may never be collected. But others have led to criminal charges here, large
civil settlements, or financial recoveries drawn from foreign property held in
the United States.

There is some resentment over expansion of American legal power, but because
many of the cases relate to human rights' claims, critics have had difficulty
drawing attention to their concerns.

American lawyers have cast a wide net. Among others who have been sued in this
country are the former President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Prince of Wales and former Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher of Britain.

The expansion of American legal power has been explained in recent years as the
natural outgrowth of an interconnected world. But lately, some lawyers and legal
scholars have begun to argue that the cases represent a sweeping change that is
transforming American courts into institutions with international sway.

"What we are exporting now, just as Britain did in the 19th century, is our
conception of law" said Burt Neuborne, a law professor at New York University.
Last week, a federal judge awarded Mr. Neuborne $4.4 million in legal fees for
his work on a series of cases against German companies and the German government
by people forced into slave labor by the Third Reich.

A few American lawyers have made millions on the international lawsuits, while
others are handling the cases largely to make human rights or political
statements.

Some major legal changes have involved terrorism abroad. Laws passed by Congress
in recent years and international treaties signed since the 1970's have expanded
the powers of American courts to try terrorism cases.

A federal jury in Manhattan is hearing evidence in deciding the fate of a
Tanzanian in the bombing of the American Embassy in Dar es Salaam, killing 11
people. The jury last week rejected the death penalty for a Saudi in the bombing
of the American Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, killing 213 people.

The United States used treaty provisions that require countries to "prosecute or
extradite" terrorism suspects to bring some of the defendants in the embassy
bombings to this country.

The fact that American prosecutors tried the case is one sign of the changing
views on international prosecution, several legal experts said. Historically,
criminal prosecutions were mounted most often where the crimes occurred. In
1986, Italian courts convicted four Palestinian gunmen who had hijacked the
Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro off the Egyptian coast and killed an American,
Leon Klinghoffer.

One reason for the change is "a much more expansive notion of U.S. prerogatives
to protect its interests," said Ruth G. Wedgwood, an international law
specialist at Yale.

One example of the new legal thinking was legislation passed by Congress in
1996, which for the first time permitted lawsuits in American courts against
countries that the United States listed as sponsoring terrorism. Libya, Cuba and
Iran are on the list. Before that, such suits were generally barred by American
rules that protect governments from lawsuits in United States courts.

In February, the Treasury Department authorized the release of $96.7 million
from Cuban assets frozen in the United States. The money went to the families of
three Miami-based pilots who were shot down by Cuban fighter jets in 1996. The
families of the pilots, who were members of the Cuban exile group Brothers to
the Rescue, had sued the Cuban government in federal court in Miami under the
1996 law.

Americans have always been able to sue foreign individuals who were in this
country. But before a landmark ruling of a federal appeals court in New York in
1980, American courts were reluctant to get involved in disputes between
foreigners involving events in other countries.

In the 1980 decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
said a seldom-used law dating of 1789 authorized foreigners to sue other
foreigners in this country when they claimed violations of international legal
norms, like rules against murder or torture.

The 1980 case involved a lawsuit by a Paraguayan doctor against a former police
official who, the court found, has tortured and killed the 17-year-old son of
the doctor, who was a Paraguayan opposition leader.

Since then there have been dozens of other suits under the 1789 law, the Alien
Tort Claims Act. And in the last few years cases have sought increasingly larger
damage awards, said Jennifer M. Green, a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional
Rights in New York, which is handling many of the cases.

Last year, a jury in federal court in Manhattan ordered Radovan Karadzic, the
former Bosnian Serb leader, to pay $4.5 billion in damages to people who were
raped, tortured and killed in the Balkan conflict.

The scope of American judicial expansion is not limited to terrorism and human
rights cases. American antitrust prosecutors have successfully argued that
groupings of international companies are subject to American rules prohibiting
collusive agreements to set prices even if only one member of the cartel sells
products in this country.

Under such rules, executives from Belgium, Britain, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands and other countries have been convicted in American courts. The
Clinton administration began a push to prosecute international price fixing, and
the Bush administration is expected to continue that drive.

But globalism means there are two sides to such expansive notions. European
regulators have started to apply their own laws to American businesses.
Skepticism by European regulators has stalled several recent mergers by American
companies, including General Electric's planned $45 billion acquisition of
Honeywell International.

Some courts refuse to get involved in foreign matters. American courts declined,
for example, to hear lawsuits against the Prince of Wales and former Prime
Minister Thatcher, which claimed they had violated human rights in Northern
Ireland and Libya.

But American courts are increasingly willing to stretch their authority. Among
the cases that opened the door was a Supreme Court ruling in 1992 that said a
Mexican charged with killing an American drug enforcement agent could be tried
in this country even though agents had kidnapped him from Mexico.

Similarly, in 1991, a federal appeals court in Washington approved the trial of
a man who federal prosecutors said was a Lebanese militia official, Fawaz Yunis,
who was charged with hijacking a Jordanian plane in Beirut and was arrested
while on a yacht in the Mediterranean.

These cases are a far cry, some lawyers say, from a New York federal court's
refusal in 1987 to consider the multibillion-dollar lawsuits against the Union
Carbide Corporation over the Bhopal chemical disaster in India.

In addition to court rulings, American legal values are also exported
informally, Mr. Wallance of Kaye Scholer argued in an article last year. As an
example he cited boycotts of clothing brands manufactured in countries that do
not comply with American workplace rules.

So far, criticism of expanding ambitions of the American legal system has been
muted. But some foreign governments have said they are offended by suits in this
country, and some American legal experts warn that the United States is opening
what could be a dangerous legal competition with other countries.

Other countries are already trying to expand the influence of their legal rules
or to fight off the influence of America's legal system. Some European countries
are resisting a proposed international agreement in The Hague that would make it
easier to enforce judgments of American courts abroad.

If American diplomats and executives become entangled in lawsuits in other
countries, the United States might start to view its legal expansionism in a
different light, said Curtis A. Bradley, a law professor at the University of
Virginia.

In early June, a Chilean judge said he would try to get Henry A. Kissinger, the
former United States secretary of state, to testify about the disappearance of
an American in Chile when the dictator Augusto Pinochet seized power in the
1970's.

Jack L. Goldsmith, a law professor at the University of Chicago, said Americans
have not considered the consequences of applying this country's law all over the
world.

"The United States loves to export our values," Mr. Goldsmith said, "but not if
it gives other countries the power to review what we do."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prof. Burt Neuborne says America is exporting its concept of
law. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)(pg. A20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); JUDGES
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); DAMAGES (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES (78%);
LAW SCHOOLS (76%); TORTURE (76%); HOLOCAUST (73%); FORCED LABOR (73%);
SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (67%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (62%); RELIGION (50%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) COURTS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: KAYE SCHOLER LLP (57%); AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (57%)

ORGANIZATION: GLOBAL RIGHTS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (57%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (57%);
SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (57%)

PERSON: PRINCE CHARLES (50%) GLABERSON, WILLIAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (94%); GERMANY (90%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
CANADA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             111 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chile's Effort to Try Pinochet Is Running Out of Steam

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, June 22


The prosecution of Augusto Pinochet, on charges that he covered up the murders
and disappearances of scores of dissidents in 1973, is drawing to a slow
procedural death, according to legal experts and human rights specialists.

The former dictator's lawyers have changed their legal tack in recent months by
arguing that their 85-year-old client is not mentally fit to stand trial, and
their appeal has gained support among the political establishment and appears
likely to be accepted in court, legal experts say.

Even the routine procedure of booking General Pinochet by taking a mug shot and
fingerprinting him has been delayed five times since early April and may never
take place. The prosecuting judge, Juan Guzman Tapia, appears to be tiring of
pursuing the matter.

"People in power -- the government, the armed forces, most of the political
parties, the press -- are not worried about the case anymore," said Ricardo
Israel, a legal scholar at the University of Chile. "My impression is that
Guzman knows sooner or later Pinochet will get off for medical reasons and the
battle is lost."

General Pinochet -- who took power in a violent coup in September 1973 that took
the life of President Salvador Allende, ruled Chile until 1990 and remained the
head of the army until three years ago -- was first arrested in London in late
1998 on a Spanish warrant for various human rights violations.

But the British government released the general early last year on account of
his declining health, and the former dictator returned home to find that he was
no longer the feared, omnipotent master of Chile. Despite military protests, he
was arrested in Chile last December on charges that he was the co-conspirator in
the death-squad killings and kidnappings of 75 supporters of Mr. Allende.

There have been hundreds of other criminal complaints filed against General
Pinochet by victims and survivors of those who suffered from executions,
disappearances and torture during his 17-year rule. An estimated 3,200 people
were executed or disappeared during General Pinochet's rule, and tens of
thousands more dissidents were tortured.

The charges in the 1973 case against General Pinochet were reduced in March,
from the allegation that he was the mastermind of the death squad to his being
an accessory who covered up its crimes.

General Pinochet had originally been kept under house arrest, but he has since
been released. Aside from a few shopping trips and visits to the hospital, the
general has remained at home, gardening and playing with his grandchildren.

The legal battle has recently centered on the defense argument that General
Pinochet, who is diabetic and has a pacemaker, cannot properly defend himself
because of memory problems caused by minor strokes.

That argument picked up considerable momentum three weeks ago when an appeals
court judge, Raul Rocha, a member of the State Forensic Psychiatry Commission in
Chile, wrote a report saying that a trial of General Pinochet would violate
constitutional guarantees of his "physical and mental integrity."

Judge Rocha wrote that under the country's penal code, cases against defendants
with dementia should be dismissed. He based his conclusions on a court-ordered
medical examination of the former dictator in January that found that General
Pinochet suffered "moderate dementia."

A three-member appeals court is due to rule in the next few days on the defense
motion to suspend the case because of General Pinochet's mental health. One
judge is considered certain to vote against the motion, and one in favor, with a
third judge casting the deciding vote. There will almost certainly be an appeal
to the Supreme Court, whichever way the lower court decides.

Most legal analysts believe that General Pinochet will win if there is an appeal
because the Supreme Court is known to be sensitive to the political winds.

President Ricardo Lagos, the first Socialist to govern the country since Mr.
Allende's death in the coup, has said he would not interfere in the case. But
senior members of the government have been quoted anonymously in the local press
as saying a dismissal of the case on health grounds would save the country
renewed stress.

Meanwhile, General Pinochet has been successful in delaying his booking, which
his lawyers and military supporters say is an unnecessary humiliation that would
put his mug shot on the front pages of newspapers across the world.

Under Chilean law all criminal defendants must be fingerprinted, but Judge
Guzman may be backing down. This week he requested an opinion from the medical
faculty of the University of Chile on the argument of General Pinochet's doctor
that the booking process could endanger his patient's failing health.

Human rights lawyers say General Pinochet must be treated like any other
defendant.

"If the purpose of all this is to show that in today's Chile, no one is above
the law and it is possible to bring to trial a former president, then processing
him through normal procedures becomes a key element," said Sebastian Brett, a
researcher for Human Rights Watch in Chile.  But he added, "The interest in the
case and the pressure has lost momentum."

In recent weeks, even as the Pinochet case has entered a critical stage, it has
been overshadowed by President Lagos's attempts to revive a slowing economy and
by his skirmish with Adm. Jorge Arancibia, who was the commander of the Chilean
Navy until last week. When Mr. Lagos learned that Admiral Arancibia intended to
resign on July 6 to run for the Senate on a rightwing opposition party ticket,
the president demanded his immediate resignation.

Under a Constitution written while General Pinochet was in power, Mr. Lagos did
not have the authority to dismiss Admiral Arancibia, but the officer did not
resist. The incident has strengthened the hand of legislators who want to amend
the Constitution to give the civilian president to right to hire and fire
military commanders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MURDER (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
FINGERPRINTING (78%); FORENSICS (78%); COUPS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%);
CONSPIRACY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(77%); JUDGES (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); PSYCHIATRY (77%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (76%); APPEALS COURTS (76%); APPEALS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); ARMIES
(75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); MISSING PERSONS (73%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); STROKES
(64%); MEMORY DISORDERS (61%); GRANDCHILDREN (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  MISSING PERSONS

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic on Trial: Trouble Ahead?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 163 words


To the Editor:

The extradition of Slobodan Milosevic to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague
(front page, June 29) reaffirms what international law has held since Nuremberg:
rank and title are no bar to prosecution for the worst atrocities.

Yet even as international justice proves its merits in the Balkans, the Bush
administration has expressed its opposition to a permanent International
Criminal Court.

How ironic to support -- as the administration should -- Mr. Milosevic's
prosecution at The Hague yet fight the legitimacy of the International Criminal
Court.

An ad hoc approach to crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes should
not be subject to the international mood of the moment, which may or may not
allow for the creation of a special tribunal. Only the International Criminal
Court will provide a permanent legal forum to prosecute the worst transgressors
of human rights.

WILLIAM ZABEL
Chairman, Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights
New York, June 29, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (92%); EXTRADITION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE
(73%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
EXTRADITION

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
(83%) COMMITTEE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); SABEL, WILLIAM; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);
SERBIA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             113 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 12, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Beijing Olympic Bid

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 760 words


As the International Olympic Committee gathers in Moscow this week to select a
host nation for the 2008 Summer Games, there is no mystery about the human
rights record of China, the heavily favored contender. It is abysmal. As a
matter of principle, China's human rights abuses and suppression of dissent
should disqualify it from holding the Olympics.

But with the United States remaining neutral on China's bid, and the rest of the
world unwilling to make human rights a decisive issue, the I.O.C. seems likely
to approve the Chinese application. Having turned down China once before, in
1993 when it applied to be host to the 2000 Games, which were awarded to Sydney
instead, many I.O.C. members are reluctant to disappoint the Chinese again.
Since the modern Olympic movement began in 1896, China has never played host to
the event.

If Beijing prevails over Toronto and Paris, the other leading aspirants, the
United States and the I.O.C. should do what they can to turn the 2008 Summer
Games into a force for constructive change in China. The long-term interests of
advancing democracy and freedom there can be served if China recognizes that its
handling of every aspect of the Games -- including the construction of new
Olympic arenas, the treatment of foreign visitors and reporters and the
political climate in which the Games are held -- will be closely monitored by
the world. The Bush administration's neutral stance is based in part on a belief
that the Chinese government may temper its domestic and foreign policies over
the next seven years to avoid the possibility of a Western boycott of the
Olympics.

We do not harbor the illusion that the Olympics alone can be a decisive turning
point in China's conduct. But China, with one-fifth of the world's population
and new economic aspirations, is not the monolithic nation it once was. Its
destiny need not be as an international spoiler and the last redoubt of a
discredited, inhumane political ideology.

China's top leaders remain stubbornly opposed to political reform even as they
expand economic freedoms and encourage entrepreneurs. But the Chinese people
seem to have higher hopes for their nation, as many demonstrated during the
democracy movement of the late 1980's. Their enthusiastic engagement with the
outside world, though restricted by the government, suggests a yearning to
become active participants not only in global commerce but the international
community as well.

The I.O.C. and the world at large should make clear that granting the Olympics
to China is not meant to reward the Chinese government but rather to signal to
the Chinese people that they are welcome to play a greater role in international
life. Close diplomatic and journalistic attention has to be paid to China's
treatment of its own citizens in the years leading up to the Games. If Beijing
is chosen, the committee itself can and should establish firm guidelines for
China's staging of the Olympics.

China has already agreed to spend more than $10 billion on infrastructure and
environmental projects to make Beijing worthy of the event. But it is of greater
importance that the I.O.C. secure a commitment from China that it will respect
the Olympic movement's humanitarian ideals.

Olympic authorities must insist that no journalists, athletes or spectators
seeking to attend the Games be denied entry to China, or find their activities
once there restricted, even if their political views are abhorrent to the
Chinese government. International media should have unrestricted access in
covering preparations for the Games and all areas of Chinese life during the
Olympics, including human rights and China's criminal justice system.

Because of the Communist government's history of abusing prison labor and of
forcefully removing people it considers undesirables in anticipation of major
events, Olympic officials must also insist on the right to monitor labor
practices at Olympic construction sites, as well as to oversee security measures
leading up to the Games.

In a more humane world, the I.O.C. would bar China from serving as an Olympic
host nation until the government learned to live with the free expression of
political and religious views and stopped abusing citizens who oppose the
authoritarian rule of the Communist Party. But there is reason to hope that the
bright spotlight the Olympics can shine on the Chinese government's behavior
over the next seven years could prove beneficial to those in China who would
like to see their country evolve into a more tolerant and democratic society.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (95%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (91%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SPORTS
GOVERNING BODIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); GLOBALIZATION (78%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (73%); BOYCOTTS (70%); APPROVALS
(70%); FOREIGN POLICY (69%); POLITICS (65%) OLYMPIC GAMES;  EDITORIALS;  SUMMER
GAMES (OLYMPICS);  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  OLYMPIC GAMES (2008)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (93%) INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: CHINA;  BEIJING (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             115 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 23, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guide Proposed for Trials of Rogue Leaders

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 20


A group of leading international legal scholars and jurists, convinced that more
public figures are likely in coming years to face trial for abuses like genocide
and crimes against humanity, is proposing the first set of guidelines for such
cases.

The guidelines, to be published on Monday by a new law program at the Woodrow
Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, were
devised by more than 30 legal experts from at least half a dozen countries and
several international organizations, including the United Nations.

Titled the Princeton Principles on Universal Jurisdiction, the guidelines are
arranged as 14 provisions governing all aspects of international trials from
definitions of crimes to disputes between governments over the accused.

The experts advocate no immunity for heads of government and no amnesty for
anyone charged with the worst of crimes.

The publication of the 14 principles follows a number of planned or attempted
prosecutions of international figures, most recently of Slobodan Milosevic, the
former president of Yugoslavia, and Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean
dictator.

Such legal actions follow no single pattern. Some occur in international
tribunals established by the United Nations, others in national courts outside
the defendant's own country. Eventually, they could fall under the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court, now being approved by legislatures around
the world.

Taken together, these cases fall under the legal term "universal jurisdiction,"
which is understood to cover the worst of offenses, which rise to the level of
international crimes. "It is jurisdiction based solely on the nature of the
crime," the introduction to the principles says. It is normally applied when
national governments cannot or do not deal with the accused person.

"Universal jurisdiction holds out the promise of greater justice," the book
says, but in such cases, the jurisprudence "is disparate, disjointed and poorly
understood."

It adds: "So long as that is so, this weapon against impunity is potentially
beset by incoherence, confusion, and, at times, uneven justice."

The idea of devising guidelines for the first time originated with William J.
Butler, a New York lawyer who is president of the American Association for the
International Commission of Jurists, and Stephen A. Oxman, a former assistant
secretary of state for European and Canadian affairs. The project was sponsored
by the International Commission of Jurists, the Netherlands Institute of Human
Rights, the Urban Morgan Institute for Human Rights, and Princeton's Program in
Law and Public Affairs.

At Human Rights Watch in New York, which has campaigned for trials of gross
violators of human rights wherever they are, Richard H. Dicker, director of the
organization's international justice program, said that what has been emerging
"are the pillars, the components of a system -- a mechanism of international
justice -- that encompasses several different and necessary parts."

What has been missing, Mr. Butler and Mr. Oxman argued, is any sense of what
operating principles should be applied to all such cases. In two conference
sessions, held last November and in January, judges and scholars from Britain,
Canada, China, Japan, India, the Netherlands, Turkey and the United States met
with experts from the European Court of Human Rights and the United Nations.
Together, they set out the 14 principles.

Principle 1 defines universal jurisdiction and Principle 2 the crimes to be
considered -- piracy, slavery, war crimes, crimes against peace, crimes against
humanity, genocide and torture. Principle 3 allows for the use of universal
jurisdiction by a country even if its laws do not specifically provide for it.
Principles 4-6 cover accountability of governments, immunities -- none for heads
of state by virtue of their positions -- and statutes of limitations.

Principle 7 argues against amnesties as "generally inconsistent with the
obligation of states to provide accountability for serious crimes under
international law." Principle 8 deals with competing jurisdictions, 9 with
avoiding double jeopardy and 10 with extradition rules.

Principle 11 addresses supporting national legislation, 12 discusses future
treaties and 13 concerns the harmonization of national practices with universal
jurisdiction. Principle 14 addresses the settling of disputes over jurisdiction
between countries.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JURISDICTION
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); AMNESTY (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); LAWYERS
(75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(70%); APPROVALS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: PRINCETON UNIVERSITY (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (55%) UNITED NATIONS; PRINCETON UNIVERSITY

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 24, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Abuse

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 164 words


To the Editor:

Bill Richardson (Op-Ed, Aug. 21) points out the value of having the United
States influence the development of an international criminal court. There is
also great value in our working to establish a multilateral protocol for the
prosecution of human rights abusers in civil court.

Victims of human rights violations can sue in American federal courts to obtain
money damages. But successful plaintiffs are unable to collect their awards
because there is no international agreement to enforce the judgments outside the
United States.

The Hague Conference on Private International Law -- involving 49 countries,
including the United States and China -- has been working on a convention under
which member countries would enforce each other's judgments in civil matters,
including human rights. But negotiations have been stalled by European countries
that want to curtail America's influence abroad.

TERESA WYSZOMIERSKI
Maspeth, Queens, Aug. 21, 2001

The writer is a lawyer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); DAMAGES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TREATIES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); HAGUE CONFERENCE ON PRIVATE
INTERNATIONAL LAW (57%)

PERSON: BILL RICHARDSON (73%) WYSZOMIERSKI, TERESA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); EUROPE (79%); NETHERLANDS (77%); CHINA (67%)

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             130 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contortions of Psychiatry in China

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 513 words


The abuse of psychiatry to intimidate and torture dissidents in the Soviet Union
was well documented and loudly deplored by the West. The practice in China has
received less comment, but Beijing, too, imprisons nonconformists as mentally
ill -- a policy that deserves worldwide attention and forceful condemnation from
foreign governments, including the United States.

During the Cultural Revolution, the genuinely mentally ill were routinely
"treated" with political re-education, and healthy people who did not hew to the
prevailing political line were often imprisoned in psychiatric hospitals. Such
abuses diminished as China became more open and psychiatry became more
professional and scientific.

Today, however, the abuse of psychiatry once again appears to be increasing in
China. The government has forcibly imprisoned members of Falun Gong in
psychiatric hospitals. Falun Gong, a popular movement that advocates channeling
energy through deep breathing and exercises, has been the target of a
heavy-handed government crackdown marked with abuses reminiscent of the Cultural
Revolution, among them the misuse of psychiatry.

Movement leaders claim that some 600 members have been forcibly detained in
mental hospitals. This number is impossible to verify, but journalists and human
rights researchers have documented numerous cases of Falun Gong members being
taken to psychiatric institutions and drugged, physically restrained, isolated
or given electric shocks.

Robin Munro, a senior researcher at the University of London, explores some of
these cases in an article published last month in The Columbia Journal of Asian
Law. Mr. Munro, who has also worked for Amnesty International and Human Rights
Watch investigating abuses in China, estimates that at least 3,000 people have
been sent to mental hospitals for expressing political views in the past two
decades, not including Falun Gong members.

Another alarming development is the network of new police psychiatric hospitals
-- called Ankangs, which means "peace and happiness" -- built since 1987.
Chinese law includes "political harm to society" as legally dangerous mentally
ill behavior. Police are instructed to take into psychiatric custody "political
maniacs," defined as people who make anti-government speeches, write reactionary
letters or "express opinions on important domestic and international affairs."
Erik Eckholm of The Times has reported that at least one labor leader was
detained and given shock therapy in a psychiatric hospital. There are currently
20 Ankangs, and the government plans to build many more.

An international gathering of psychiatrists, which investigated similar abuses
in the Soviet Union, is trying to publicize China's practices and organize an
investigation by members of the World Psychiatric Association. Psychiatric
imprisonment is not a widespread phenomenon compared with the Chinese
government's use of prisons and labor camps for dissidents. But it is a
particularly noxious practice, and one that deserves more attention and
criticism than it has so far received.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CULTS & SECTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MENTAL ILLNESS (90%);
PSYCHIATRY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PSYCHIATRIC
HOSPITALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (75%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (73%); JOURNALISM (71%);
WRITERS (71%) POLITICAL PRISONERS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EDITORIALS;
MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%) FALUN GONG
(SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             133 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Combat Sweatshops

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 144 words


To the Editor:

Re "Labor Standards Clash With Global Reality" (front page, April 24):

As you note, concern about global working conditions is growing on college
campuses and more broadly elsewhere.

Multinational companies that fail to respond to this evolving concern do so at
their peril.

While no one company can change the system, by acting collectively, such
companies can compel real change. One such effort is the Fair Labor Association,
on whose board I serve. It is a collective effort by major apparel companies,
human rights, consumer and religious groups, and more than 150 universities to
monitor factory conditions and remedy violations where they are found. To date,
Gap Inc. has declined to participate in this collective effort. It is time for
it to do so.

MICHAEL POSNER
Executive Director, Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights
New York, April 26, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GARMENT WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (88%); MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); MULTINATIONAL
CORPORATIONS (73%); RELIGION (53%) APPAREL;  SWEATSHOPS;  LABOR

COMPANY: GAP INC (70%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%) GAP
INC; FAIR LABOR ASSN; LAWYERS COMMITTEE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS

TICKER: GPS (NYSE) (70%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS448140 FAMILY CLOTHING STORES (70%); SIC5651 FAMILY CLOTHING
STORES (70%)

PERSON: POSNER, MICHAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             140 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Candidates in Peru's Presidential Race Peck at Fading Military

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 25


The two presidential candidates competing to succeed the ousted President
Alberto K. Fujimori have begun a gentle assault on the traditional third force
in Peruvian politics -- the bloated and politically powerful armed forces -- as
the military has sunk in prestige after an array of scandals.

The military tied its fortunes to the 10-year Fujimori rule, and when that
collapsed and the former president fled to Japan late last year, so the
officers' fortunes sank too. During the last several months, 18 generals and
admirals have been arrested on charges ranging from leading a paramilitary death
squad to accepting bribes from drug traffickers and taking kickbacks from
purchases of a squadron of overpriced and obsolete MIG-29 fighter jets.

More than 70 other officers have been cashiered in the single most sweeping
cleansing of the Peruvian armed forces in modern history. There have been
several other embarrassments -- an uprising last year by a military unit and the
recent downing of an American missionary plane mistakenly thought to be
trafficking in drugs.

No institution has completely filled the vacuum where once the military presided
as the final arbiter of Peruvian political life.

But the humiliation of the officers has been deep. Interim President Valentin
Paniagua and Congress have quietly cut the military budget by more than $300
million this year. Investigations are under way to determine the military's
culpability in a series of massacres between 1980 and 1995 during the war
against two terrorist insurgencies. The military has even been forced to accept
the appointment of a human rights truth commission and the unearthing of several
clandestine graves -- two developments that would have been impossible just six
months ago.

But President Paniagua has left it to the military to decide how to reorient its
own training, force structure, combat manuals and a culture that for years has
tolerated high levels of corruption with little or no civilian supervision.

There has been surprisingly little public debate about what kind of military
Peru needs at a time when terrorism has been reduced to minor levels and
long-standing border disputes with Ecuador and Chile have been resolved. Even as
the political power of the military has gradually declined in Argentina, Brazil,
Bolivia and even Chile, Peruvian political leaders have long respected military
claims that they can manage their own affairs.

With a total force of 115,000 men, and an army reserve force of 180,000 more,
Peru's armed forces are nearly twice the size of those in Colombia -- a bigger
country which is in the middle of a raging guerrilla war. In Peru, the $1.2
billion annual budget of the armed forces has been a major drain on a government
that has insufficient resources to promote education and rudimentary health
care.

For years after a left-wing military government ruled between 1968 and 1980, the
Peruvian armed forces had a rocky relationship with the United States and relied
on Soviet arms and trainers. Relations with Washington improved after Mr.
Fujimori's first election in 1990, and the Bush and Clinton administrations drew
close to the high command in its fight against terrorism and drug trafficking.

The Peruvian military was barely mentioned in an hour and a half of televised
presidential debate last week, and only by one candidate. But the issue has
crept into the campaign.

Alejandro Toledo, a former World Bank official who is well ahead in the polls
leading to the June 3 vote, has used his stump speeches to call for cuts in
defense spending and international arms purchases in order to increase social
spending.

"I know of lots of military men who want to reform the role of the military and
we want to help them," Mr. Toledo said in a recent radio interview.

"The military has been much weakened," he said in another interview, during a
flight between campaign stops in late March. "The desire for an attempt at moral
rejuvenation is great and the people are demanding a moralization."

The other candidate, former President Alan Garcia, a populist whose 1985-1990
government was plagued by military human rights abuses, has also called for cuts
in military spending, although he raises the issue less often and less
prominently than Mr. Toledo.

But in an interview during the first-round campaign, Mr. Garcia noted that "we
have a naval force with too many ships that are costly to maintain."

Even such mild criticism would have been taboo before Mr. Fujimori fled to Japan
last November shortly after disclosures that his intelligence chief, Vladimiro
Montesinos, and senior officers were tied to smuggling arms to the Colombian
guerrillas. The entire high command, which was selected by Mr. Montesinos for
its loyalty to the government, was forced to step down.

The military was further embarrassed last month when a captured videotape was
released showing hundreds of top officers signing a document in 1999 that
endorsed a 1992 coup by Mr. Fujimori, during which he closed Congress and the
Supreme Court.

President Paniagua accepted the resignations of his high command, and reshuffled
the senior officer corps for the second time in four months. But more than 1,000
officers who had also signed the document were not disciplined.

"That was a lost opportunity for a clean sweep," said Congressman Fernando
Olivera. "But I understand the decision. President Paniagua did not want to
destabilize the situation in the middle of a presidential campaign."

While President Paniagua has cut back on military attaches with large salaries
and limited duties in foreign embassies, he has not acted to shave significantly
the number of generals and admirals, now more than 250.

Carlos Tapia, a sociologist who is a former lecturer at the Peruvian military
academy, said civilian politicians remain wary of challenging the military
because the government depends on the military to build rural roads, fight drug
trafficking and share intelligence gathered by the security forces. He noted
that the army also has strong ties to peasant militia groups that were formed
during the war against terrorism and now provide vital functions such as
building housing and schools.

Senior officers have remained quiet about the changes their institutions are
going through. But in a recent meeting with foreign correspondents, Defense
Minister Walter Ledesma pledged that the military was ready for reform.

"The armed forces are profoundly committed to democracy and human rights," Mr.
Ledesma said. Referring to cuts in his budget, he added, "we are very conscious
of the economic problems of the country."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (91%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%);
POLITICS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); APPOINTMENTS (89%); BUDGETS (87%); ELECTIONS (78%); HISTORY
(78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); ARMIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%);
LIBERALISM (78%); ETHICS (77%); MILITARY RULE (77%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS (77%);
DEFENSE SPENDING (77%); SCANDALS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); CORRUPTION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); TERRORISM (75%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (75%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); BRIBERY (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (72%); ARRESTS (70%); BUDGET CUTS
(70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (69%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES;  ELECTIONS;  ETHICS;  ELECTION ISSUES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; GARCIA, ALAN; TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: LIMA, PERU (58%)

COUNTRY: PERU (99%); ECUADOR (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); COLOMBIA (79%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             143 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mother Superior's Role in Rwanda Horror Is Weighed

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1427 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS


Sister Gertrude, once a mother superior, has been in court for seven weeks,
listening to grim details about murder in the convent. She has barely moved
except to bow her head, which is covered with the brown veil of the Benedictine
order.

Sister Gertrude is a Hutu from Rwanda, one of the four accused in a highly
unusual trial in Belgium.

She is here to answer charges that she collaborated with the attackers during
the Rwandan killing frenzy in 1994. Among her accusers are fellow nuns, blaming
her for the deaths of more than 20 of their family members who had been safely
hidden in the convent until she summoned the police.

Prosecutors have linked Sister Gertrude, 42, to other, even greater horrors at
the sprawling religious compound set in the southern hills of Sovu, near the
city of Butare. They cite the day that more than 500 Tutsi refugees were locked
in the convent garage, sprayed with gasoline and burned alive. As many as 7,000
refugees were hacked and clubbed to death by militia gangs, the indictment says,
after the mother superior had driven the refugees from the convent grounds.

"The monastery, instead of a place of asylum, of safety, became a deadly trap,"
Alain Winants, the prosecutor, told the court.

Sister Gertrude has spoken in near-whispers. "I never wanted anybody to die -- I
suffered with the people," she said when questioned in a recent session. If all
the refugees had stayed packed inside the convent, "we were all going to
perish," she said. Sister Maria Kisito, 36, another Hutu nun, also in the dock,
nodded. She is charged with similar crimes, as an alleged accomplice. Defense
lawyers told the court that the nuns had feared retaliation if they harbored
Tutsi refugees.

The "Rwanda Four" as they have come to be known, are being tried under Belgian
laws that were adopted to comply with international human rights conventions,
enabling the courts to try grave human rights violations committed anywhere. The
trial is held in Belgium, Rwanda's former colonial master, because the four
accused had come to live here.

The trial of the two nuns has embarrassed the Roman Catholic Church, which had
already come under heavy criticism over its equivocal role during the Rwandan
tragedy. Influential Belgian Catholics, both politicians and clergy, tried for
several years to block the trial. The judge in charge of the investigations has
complained that Catholic priests put "undue pressures" on some of the nuns who
were important prosecution witnesses, to get them to retract their charges
against their sisters. They did not retract. About a dozen nuns have testified,
for and against the accused.

The case has also reopened the debate about the role of Roman Catholic and
Protestant church leaders, some of whom sided openly with the Hutu government
before it orchestrated the killings of as many as 500,000 Tutsi and moderate
Hutu during the 1994 civil war.

Reports abound of heroic priests and nuns who stood up to the killers and saved
people -- and several hundred priests and nuns were slain themselves. But there
is much evidence of refugees seeking protection in churches, only to be trapped
there and killed after priests had called in armed mobs. Genocide trials in
Rwanda, Africa's most heavily Catholic nation, have already included church
workers, and at least two priests have been sentenced to death.

The much publicized case at the Palace of Justice in Brussels involves two other
Rwandan defendants -- a physics professor, Vincent Ntezimana, and a businessman,
Alphonse Higaniro. The two men, like the nuns, have denied the charges of
complicity in specific murders and of responsibility in a number of unspecified
deaths.

The trial, moreover, has drawn much attention from experts since it began on
April 17 because it represents a milestone in international law. It marks the
first time that a jury of 12 ordinary citizens of one country is asked to judge
people accused of war crimes committed in another country.

Legal scholars say they are looking to the jury's verdict, expected on June 7,
as an important precedent as worldwide interest in prosecuting human rights
crimes mounts. "This is a very painful moment for us," said a Belgian priest who
has followed the proceedings, "but it is important that the truth come out."

The story of what happened at the Sovu convent may not be more devastating than
so much other evil that took place in Rwanda's three-month-long carnage. But six
years of meticulous research by a Belgian judge and his team of investigators --
who went to the sites and questioned scores of people, have produced an
uncommonly detailed and professional reconstruction of what happened in one
religious precinct.

Trouble began in the village of Sovu on April 18, 1994, as women and children
came fleeing from the hills. They had heard explosions and rumors of massacres
nearby. Many flocked to the convent, shown on film in court as a sprawling
complex with a clinic and vegetable fields. As the Tutsi refugees flooded in,
nuns testified in court, Sister Gertrude become more and more disturbed, calling
the refugees "dirt." She and Sister Maria Kisito, who had a brother in the local
Hutu militia, went to get help from soldiers and militiamen who promised to
clear the place, witnesses said.

The first attacks came on April 22, at 7:30 a.m. The indictment says that
soldiers and militia fired on the clinic, where hundreds of people huddled. Then
the militia and local Hutu gangs burst in, brandishing machetes, clubs and hoes.
They chased the refugees and hacked them to death.

That afternoon, the indictment goes on, the gangs returned, this time attacking
the garage, where more than 500 people were barricaded inside. The militia
leader asked for gasoline. Witnesses said that the two nuns arrived with jerry
cans.

The attackers chained the garage doors, knocked holes in the walls and threw
grenades inside, the indictment said. Next they set fire to the packed building.
Sister Maria Kisito brought dried leaves to fan the flames.

"It must have been a true carnage," said the investigating judge who later saw
the burned garage. By the end of that day, 7,000 people had died, the local
police said.

There was more. Three days later, Sister Gertrude met again with the leader of
the Sovu militia, Emmanuel Rekeraho, complaining to him that more refugees were
in the compound, according to the indictment. On April 25, more than 30 people,
among them convent employees and their relatives, were handed over to the
militia, who killed them.

Sister Gertrude was still angry because some relatives of Tutsi nuns remained in
the convent, according to nuns' testimony. There was Aline, the 19-year-old
niece of Sister Benedicte, spending her Easter holidays because she was thinking
of taking her vows. There was Sister Scholastique's niece with her 18-month-old
baby. There were two brothers of Sister Marie-Bernard -- about 22 family members
in all. Nuns testified that for one week the mother superior urged the relatives
to leave, saying the lives of the nuns were in danger.

Mr. Rekeraho, now in prison in Kigali, told the group African Rights that the
nuns' lives were not threatened because he did nothing "without first discussing
it with Kisito and Gertrude." He was reported as saying: "Those two nuns
collaborated with us in everything we did. They got the Tutsi out of their
hiding places and handed them over to us. They shared our hatred for the Tutsi."

According to the indictment, on May 5, the mayor received a letter, signed by
Sister Gertrude. It demanded that all the outsiders "who are insisting on
staying" and for whom there is no food, be removed by May 6, "so that the work
of the monastery can continue in peace."

The mayor appeared the next day, accompanied by police and militia. Sister Maria
Kisito guided them to the rooms. Aline begged the mother superior for a veil to
save her life, but was refused.

In the courtroom, as a large photo of Aline was flashed on a screen, her mother,
Leokadi Makamusame, started sobbing. "My daughter was killed because of a little
piece of cloth," she cried.

The indictment says that the relatives were forced to leave the convent after
the mayor told them they would be safe.

But soon a small group of women returned, among them the mother of Sister
Regine, a Tutsi nun. They had seen killings starting down the road. The mother
begged a policeman to shoot them so they would not be hacked to death by
machetes. The policeman demanded money and she gave him 7,000 Rwandan francs.
Then he shot and killed all six of them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sister Gertrude, left, a Benedictine nun, departing a Brussels
court where she and three others are being tried on charges stemming from
killings in 1994 at a religious compound she headed near Butare, Rwanda. (Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (93%); REFUGEES (91%); RELIGION (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); INDICTMENTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); WITNESSES (78%);
HOMICIDE (78%); FAMILY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); LAWYERS (75%);
PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (74%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (73%); BURN INJURIES (71%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); MURDER (58%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE;  NUNS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; GERTRUDE (NUN); KISITO, MARIA (NUN); NTEZIMANA, VINCENT
(PROF); HIGANIRO, ALPHONSE

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (88%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (97%); BELGIUM (93%)

REGION: RWANDA;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             144 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 13, 2001 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Salute to a Rights Campaigner Who Gave Genocide Its Name

BYLINE:    By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 12


One hundred years after his birth, a largely forgotten immigrant from Poland who
coined the word genocide and pushed a convention outlawing it through the
General Assembly is being honored here, thanks to a small human rights institute
in New York campaigning to keep his story alive.

The immigrant, Raphael Lemkin, a legal expert and linguist who died in 1959 at
58, had fought since 1933 to make genocide, which he first labeled a "crime of
barbarity," a recognized and punishable international offense. The convention,
adopted in December 1948, came into force in 1951. The United States did not
ratify it until 1988, in the waning days of the second Reagan administration.

Felice Gaer, director of the Jacob Blaustein Center for the Advancement of Human
Rights, the organization honoring Mr. Lemkin, said that although 132 countries
had now ratified the convention, and genocide is regarded universally as the
worst of offenses, a number of countries where mass crimes against ethnic or
religious groups have been committed in recent decades have not adhered to the
agreement. Among them are Indonesia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Sudan. Overall,
most African countries and more than half a dozen Latin American and Caribbean
nations have not ratified the convention.

On Wednesday at the United Nations, the Clinton administration's ambassador for
war crimes, David Scheffer, and Secretary General Kofi Annan's wife, Nane Annan,
are to speak at the event focusing on Mr. Lemkin's legacy. (Mr. Annan left
Monday night for the Middle East.) Mr. Scheffer was the chief American
negotiator in the establishment of the International Criminal Court, which will
give a legal home for prosecution of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

The treaty establishing the court was signed by Mr. Scheffer on behalf of the
United States on Dec. 31, but the Clinton White House did not try to fight for
its adoption in a hostile Congress and against the strong objections of the
Pentagon, which wants a guarantee that no American will ever be tried.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said here after a meeting with Mr. Annan
earlier this year that the Bush administration would never support the court.
United Nations officials say the administration has quietly asked the United
Nations whether it can rescind Washington's signature.

Mr. Lemkin first took up the cause of endangered minorities as a child in
Poland, where he read "Quo Vadis" and became obsessed with images of early
Christians being torn to death by lions in Rome as the crowds cheered, according
to a new biography by William Korey, a writer on human rights topics. Dr. Korey
is on the board of the Blaustein institute, part of the American Jewish
Committee, which paid for Mr. Lemkin's burial in Queens, where he died after a
heart attack.

By 1933, before the world's attention -- and Mr. Lemkin's -- turned to Nazi
Germany, he was known internationally for his battle as a Polish prosecutor to
codify crimes against humanity and against cultural and artistic works of ethnic
groups, among them the Armenians who were the victims of the Ottoman Turks. He
fled Poland for Sweden in 1939 after the German invasion. His parents died in
the Holocaust nearly a decade later, though he did not know their fate for
several years.

By the end of World War II, and with the establishment of the United Nations,
Mr. Lemkin moved to New York to begin his campaign for a genocide convention.

Writing and teaching law intermittently at Duke University and Yale, he lobbied
endlessly and often annoyingly, according to Dr. Korey, until the Genocide
Convention won a place on the United Nations' agenda.

"Genocide" first appeared in 1944, the Oxford English Dictionary says, in a book
by Mr. Lemkin, "Axis Rule in Occupied Europe," which was published in the United
States by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He told his
contemporaries that he had stumbled on the idea while reading Plato, who used
the Greek word genos to describe a clan or ethnic group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 14, 2001



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about Raphael Lemkin, the legal scholar who
coined the word "genocide," misstated the interval between his flight from
Poland and his parents' death in the Holocaust. While Mr. Lemkin did not know
when they died, the interval could not have been nearly a decade. He fled in
1939, six years before the end of World War II.

An article yesterday about Raphael Lemkin, the legal scholar who coined the word
"genocide," misstated the interval between his flight from Poland and his
parents' death in the Holocaust. While Mr. Lemkin did not know when they died,
the interval could not have been nearly a decade. He fled in 1939, six years
before the end of World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); RELIGION (72%); WRITERS (72%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (70%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (67%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (60%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (50%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  TREATIES;  AWARDS, DECORATIONS
AND HONORS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS; BLAUSTEIN, JACOB, CENTER FOR
THE ADVANCEMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: LEMKIN, RAPHAEL (1901-1959); CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); POLAND (88%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%); SUDAN (79%); NIGERIA (79%); AFRICA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); CARIBBEAN
ISLANDS (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%); GERMANY (50%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 20, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights and a Nominee

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

Your June 14 front-page article about John D. Negroponte, the nominee for
ambassador to the United Nations, gives the impression that there is some
question of his commitment to human rights and the rule of law. In fact, his
record is abysmal.

Two American citizens, the Rev. James Carney and David Arturo Baez Cruz, were
"disappeared" by the Honduran military during Mr. Negroponte's tenure as
ambassador to Honduras. A 1985 State Department memo reads: "Fr. Carney case . .
. is dead. Front office does not want the case active. . . . We aren't telling
that to the family."

A 1997 C.I.A. report notes "embassy did not want information concerning human
rights abuses . . . to be disseminated," as it would "reflect negatively on
Honduras and not be beneficial in carrying out U.S. policy." The report
continues: "No further reporting on the prisoner executions . . . there was
concern on the part of Negroponte that over-emphasis would create an unwarranted
human rights problem for Honduras." This man is going to regain respect for
America's human rights record?

JOHN HANSON
Greenville, S.C., June 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); RULE OF LAW (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (90%)

CITY: GREENVILLE, SC, USA (50%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, SC, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             149 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 12, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Reward Dictators

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 205 words


To the Editor:

Re "Beijing Must Wait, Worry, and Not Mess Up" (Sports pages, July 11): Despite
its awful human rights record, China is a strong candidate to play host to the
2008 Summer Olympic Games. It has been argued that the Olympics will motivate
China to improve its human rights record.

I disagree.

There is no logic in rewarding an abuser for displaying the potential to do less
harm. If Beijing is given the 2008 Summer Games, the Chinese government will
learn that it can get what it wants without improving individual rights, and the
Olympics will lead only to superficial improvements in the lives of the Chinese.

On the other hand, if Beijing is not offered the Olympics, then the whole world,
including other problematic regimes, will see that totalitarianism does not pay
off. Furthermore, the Chinese government will come to understand that unless it
establishes a much better human rights record, it need not bid on another
Olympics.

It is a mystery to me how Beijing became a candidate to be host to the Olympics
since the Olympic Charter states that "Olympism seeks to create a way of life
based on the joy found in . . . respect for universal fundamental ethical
principles."

H. ARKIN KORA
New York, July 11, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (90%);
SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ETHICS (72%);
OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (72%) OLYMPIC GAMES (2008);  SUMMER GAMES (OLYMPICS);
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (59%) INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE

PERSON: KORA, H ARKIN

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%)

REGION: CHINA;  BEIJING (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             150 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1172 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

U.S. Drops 2-War Strategy To Buttress Home Defense
The United States is abandoning requirements that its military be able to fight
two major wars simultaneously, according to a classified document. The new
strategy orders the armed forces to "win decisively" in a single major conflict,
defend American territory against new threats and wage a number of actions
around the globe. The shift could mean more money for the proposed missile
shield and for fighting terrorism.   A1

Senior Pentagon officials disclosed details of a missile defense testing plan
that they said could lead to a working system within four years. Senate
Democrats said it would probably violate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty within
a year.   A1


Algerian Leader Meets Bush
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, making the first visit of an Algerian head of
state to the White House in 16 years, met with President Bush, who urged him to
move ahead with economic and political reforms.   A3

U.S. Report on Slavery
The State Department criticized several American allies, including Saudi Arabia,
Israel, Greece and South Korea, for not doing enough to stop slave trafficking
within their borders.   A8

Dissenting View on Taliban
Human Rights Watch broke ranks with other human rights groups and Washington,
issuing a report that asserted that the Taliban alone were not responsible for a
deepening disaster in Afghanistan and calling for sanctions against Russia and
Iran for militarily aiding the opposition.   A8

South Africa Evicts Squatters
Riot police and demolition workers tore down the flimsy shacks of homeless
people living on a vacant farm after negotiations broke down between church
leaders and local officials. The move was seen as a message that the government
would not tolerate the kind of farm invasions that have occurred in Zimbabwe.
A8

Riots in Northern Ireland
The police and rioters fought pitched battles after a day of marches by
Protestants that Roman Catholics denounced as a provocation.   A3

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A10-18

Campaign Finance Bill Is Dealt Setback in House
The House voted, 228-203, to reject the ground rules for debate that had been
set by Republican leaders, putting the bill's resurrection in doubt and leaving
each party blaming the other for the impasse; 19 Republicans voted with all 208
Democrats against the rules, which sponsors believed would kill the bill.   A1

Move to Compromise on Drilling
The Senate signaled its clear support for a compromise White House plan for new
oil and gas drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico, turning aside a
Democrat-backed measure, 67 to 33, that would have blocked exploration in the
area.   A12

Push for Better Fuel Efficiency
A pivotal House panel voted, 29 to 3, to require carmakers to raise the fuel
economy of sport-utility vehicles and minivans, setting the stage for the first
Congressionally mandated increase in auto efficiency standards in a generation.
A12

Bush's Drug Discount Plan
Five big health care companies promised to work with President Bush to help
Medicare beneficiaries get discounts on prescription drugs through a voluntary
private program starting Jan. 1. Democrats ridiculed Mr. Bush's proposal as a
trivial step in addressing a big problem.   A1

U.S. to Guard Abortion Doctor
Attorney General John Ashcroft ordered the United States Marshals Service to
protect Dr. George Tiller, a Kansas physician who has been singled out as a
subject of expected anti-abortion protests.   A17

Fugitive's Extradition Ordered
Ira Einhorn, 61, convicted of killing his girlfriend in Philadelphia nearly a
quarter-century ago, was ordered extradited to the United States, but the French
government quickly delayed the move for a week when he slit his own throat. His
lawyer said he could be out of the hospital in two days.   A17

Tax Protesters Win a Round
Tennessee lawmakers abandoned plans to resurrect a state income tax after about
200 protesters chanting "No new taxes" broke windows at the Capitol and accosted
lawmakers. The state police locked the building, but no arrests were reported.
A10

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Louima to Get $8.75 Million To Settle Brutality Lawsuit
The city will pay $7.125 million and its main police union will pay $1.625
million to settle the brutality suit brought by Abner Louima, who was tortured
in a Brooklyn station house. The agreement does not mention any change in police
procedures, but Mr. Louima said the process of altering how officers were
trained, monitored and disciplined had begun.   A1

Vacant Units Deregulated
Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village, bulwarks of middle-income housing in
the city, are removing vacant apartments from rent regulation and turning them
into luxury rentals for $2,100 to $4,200 a month.   B1

EDUCATION

A Promotion From Within
An assistant principal for biology, Valerie Reidy, was named principal of the
Bronx High School of Science after a national search for a new leader for the
elite public school.   B1

New Standards Faulted
The superintendents of the nation's two largest city school systems, New York
and Los Angeles, warned that new testing and accountability measures passed by
Congress could drive down educational standards.   A10

SPORTS   D1-8

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Attempt to Clone Embryos
Advanced Cell Technology, a Massachusetts company, is using cloning technology
to try to create human embryos that would yield stem cells.   A14

Nancy Reagan has privately indicated her support for research on embryonic stem
cells, and two of her husband's closest former aides were said to have conveyed
her position to senior White House officials.   A14

Variations in the Genome
Scientists said a study of the variability in the human genome found that each
human gene may come in 12 different versions on average, a finding that cast
doubt on an effort to mine the genome for the genetic basis of common human
diseases.   A14

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Airline Deal Forced Forward
United Airlines reluctantly agreed to move forward with its proposed $4.3
billion bid to buy US Airways, at the insistence of US Airways and under an
implied threat of litigation.   C1

Change Atop Investment Bank
John J. Mack, a former president of Morgan Stanley, was named to run Credit
Suisse First Boston, succeeding Allen D. Wheat, who was fired.   C1

Rise in G.E.'s Profits
General Electric, despite a decline in quarterly revenue, said second-quarter
earnings were up 15 percent from the same quarter last year.   C2

A State and Microsoft Settle
New Mexico settled its antitrust claims against Microsoft, dropping from the
lawsuit brought by 18 states and the federal government.   C5

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

WEEKEND   E1-26; E27-36

Emmy Nominations
HBO's "Sopranos" led the nominations, with 22, followed by NBC's "West Wing,"
with 18. The winners will be announced on Sept. 16.   E24

OBITUARIES   A19

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: Mr. Hastert's debacle; the next Microsoft Windows; terrorizing
civilians in Chechnya.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E38
TV Listings   E26
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); RIOTS (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(79%); EVICTION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); SLAVERY
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (74%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (73%); EMERGING MARKETS
(72%); TERRORISM (70%); RELIGION (69%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (69%); AUTOMOBILE MFG
(68%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (67%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (64%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (64%); HOMELESSNESS (64%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION
(63%); SPORT UTILITY VEHICLES (63%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (63%); MOTOR VEHICLES
(61%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (60%); AUTOMAKERS (60%); OIL EXTRACTION (60%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (54%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); ABDELAZIZ BOUTEFLIKA (53%)

STATE: GULF OF MEXICO (79%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); ALGERIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND
(79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 21, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing United Nations: Support For Slavery Reparations

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 92 words


Human Rights Watch threw its weight behind demands for reparations and
compensation for slavery, a topic likely to inflame debate at the United
Nations-sponsored World Conference Against Racism later this summer in Durban,
South Africa. The New York-based international human rights organization called
for the establishment of panels in countries including the United States, Brazil
and South Africa to assess the effects of slavery and colonialism, and look for
the broadest ways to compensate the descendants of slaves.   Barbara Crossette
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (54%)
SLAVERY;  UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  REPARATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (90%); BRAZIL (86%)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             158 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 26, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/Defining Moments;
Did Machete-Wielding Hutus Commit Genocide or Just 'Acts of Genocide'?

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1367 words


IN the spring of 1994, United States government policymakers were confronted
with mounting evidence that a blood bath of huge proportions was taking place in
the central African country of Rwanda. Moreover, the nature of the killing -- by
Hutu-backed militias, aimed largely at civilians within the Tutsi minority --
raised the likelihood that genocide was occurring. Those Hutus who favored
ending a four-year-old civil war with Tutsi rebels were also killed.

The Clinton administration had little inclination to become involved in an
ethnic conflict in Africa, especially since it had just lost 18 servicemen in an
ill-defined peacekeeping mission Somalia.

One of the issues administration officials debated behind the scenes was whether
it was best to avoid using the word genocide to describe what was happening, as
that might increase legal and political pressure to act. Documents disclosed
last week by the National Security Archive show some of that debate. On May 21,
1994, Secretary of State Warren Christopher agreed to allow department officials
to say that "acts of genocide have occurred," and on June 10, he finally flatly
called it genocide. Between April 6, when the killing began, and July 4, when
the Tutsi rebels took over the capital city of Kigali, an estimated 800,000
people were slaughtered.

In a visit to Rwanda in March 1998, President Clinton expressed regret that the
West did not recognize the genocide for what it was far earlier.
   NEIL A. LEWIS

The killing began immediately after an airplane carrying the Rwandan president,
Juvenal Habyarimana, was downed as he returned from a peace conference in
Tanzania. Less than a month later, senior Defense Department officials held a
meeting in the Pentagon about the situation in Rwanda. A memorandum dated May 1,
1994, recorded the discussion of several topics and concluded:

1. Genocide Investigation: Language that calls for an international
investigation of human rights abuses and possible violations of the genocide
convention.

Be careful. Legal at State the Office of Legal Adviser at the State Department
was worried about this yesterday -- Genocide finding could commit U.S.G.  United
States Government to actually "do something."

One month into the genocide, the Defense Intelligence Agency, an arm of the
Pentagon, drafted a military analysis of the situation. The May 9 memorandum
asserted that genocide was occurring:

It appears that, in addition to the random massacre of Tutsis by Hutu militias
and individuals, there is an organized, parallel effort of genocide being
implemented by the Army to destroy the leadership of the Tutsi community. The
original intent was to kill only the political elite supporting reconciliation;
however, the government lost control of the militias and the massacre spread
liked wildfire. It continues to rage out of control.

On May 18, Toby T. Gati, the assistant secretary of state for intelligence and
research, sent a memo to the head of the Africa division, George E. Moose, and
to the legal adviser Conrad K. Harper, detailing events showing that genocide
was occurring:

There is substantial circumstantial evidence implicating senior Rwandan
government and military officials in the widespread, systematic killing of
ethnic Tutsis. . . . Massacres in Rwanda have claimed from 200,000 to 500,000
lives, according to international humanitarian organizations. (We believe
500,000 is an exaggerated estimate. . . .) Most of the killed have been Tutsi
citizens, including women and children.

Ms. Gati went on to list some of the criteria for genocide under the 1948 Geneva
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crime and Genocide:

KILLING AND HARM. International organizations, foreign diplomats and indigenous
eye witnesses have reported systematic executions of Tutsis in villages,
schools, hospitals and churches by Hutu militia, the Presidential Guard and
military forces. Many have been killed or gravely injured by machete-wielding
militia members because they are ethnic Tutsi, have Tutsi physical
characteristics or support Tutsis. . . .

UNBEARABLE LIVING CONDITIONS. Campaigns of ethnic cleansing against Tutsis
appear well-planned and systematic. Homes are often destroyed and looted after
the occupants have been killed. Hospital staff have witnessed the execution of
Tutsi patients. . . .

MEASURES TO PREVENT BIRTHS. Tutsi children, along with their parents, are being
mutilated and killed. In one town, pregnant women at a maternity clinic were
massacred. . . .

On May 16, a lawyer in the Office of Legal Adviser drafted a memo concluding
that all the legal prerequisites for genocide had occurred in Rwanda. The
lawyer, Joan Donoghue, listed three main criteria: specific acts had been
committed; the acts were committed against members of a national, ethnic or
racial group; and they were committed with the intent to destroy the group. For
the first criterion, she relied on figures and descriptions from the office of
Ms. Gati, whose memo was drafted two days later:

There can be little question that the specific listed acts have taken place in
Rwanda. . . .

The second requirement is also clearly satisfied. As I.N.R.  Ms. Gati's agency
notes, most of those killed in Rwanda have been Tutsi civilians, including women
and children. . . .

It also appears that the third element has been satisfied. At least some of the
prohibited acts have apparently been committed with the requisite intent to
destroy, in whole or in part, the Tutsi group as required by the Convention. . .
.

On May 21, using both the Gati and Donoghue memos, four senior State Department
officials urged Secretary Christopher to allow the statement that "acts of
genocide have occurred." The four officials, Mr. Moose, Mr. Harper, John
Shattuck, assistant secretary of human rights, and Douglas J. Bennet, assistant
secretary for International Organizations, titled their memo "Has Genocide
Occurred?":

Events in Rwanda have led to press and public inquiries about whether genocide
has occurred there. In light of the Gati and Donoghue memos we believe that
Department officials should be authorized to state that "acts of genocide have
occurred." This is the same formulation that we use with respect to Bosnia. . .
.

A U.S.G. statement that acts of genocide have occurred would not have any
particular legal consequences. Under the Convention, the prosecution of persons
charged with genocide is the responsibility of the competent courts in the state
where the acts took place or an international penal tribunal (none has yet been
established); the U.S. has no criminal jurisdiction over acts of genocide
occurring within Rwanda unless they are committed by U.S. citizens. . . .

Although lacking in legal consequences, a clear statement that the U.S.G.
believes that acts of genocide have occurred could increase pressure for U.S.
activism in response to the crisis in Rwanda. . . .

Referring to a coming meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the
officials said the United States would have to take a stand:

If we do not seize the opportunity presented by such a forum as the U.N.H.R.C.
meeting to use the genocide label to condemn events in Rwanda, our credibility
will be undermined with human rights groups and the general public who may
question how much evidence we can legitimately require before coming to a policy
conclusion.

On June 10, relying on the State Department guidance, Christine Shelly, a
department spokeswoman, replied to reporters' questions by saying that "acts of
genocide have occurred in Rwanda." Pressed by reporters to define the difference
between "acts of genocide" and "genocide" Ms. Shelly replied:

As to the distinctions between the words, we're trying to call what we have seen
so far as best we can; and based again on the evidence, we have every reason to
believe that acts of genocide have occurred.

Alan Elsner, a Reuters reporter, then asked:

How many acts of genocide does it take to make genocide?

Ms. Shelly: Alan, that's just not a question I'm prepared to answer

Later that day in Istanbul, where he was traveling, Mr. Christopher told a
questioner:

If there is any particular magic in calling it genocide, I have no hesitancy in
saying that.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Tutsi teacher who managed to survive an attack by Hutus with
machetes. (Jean-Marc Bouju/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (88%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); PEACEKEEPING (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); PEACE PROCESS (66%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(64%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  RWANDA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
HUTU TRIBE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY ARCHIVE

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (72%) CLINTON, BILL

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (92%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%);
SOMALIA (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lost Chance at Durban

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 139 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Danger of Walking Out at Durban," by Michael Lerner (Op-Ed, Sept. 4):

The United Nations conference on racism is not just about the Middle East
conflict but also about the millions of refugees who are fleeing racism but who
find intolerance; about the so-called untouchables of South Asia; about
repairing the legacy of slavery; about how H.I.V. and AIDS disproportionately
affect people of color; about the ways that racism and sexism interact; and
about racism in the application of the death penalty.

By leaving the conference, the United States squandered an opportunity to stand
against intolerance, take pride in its own successes and face the challenges in
the long fight for equality at home and abroad.

REED BRODY
Durban, South Africa, Sept. 7, 2001

The writer is advocacy director of Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); REFUGEES (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); WRITERS (73%); SLAVERY (69%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (53%) UNITED NATIONS
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) UNITED NATIONS;
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: BRODY, REED

COUNTRY: ASIA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED STATES (90%); SOUTH AFRICA (78%)

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             160 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE ACCORD ON RACISM: THE DECLARATION;
Regrets for Past Wrongs And Hopes for Peace

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 874 words


Following are excerpts from the Middle East declaration approved yesterday by
the United Nations conference in Durban, South Africa, and from the Program of
Action.

1. We are conscious of the fact that the history of humanity is replete with
major atrocities as a result of the gross violation of human rights and believe
that lessons can be learned through remembering history to avert future
tragedies.

2. We recall that the Holocaust must never be forgotten.

3. We recognize with deep concern religious intolerance against certain
religious communities, as well as the emergence of hostile acts and violence
against such communities because of their religious beliefs and their racial or
ethnic origin in various parts of the world which in particular limit their
right to freely practice their belief.

4. We also recognize with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism and
Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the emergence of racial
and violent movements based on racism and discriminatory ideas against Jewish,
Muslim and Arab communities.

5. We are conscious that humanity's history is replete with terrible wrongs
inflicted through lack of respect for the equality of human beings and note with
alarm the increase of such practices in various parts of the world, and we urge
people, particularly in conflict situations, to desist from racist incitement,
derogatory language and negative stereotyping.

We are concerned about the plight of the Palestinian people under foreign
occupation.

We recognize the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and to the establishment of an independent state, and we
recognize the right to security for all states in the region, including Israel,
and call upon all states to support the peace process and bring it to an early
conclusion.

6. We call for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the region in which
all peoples shall coexist and enjoy equality, justice and internationally
recognized human rights, and security.

7. We recognize the right of refugees to return voluntarily to their homes and
properties in dignity and safety, and urge all states to facilitate such return.


Program of Action

1. We believe that all conflicts and disputes should be resolved through
peaceful means and political dialogue. We call on all parties involved in such
conflicts to exercise restraint and to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law.

2. We call upon states, in opposing all forms of racism, to recognize the need
to counter anti-Semitism, anti-Arabism and Islamophobia worldwide and urge all
states to take effective measures to prevent the emergence of movements based on
racism and discriminatory ideas concerning these communities.

3. As for the situation in the Middle East, we call for the end of violence and
the swift resumption of negotiations, respect for international human rights and
humanitarian law, respect for the principle of self-determination and the end of
all suffering, thus allowing Israel and the Palestinians to resume the peace
process, and to develop and prosper in security and freedom.

Slavery Text

We acknowledge that slavery and the slave trade, including the trans-Atlantic
slave trade, were appalling tragedies in the history of humanity not only
because of their abhorrent barbarism but also in terms of their magnitude,
organized nature and especially their negation of the essence of the victims and
further acknowledge that slavery and the slave trade are a crime against
humanity and should always have been so, especially the trans-Atlantic slave
trade, and are among the major sources and manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and that Africans and people
of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent and indigenous peoples
were victims of these acts and continue to be victims of their consequences.

Remedies and Other Measures

The world conference acknowledges and profoundly regrets the massive human
sufferings and the tragic plight of millions of men, women and children caused
by slavery, slave trade, trans-Atlantic slave trade, apartheid, colonialism and
genocide and calls upon states concerned to honor the memory of the victims of
past tragedies and affirms that wherever and whenever these occurred they must
be condemned and their reoccurrence prevented.

The world conference regrets that these practices and structures, political,
socioeconomic and cultural, have led to racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.

The world conference recognized that these historical injustices have undeniably
contributed to poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion,
economic disparities, instability and insecurity that affect many people in
different parts of the world, in particular in developing countries.

The world conference recognizes the need to develop programs for the social and
economic development of these societies and the diaspora within the framework of
a new partnership based on the spirit of solidarity and mutual respect in the
following areas: debt relief, poverty eradication, building or strengthening
democratic institutions, promotion of foreign direct investment, market access.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (94%); RACE & RACISM (92%); RELIGION (91%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
APPROVALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HOLOCAUST (76%); JEWS & JUDAISM (76%);
REFUGEES (73%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  SLAVERY;
PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); ISRAEL (93%);
SOUTH AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: MIDDLE EAST;  ISRAEL;  AFRICA

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 11, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Blacklists Paramilitaries In Colombia

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 380 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Sept. 10


A day before Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was to arrive to meet President
Andres Pastrana, the Bush administration today blacklisted a right-wing
paramilitary group as a terrorist organization responsible for hundreds of
massacres in its war against leftist rebels.

Being put on the State Department list of terrorist groups means that financial
support for the organization is illegal. The action also makes it easier for the
United States to seize assets, an important factor because investigators here
estimate that the paramilitary groups have hundreds of millions of dollars in
foreign bank accounts.

Washington made its decision as the group, the United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia, has embarked on a program to shuffle its command and remake its image.

On June 6, the longtime commander of the 8,000-member group, Carlos Castano,
resigned to oversee its political wing. On Wednesday, the group said it was
forming a nationwide political movement to "to dignify politics and make peace
possible."

But to human rights groups and the State Department, the Self-Defense Forces is
simply seen as a brutally efficient killing machine responsible for thousands of
deaths in the last decade, mainly of civilians suspected by the group of being
rebel sympathizers.

"Many of these massacres were designed to terrorize and intimidate local
populations so the A.U.C. could gain control of these areas," Secretary Powell
said in a statement, referring to the group by its Spanish initials. "I hope
this will leave no doubt that the United States considers terrorism to be
unacceptable, regardless of the political or ideological purpose."

The secretary's visit is intended to reassure the government here that although
the Bush administration is reviewing its anti-drug policy in Colombia, it is not
contemplating a change in the drive to strengthen the military to fight drugs
and support peace negotiations.

Mr. Pastrana's efforts against drugs are being supported by $1.1 billion in
American aid. But they have been complicated by the paramilitary groups, who
have attacked peace advocates and worked to derail peace efforts with rebels.
The group is also heavily involved in drug trafficking and, human rights groups
say, benefits from close ties to some military units.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (91%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); DRUG
POLICY (86%); POLITICS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LIBERALISM (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (76%); ARMED FORCES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (68%);
PEACE PROCESS (65%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (63%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%) UNITED SELF-DEFENSE
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); COLOMBIA (97%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             162 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Move: Room for Guns and Butter?

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 159 words


To the Editor:

Thomas L. Friedman ("Hama Rules," column, Sept. 21) is right to focus on the
repression of domestic Islamist opposition movements by America's Arab allies as
a contributing factor to the violence. Reform-minded, peaceable activists have
been treated the same way as extremists bent on political violence.

Across the Arab world, many United States allies commit serious human rights
violations, practices that the United States and other Western states have not
adequately challenged. Instead, these governments have been praised for their
"moderation," and some have been rewarded with generous foreign aid. Such
responses have communicated an indifference to the aspirations of Arab people
for basic rights and freedoms and have fueled cynicism throughout the region.

NEIL HICKS
New York, Sept. 25, 2001

The writer, an official of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, oversees the
committee's work on behalf of human rights defenders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (56%)

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             163 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Deputies Back War Crimes Court

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Jan. 2


After months of delay, the Cambodia National Assembly voted today to create a
special tribunal, with help from the United Nations, to try the leaders of the
murderous Khmer Rouge regime of the 1970's.

Many political and technical pitfalls still lie ahead, and officials and experts
said that it might be years before any of the aging leaders face trial and that
some could evade justice altogether.

"I cannot say how many years, but it will take time," the assembly's president,
Norodom Ranariddh, said on Friday.

The assembly acted surprisingly quickly, after just two days of consideration
and with little debate. But it remained unclear whether Prime Minister Hun Sen,
who orchestrates most political events, truly wants a trial to proceed.

"It's a step forward," said a diplomat with long experience in Cambodia, "but we
know that the roads are very rocky here. Based on past experience I would at
this stage tread very carefully."

Though there was a show trial for absent defendants in 1979, no one has yet been
brought into court to answer for the deaths of more than a million people when
the Communist Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979.

When its guerrilla resistance collapsed at the end of the 1990's, most of its
surviving leaders were granted amnesty and have been left alone to live in quiet
retirement. Its supreme leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998.

The measure passed today, based on an American formula, involves a cumbersome
compromise in which both Cambodian and foreign prosecutors and judges would
jointly select the defendants and jointly reach their verdicts. The foreign
judges would be in the minority but would hold veto power over decisions.

The compromise was made necessary by the resistance of Mr. Hun Sen, who is
seeking to keep control of the process and who has engaged in what one political
expert, Kao Kim Hourn, called "a policy of ambiguity" regarding his intentions.

Both foreign and domestic critics say the formula leaves the process vulnerable
to the corruption and political manipulation that characterize the Cambodian
legal system.

"Maybe it will function well -- maybe -- but we are concerned," said Kek
Galabru, the head of Cambodia's leading human rights group, Licadho. "It is
difficult to find independent judges in Cambodia, and most of the judges and
prosecutors are not professional. And also there is the problem of corruption.
So it will be difficult for the United Nations-appointed judges and prosecutors
to work with the Cambodian team."

Sara Colm, the Cambodia representative of the New York-based group Human Rights
Watch, expressed a widely held concern that the mixed-tribunal formula might set
a precedent in which future United Nations courts could be similarly diluted by
local political pressures.

She said a difficult process of negotiation with the United Nations over the
last four years has been "a steady retreat" from the ideal of an impartial
international tribunal.

"The concern is that by relying so much on the Cambodian judiciary -- which has
been torn apart by the Khmer Rouge years and is still in the process of
rebuilding -- that a tribunal of this nature would not be able to offer the
fairness and transparency that is required," she said.

By selecting and pressuring the Cambodian members of the tribunal, she said, the
government could determine who is prosecuted and how defendants are judged.

Mr. Hun Sen has said that at least one Khmer Rouge leader, Ieng Sary, should not
be tried, although his name is one of the main half dozen raised by proponents
of the trials.

Mr. Hun Sen has alternated between urging that the past be buried and forgotten
and urging that a trial proceed to exorcise the ghosts of the past. Foreign
envoys who have visited him have emerged alternately encouraged and frustrated.

His policy of ambiguity involves balancing pressures from both internal and
external groups, including demands for a trial from most Western nations and
pressure against a trial from China, a long-term sponsor of the Khmer Rouge.
Both sides wield significant economic and political influence in Cambodia.

Though he likes to call himself a strongman -- and often acts like one -- Mr.
Hun Sen faces internal pressures from his party. A number of its top officials,
like Mr. Hun Sen himself, were themselves low-level Khmer Rouge cadre and fear
that prosecutors could cast a wide net.

The measure passed today explicitly takes that concern into account, specifying
that only those "most responsible" for atrocities would be put on trial.

Critics say, though, that any prior limitation on the defendants could stymie a
fair and unfettered investigation. A great deal of documentary evidence has been
gathered by a Cambodian documentation center, but legal experts say that witness
interviews are central to successful prosecutions.

The names of the surviving leaders and suspects are well known. In addition to
Mr. Ieng Sary, two top leaders who surrendered two years ago -- Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan -- live in a remote enclave near the Thai border under a
provisional amnesty, surrounded by former Khmer Rouge fighters who were once
under their command. Documentary evidence has also been gathered implicating Mr.
Ieng Sary's wife, Ieng Thirith.

Two other prominent figures who did not surrender and were not granted amnesty
by the government -- Ta Mok and Kaing Khek Ieu, the commandant of the Khmer
Rouge torture chamber, Tuol Sleng -- have been jailed and could be the first
defendants to be brought into court.

Mr. Hun Sen has warned of instability if a trial proceeds, and he has been
suspected of fomenting violence himself when it suits his ends. Most experts
dismiss the possibility of any concerted Khmer Rouge backlash.

But a number of steps remain to be taken before any trial can proceed. The
measure passed today must be approved by a newly created and usually passive
Senate as well as a Constitutional Council before being signed into law by King
Norodom Sihanouk.

Then a new round of negotiations with the United Nations over procedures and
technicalities would begin. Only then could the expensive and complex process
begin of setting up a court, choosing prosecutors and judges and investigating
potential defendants.

"This has been the easy part," said Mr. Kao Kim Hourn, the director of the
Cambodian Institute for Cooperation and Peace. "The more challenging part will
be putting together the team -- particularly the Cambodian team -- and having
the two teams work together in setting up the court."

And even that will only be a start, he said.

"The other, more challenging, part will be how to encourage those alleged Khmer
Rouge leaders to come forward to appear in the court," he said. "Very
challenging. And what would happen if they would not show up in court?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cambodian legislators yesterday approved the creation of a
special tribunal, with help from the United Nations, to try the former leaders
of the Khmer Rouge, which killed more than a million people in the 1970's.
(Reuters); Ta Mok, a top commander, could be one of the first to be tried.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JUDGES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CORRUPTION (85%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%);
VERDICTS (76%); VETO (75%); AMNESTY (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%) FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             167 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Accuser In Spain Finds Tables a Bit Turned

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 235 words

DATELINE: MADRID, Feb. 12


The judge who sought to try the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet on
human rights abuses has been placed under investigation on suspicion of
improperly disclosing information about cases to a journalist, a disciplinary
board said today.

The charges against the judge, Baltasar Garzon, will be heard by the judicial
oversight board.

If found guilty, Mr. Garzon could face punishment ranging from a $300 fine to
being removed from the bench.

The investigation ordered by the disciplinary board stems from a book published
in December by Pilar Urbano titled "Garzon: the Man Who Saw the Dawn."

It addresses high-profile cases handled by Mr. Garzon, including his failed
effort last year to put General Pinochet on trial in Madrid for human rights
abuses.

Mr. Garzon issued the warrant that kept General Pinochet under house arrest in
London for 16 months. But Britain refused to extradite General Pinochet to
Madrid, and the general returned to Chile.

Mr. Garzon, who as an investigative judge conducts inquries and issues
indictments, also has brought charges against officials for the deaths of
Spaniards in Argentina and Chile.

When Ms. Urbano's book came out, questions were raised as to whether Mr. Garzon
was the source of the information. Ms. Urbano said Mr. Garzon refused to discuss
cases he had handled. But she admits that some information in those cases is
presented as quotes from Mr. Garzon.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); INDICTMENTS (78%); EXTRADITION (78%); HOUSE
ARREST (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); JUDICIAL ETHICS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); ARRESTS (77%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GARZON, BALTASAR (JUDGE); PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (86%); LONDON, ENGLAND (53%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (93%); SPAIN (90%); ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: CHILE;  SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             168 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2001 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

China's Crackdown on Sect Stirs Alarm Over Psychiatric Abuse

BYLINE:   By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1555 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 17


China's crackdown on the Falun Gong spiritual movement is focusing new attention
on Beijing's practice of imprisoning dissenters in psychiatric hospitals.

In the government's campaign to discredit Falun Gong, the official press here
has openly suggested that believers are mentally disturbed and need treatment.
Hundreds of defiant followers have been forcibly hospitalized and medicated,
according to reports from Falun Gong and from human rights monitors.

A new report has further stoked alarm abroad by documenting an unexpectedly rich
history of questionable psychiatric practices aimed at stifling political
dissenters.

"But what's surprising now is the sharp increase in cases," said Robin Munro, a
British researcher and author of the report, which appeared in the Columbia
Journal of Asian Law. He said the rise was attributable to the government's
18-month-old crackdown on Falun Gong, a widespread spiritual movement that the
government has condemned as a dangerous cult.

The new attention on China's abuses comes as the country has been trying to
burnish its human rights image, hoping to be chosen as the site for the 2008
Olympics. Bush administration officials nonetheless said on Friday that they
would condemn China's record at an annual United Nations forum in Geneva.

Apart from the wrenching decade of Mao's Cultural Revolution, which ended in
1976, China has not been known for the systematic abuses of psychiatry that
occurred in the Soviet Union, where hundreds of dissidents were spuriously
diagnosed as schizophrenic and locked away. And Chinese and Western experts have
praised the broader field of psychiatry here for advancing under difficult
conditions and becoming more scientific.

But with the Falun Gong crackdown, concern over the political misuse of
psychiatry is rising. And outside Falun Gong, political cases like that of Cao
Maobing, a worker in a state-owned silk mill in Jiangsu Province, have attracted
international attention.

Last year, Mr. Cao was in trouble with authorities after he protested against
corruption and tried to organize fellow workers into an independent trade union.
In December, one day after he spoke with foreign reporters about his complaints,
the police took him to a psychiatric hospital, where he has been medicated and
forced to undergo electroshock therapy, said relatives and friends who insist
that he is not insane but a determined advocate. The hospital director says a
committee of 17 experts has declared that Mr. Cao suffers "paranoid psychosis."

Even given such cases, Mr. Munro said official data indicated that China's
political use of psychiatric confinement had declined significantly in the
1990's, before Falun Gong was banned a year and a half ago.

Now, he said, "the new repression of Falun Gong has sounded a loud warning
bell."

"The mental-pathology model is being extended to religious nonconformists," Mr.
Munro charged. He calls this a potentially ominous harbinger as China enters an
era of rapid social change.

That fear is vehemently countered by leading Chinese psychiatrists, supported by
some experts in the West, who say the fervent spiritual practices of Falun Gong
present a special case.

Mr. Munro's report casts special attention on a secretive, police-managed system
of 20 centers for the criminally insane. Critics say those hospitals may harbor
the worst examples of political abuse, although they have not generally been
used for Falun Gong believers.

Alarmed by the Falun Gong reports and by the evidence in Mr. Munro's article of
a broader history of problems than many had realized, medical and rights groups
abroad are starting a global campaign to condemn psychiatric abuses in China and
to push for access to suspect hospitals by outside experts.

"We hope that outside pressure can end this form of repression," said Robert van
Voren, general secretary of the Geneva Initiative on Psychiatry, a coalition of
European and American doctors that drew world attention to Soviet misdeeds.

"With China's desire to host the 2008 Olympics, I don't think they'll want
another scandal," Mr. van Voren said in an interview.

The group has started lobbying national psychiatric associations around the
world to consider censuring or suspending China at next year's meeting of the
World Psychological Association.

But many Chinese psychiatrists, supported by some Western experts, insist that
comparisons with the former Soviet Union are misleading and that political
malpractice by their profession is uncommon today.

"Our biggest problem is not that normal people are diagnosed as mentally ill,
but that ill people are not getting the evaluation and treatment they need,"
said Dr. Tian Zu'en, chief of forensic psychiatry at Anding Psychiatric
Hospital, run by the Bureau of Health in Beijing.

Dr. Tian said that while there might be a few examples around the country of
people in the criminal system having been committed to hospitals without the
required scientific evaluation, the problem "should not be wildly blown out of
proportion."

Mr. Munro, the report author, said the problem was ultimately rooted outside
psychiatry, in China's repression of independent political speech and
organizing.

"Sane or insane, these people are not committing criminal offenses by
international standards," he said.  Those who have mental disorders should be
treated in a medical rather than a criminal setting, he said.

Mr. Munro hazards a calculation that since 1980, at least 3,000 people who were
arrested for some kind of "political" crime were referred for psychiatric
evaluation, with many of them deemed mentally ill and confined for some period.

"We don't know how many of these people were mentally disordered," Mr. Munro
said. "What we know is that the official threshold for doubting the sanity of
these individuals is very low."

His review of official documents, Mr. Munro said, indicated that specific types
of "political criminals" are most likely to be referred to psychiatrists. These
include persistent petitioners, those who shout or post anti-Communist slogans
and those who display what the police see as "a perplexing absence of any normal
instinct for self-preservation" in the face of certain arrest.

Citing Chinese textbooks, Mr. Munro shows that diagnostic concepts like
"political mania" and "litigious mania" have received mention here within the
last decade. As a residue of such ideas, he argues, some people who are
especially driven or eccentric in their actions may be improperly labeled as
psychotic.

In Western societies, he said, many of these same people might be seen as odd or
even as neurotic or suffering from personality disorders, but forced confinement
would not be an issue.

In an example often cited by human rights groups, a politically independent
worker in Beijing named Wang Wanxing was diagnosed as a "paranoid psychotic"
after his arrest in 1992 for unfurling a pro-democracy banner in Tiananmen
Square. He spent the next seven years in a police hospital for the criminally
insane.

He was sent home in early 1999 and seemed perfectly lucid to acquaintances. But
later that year -- after he said he intended to hold a news conference to
denounce his treatment -- he was taken back to the center, where he remains.

In response to inquiries from the United Nations, Chinese authorities said an
appraisal by hospital doctors "had determined that he was suffering from
paranoia, that some of his actions were governed by wishful thinking, that he
had lost his normal capacity for recognition and was irresponsible."

Dr. Yu Qingbo, deputy chief of forensic psychiatry at Anding Hospital, said
Chinese psychiatrists -- including those at the centers run by the police -- use
diagnostic criteria consistent with those in the West.

Both Dr. Yu and Dr. Tian said it was usually not hard to distinguish between a
sane, committed political dissident and a person who is lost in delusions. "If
true dissidents are sent to us and we falsely claim they are ill, then we can be
accused of trying to protect them," Dr. Yu said.

Likewise, Dr. Tian said, it is usually not hard to distinguish between a
religious believer in a hypnotic or "altered state" -- who is not considered ill
-- and a person whose ego is shattered. "Around the world, all psychiatrists
could agree on that," he said.

More difficult to discern, he said, were cases where a person joins a religious
sect while in the early stages of developing psychosis, a common phenomenon that
can require longer-term observation.

Another psychiatrist here said that abusive practices were more likely outside
the major cities, where trained doctors are scarcer and the police may hold
greater influence over doctors.

Like many experts here, this doctor asked why the authorities would need to
resort to psychiatric commitments at all. "They have labor camps everywhere, and
they've shown they aren't afraid to use them," the doctor said. "Why go to the
trouble and expense of psychiatric confinement?"

A leading Western expert on Chinese psychiatry, Dr. Arthur Kleinman of Harvard
University, said the abuses "are lodged mainly in the mental hospitals run by
the police."

"Getting observers into that sector is important," he said. "But what I fear is
that the entire profession will be unfairly tarnished in what will amount to a
global witch hunt."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 20, 2001



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about China's practice of committing members of
the Falun Gong spiritual movement to psychiatric hospitals misstated the name of
a medical organization that is being asked to bar China from its convention next
year. It is the World Psychiatric Association, not the World Psychological
Association.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wang Yaoqing and her son, Li Zhilum, 8, going through their
Falun Gong exercises in Hong Kong, where the movement is not yet banned.
(Associated Press)(pg. 6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CULTS & SECTS (90%); PSYCHIATRY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
HOSPITALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); MENTAL ILLNESS (89%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS
(89%); PARANOIA (78%); SCHIZOPHRENIA (78%); RELIGION (78%); CORRUPTION (76%);
OLYMPICS (73%); POLITICS (70%); WRITERS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(66%); LABOR UNIONS (64%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (64%) MENTAL HEALTH AND
DISORDERS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FALUN GONG (CHINESE SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: ECKHOLM, ERIK

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); JIANGSU, CHINA (79%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); HONG KONG (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SWITZERLAND (78%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             174 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 24, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Delayed Justice in Argentina

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 491 words


Today marks the 25th anniversary of Argentina's last successful military coup,
which brought to power a junta whose murderous repression of Argentina's
peaceful left became known as the "dirty war." It is a sign of Argentina's
growing confidence as a democracy that some of the soldiers and mid-level
military officers responsible for the abuses may soon be brought to trial.

After Argentina returned to democracy in 1983, the government, under threat from
the military, issued an amnesty for crimes committed by all but the top
officers. But earlier this month, a judge declared these laws illegal, ruling
that the crimes were so serious that they could not be forgiven and that the
amnesties violated international treaties Argentina had signed.

The ruling, which has been appealed to the Supreme Court, has won widespread
praise in Argentina, but also opposition from powerful quarters. Military
officers have condemned it, as have civilian government officials.

Nine of the top junta members from the dirty war era were tried in 1985, and
five were convicted of murder and other crimes. But as trials began to reach
further down the chain of command, soldiers rebelled. Three uprisings were
enough to persuade the government to end the trials and grant amnesty to all but
the top officers on the grounds that lower-ranking soldiers had been following
orders. Then in 1990, President Carlos Menem even pardoned the five imprisoned
junta members.

Since then, the only dirty war cases seen in Argentine courts have been for the
kidnappings of prisoners' children, a crime that was not covered by the amnesty
laws. But with Judge Gabriel Cavallo's decision this month, the possibility now
exists that soldiers will be prosecuted for murders and disappearances.

Judge Cavallo's decision is one of several recent international instances of
prosecutions of those previously considered untouchable. The most publicized was
the arrest of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in Chile. This week the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights made its first direct ruling against an amnesty. Peru's congress
rushed through an amnesty law in 1995, protecting from prosecution all military
officers who committed human rights violations between 1980 and 1995. The court
ruled that the amnesty had no validity and could not stand in the way of
investigations and trials. The new government of Peru has said that it will
initiate prosecutions.

If Judge Cavallo's decision is upheld in Argentina, it could lead to a
long-overdue removal from the military of those with complicity in the dirty
war. Trials would also finally provide relief for some of the tens of thousands
of those who were tortured or who lost family members, victims whose suffering
is as fresh as it was a generation ago. Argentina has changed dramatically since
1976. It is now a full democracy with no fear of a military coup. There is no
longer a reason to avoid the justice that Argentina deserves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AMNESTY (91%); ARMED FORCES (91%); MILITARY RULE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); COUPS (90%); MARTIAL LAW (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
ANNIVERSARIES (78%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); MURDER
(76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); LITIGATION (76%);
CORRECTIONS (76%); TORTURE (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); JAIL SENTENCING (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%);
PARDONS (75%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); APPEALS
(68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%) AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  EDITORIALS

PERSON: CAVALLO, GABRIEL (JUDGE)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (98%); PERU (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); CHILE (79%)

REGION: ARGENTINA

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             176 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detained in China

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 147 words


To the Editor:

Re "Beijing Says Chinese-Born Scholar on Visit From U.S. Is a Spy" (news
article, March 28):

Beijing's detention of Gao Zhan on undisclosed and unsubstantiated charges of
"spying" reminds us that China remains a country where rights are violated,
guilt is presumed and legal mechanisms are distorted to advance the political
interests of the state.

This is a particularly important reminder as the United Nations Human Rights
Commission prepares to debate a resolution on human rights abuses in China and
Tibet.

It is to be hoped that China will one day recognize the rule of law, where an
impartial legal system constrains state actions and provides enough transparency
to prevent such arbitrary detentions. In the meantime, Beijing's conduct should
signal the Human Rights Commission that the resolution must be passed.

NIMA R. TAYLOR
Cambridge, Mass., March 28, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); RULE OF LAW (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%) POLITICAL PRISONERS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: GAO ZHAN; TAYLOR, NIMA R

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); SOUTHWEST CHINA
(78%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); TIBET (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             177 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths;
SMITH, ESTHER

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 411 words


SMITH-Esther, 77. Died on April 4 after a long and valiant fight with cancer.
Lifetime fighter for social justice, Yiddish Scholar, Union Organizer, leader in
Stuyvesant Town anti-discrimination fight, V.P. Women's Division American Jewish
Congress, Director Medical Committee for Human Rights (medical arm civil rights
movement), Director Committee of Responsibility (providing medical care for war
injured Vietnamese children) Assistant to President, Health and Hospital
Corporation, Activist in Democratic Party, member Democratic National Committee,
Associate Director Post Graduate Center for Mental Health, founding member
U.S./Israel Women to Women. Daughter of Isadore and Rose Frank (deceased).
Esther's spirit will be treasured in the love of her: husband for 57 years David
Smith, her sister Eleanor Tilson, her daughters Karen and Abby, grandson Jesse,
granddaughter Sonja, son-in-law Maarten, and nephews Mark, Andrew & Daniel.
Esther's example of leadership made her an early feminist role model. Her
courage and tenacity to stand firmly for social justice will remain as her
inspirational legacy. A memorial will be held in the near future.

SMITH-Esther. The Board of Directors of the NORC Supportive Services Center
extends its deep condolences to our Chairman, David Smith and to their daughters
Karen and Abby, grandson Jesse and family on the death of their beloved wife,
mother and grandmother. We will surely miss her wonderful spirit. Nat Yalowitz,
President Ed Yaker, Vice President

SMITH-Esther. The Board of Directors of Penn South Social Services offers its
loving condolences to our Chairman, David Smith, daughters Karen and Abby,
grandson Jesse and family on the death of their loving wife, mom and grandma.
She was a fighter for peace and human rights and we shall greatly miss her. Nat
Yalowitz, President Priscilla Burns, Secretary

SMITH-Esther. The Board of Directors of Mutual Assisted Senior Housing (MASH)
deeply mourns the loss of our President David Smith's loving wife. To their
children, Karen and Abby, grandson Jesse and family, we share your loss. She
stood for the best in all of us. Kenneth Wray, EVP Nat Yalowitz, Sec/Treas.

SMITH-Esther. It is with deep sorrow that we express our condolences on the
passing of Esther Smith on April 4, 2001 after a prolonged illness. She was the
loving wife of David Smith, former Penn South President and Chairman Emeritus,
and a fighter for social justice. Penn South Board of Directors

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GRANDCHILDREN (90%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); CANCER (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY
HOSPITALS (76%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); GRANDPARENTS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); HOSPITALS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN JEWISH CONGRESS (58%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (58%);
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (57%)

PERSON: ADAM SMITH (89%) SMITH, ESTHER

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             180 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1072 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Rumsfeld Would Withdraw U.S. Troops From Sinai
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld surprised Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
during a meeting in Washington last month by saying the United States wanted to
withdraw the American soldiers serving as peacekeepers in the Sinai, Bush
administration officials said. State Department officials who specialize in
Mideast policy were not told in advance.   A1

Palestinian militants fired a fresh volley of homemade mortar shells at Israeli
settlements and military posts, only hours after Israel withdrew from a corner
of the Gaza Strip. President Bush spoke by telephone with Mr. Sharon, in an
apparent effort to smooth over the tensions raised by Washington's criticism of
the Israeli incursion into Gaza.   A8


Beijing Talks on Spy Plane
U.S. negotiators said they had decided to continue talks with the Chinese
government concerning the collision of an American spy plane and a Chinese
fighter jet on April 1. On Wednesday, they had threatened to end the
negotiations.   A6

No Debate on Rights in China
China, aided by Russia and Asian, African and Arab nations, got an American
resolution calling attention to Beijing's human rights record struck from the
agenda of the United Nations Human Rights Commission.   A6

Coup Attempt in Burundi
Young officers tried to overthrow the government, seizing a radio station until
they were surrounded and some surrendered, officials said.   A5

Bosnian Serb Officer on Trial
Dragan Obrenovic, a former Bosnian Serb Army commander accused of playing a
central role in the biggest massacre of the Bosnian war, pleaded not guilty to
charges of genocide and other war crimes at The Hague.   A13

Russian Mogul Wins One
Spain's high court rejected Russia's request to extradite Vladimir A. Gusinsky
on fraud charges, ending a 10-month legal battle just as prized pieces of his
Media-Most empire back home were being seized.   A11

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A14-22

Divided Court Allows Race in Redistricting
The Supreme Court, voting 5 to 4, upheld a long-disputed North Carolina
Congressional district against the accusation that the 47-percent black district
was the product of an unconstitutional racial gerrymander. The majority opinion
held that race is not an illegitimate consideration in redistricting as long as
it is not the "dominant and controlling" one.   A1

Bush Takes Up Fund-Raiser Role
President Bush is to appear at a pair of Republican fund-raising dinners in the
next several weeks that together are expected to raise more than $25 million for
the party. Cabinet members have also begun accepting assignments linked to
money-raising for the party.   A1

Mr. Bush visited Connecticut, where he was born and went to college and where
his grandfather was elected to the Senate, but he said nothing about those roots
in appearances pushing his tax cut and education plans.   B5

Osprey Survives Military Review
A Pentagon panel recommended an overhaul of the Marine Corps' troubled V-22
Osprey program, calling for new tests and design changes but finding no flaws in
the crash-plagued aircraft that would justify canceling the $40 billion program.
A20

High Water in the Midwest
Mississippi River communities in Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota and Illinois
remained braced for the possibility of more floods.   A14

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Study on Child Care Effects
Researchers said children who spend most of their time in child care are more
likely to show behavioral problems in kindergarten than those cared for mainly
by their mothers.   A22

Arsenic Decision Pushed Back
The E.P.A. said it would postpone until February a decision on how much arsenic
should be allowed in drinking water. But agency officials said a new rule would
call for a reduction of at least 60 percent from current levels. A Clinton-era
rule, recently set aside, would have reduced the arsenic standard by 80 percent.
A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Police Take a New Tack In Fighting Drug Gangs
The authorities brought conspiracy charges against 13 men who they said were
members of a violent crack gang that blighted a central Harlem block for nearly
15 years. The arrests were the product of a new strategy and a new unit formed
to break up drug organizations entrenched in poor neighborhoods.   B1

Testifying Under the Influence
A prosecution witness, Gregory Coleman, who has repeatedly said that he heard
Michael C. Skakel confess to killing Martha Moxley in 1975, testified at a
pretrial hearing that he used heroin an hour before appearing in front of the
grand jury that eventually charged Mr. Skakel.   B1

ARTS   E1-12

HOUSE & HOME   F1-16

EDUCATION

Hawaii Faculty Ends Strike
The union representing faculty members at the University of Hawaii reached
agreement with the state on a two-year contract, ending one of the two strikes
that have kept students from kindergarten through graduate school out since
April 5.   A14

CIRCUITS   G1-10

SPORTS   D1-8

Devils Thwarted on Sweep
Carolina beat the Devils, 3-2, to hang on in the N.H.L. playoffs.   D1

OBITUARIES   B11

Burt Gwirtzman
The No. 1 fan of the football Giants and the hockey Rangers, a presence on the
New York sports scene in autumn and winter for more than six decades, was 75.
B11

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Surprise Fed Cut Lifts Stocks
The Fed, acting between scheduled meetings, cut its benchmark interest rate by
half a percentage point, igniting a stock rally. The Fed also signaled that it
was likely to reduce rates further in coming months. The moves reflected rising
concern within the Fed that the economy is at risk.   A1

The Nasdaq recorded its fourth-largest gain in percentage terms, rising 8.1
percent, or 156.22 points, to 2,079.44. The Dow surged 399.10 points, or 3.9
percent, to 10,615.83, and the S.& P. 500 leapt 46.35 points, or 3.9 percent, to
1,238.16.   C12

I.B.M. Hits the Target
I.B.M. met analysts' expectations with quarterly profits that were 18 percent
above the same period a year earlier. Net income rose by 15 percent and revenue
by 9 percent.   C1

Media Giant's Upbeat Outlook
AOL Time Warner said first-quarter revenue grew strongly and losses narrowed as
its AOL and cable businesses prospered despite concerns about the economic
slowdown.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Alan Greenspan's surprise move; weapons for Taiwan; the swamps of
New Jersey.

Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E6
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E10
Weather   D8
Public Lives   B2

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); FUNDRAISING (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); REDISTRICTING (85%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
COUPS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); LITIGATION (76%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (74%);
ESPIONAGE (74%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); SUPREME COURTS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); GENOCIDE (66%); ELECTORAL DISTRICTS
(66%); TAX LAW (63%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (87%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); CHINA
(93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); ISRAEL (93%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SPAIN (79%); BURUNDI (79%);
NETHERLANDS (78%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
A Test of Civilization

BYLINE:  By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


There is a class of Americans, two million of them, who have little if any way
to vindicate their constitutional rights. They can be abused, tortured, raped
without effective recourse to law.

They are the inmates of America's prisons. As such, they get little sympathy
from the public. But I hope and believe that few among us would want even those
who have been properly convicted and imprisoned to be deprived of their legal
protection from physical harm and brutality.

Think about this recent case: A prisoner at the federal penitentiary in Atlanta
was held for five days in what is called a "four-point restraint." He was
chained by his wrists and ankles, on his back, in a spread-eagle position. He
was forced to urinate and defecate on himself. For five days.

The nauseating facts of that case are not in doubt -- because the prisoner found
a lawyer who sued the Federal Bureau of Prisons over the lawless treatment. The
bureau settled the lawsuit by paying the prisoner $99,000.

But it was unusual, indeed extraordinary, for that prisoner to get legal help.
For Congress in the 1990's erected a series of barriers that prevent prisoners
from vindicating their legal rights in most cases even if they have been
brutally mistreated.

One statute bars poverty lawyers who get federal funds from representing
prisoners. Another sets the fees so low for private lawyers who sue successfully
that few can afford to take on prison cases.

Harshest of all is the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1996, passed by a
Republican Congress and signed by President Clinton. Among other things it
requires prisoners to exhaust a prison's "administrative remedies" for
mistreatment before they can sue. They may have as little as five days to do
that; they may not know how, and they may face retaliation if they complain. If
they fail that barrier, they have waived their rights.

The use of four-point restraints has not been limited to that one Atlanta
federal prisoner lucky enough to get a lawyer. In 1999 another inmate in that
prison died while under such restraint. In the years 1996-97 about 100 federal
inmates were held in those restraints, one for two months.

The director of the Southern Center for Human Rights, Stephen Bright, wrote to
leaders of the Senate Judiciary Committee last week urging an investigation of
the use of four-point restraints -- and of obstacles to effective legal remedies
for abuse in prisons. He and a colleague, Marion D. Chartoff, said they had
found numerous cases in which prisoners were thus restrained as punishment for
petty misbehavior.

And four-point restraints are not the only brutality found in American prisons.
Another is male rape, the subject of a chilling report this week by Human Rights
Watch. The report found that inmate-on-inmate sexual abuse is frequent in
prisons, and that the authorities do little to protect prisoners -- even those
who have expressed their fear of attack.

Brutal prison conditions should concern us the more because this country now
imprisons a higher percentage of its population than any other in the world.
Long mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenses are a major reason
for the burgeoning prison population.

The number of federal prisoners passed 150,000 last week, three times the number
when President Reagan left office in 1989. The Bureau of Prisons predicts it
will have nearly 200,000 by 2006. Of present inmates, 58 percent are there for
drug crimes.

The time has come for Congress and state legislatures to reconsider the drug war
-- and mandatory minimum sentences. They are often grossly out of proportion to
the offense, and they put heavy strains on our resources. The Federal Bureau of
Prisons now spends almost as much annually as the F.B.I. and the Drug
Enforcement Administration combined.

In any event, we should be doing much more to enforce legal rules against
brutality in prisons. That is for the sake not only of the prisoners but of us,
the law-abiding. Winston Churchill explained why in 1910, when as home secretary
he said in Parliament:

"The mood and temper of the public in regard to the treatment of crime and
criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilization of any country.
A calm, dispassionate recognition of the rights of the accused, and even of the
convicted criminal . . . measure s the stored-up strength of a nation and is
sign and proof of the living virtue in it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(77%); LEGISLATION (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (74%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE (72%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE
(71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (67%); INVESTIGATIONS (63%) PRISONS AND PRISONERS;  DRUG
ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS (56%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (54%) LEWIS, ANTHONY

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 931 words


ASIA

SRI LANKA: 300 DEAD IN NEW FIGHTING -- More than 300 people have died in a
government offensive on the northern Jaffna peninsuala just three days after
Tamil Tiger rebels ended their cease-fire, the government said. President
Chandrika Kumaratunga said she still wanted talks with the rebels, who are
seeking a homeland in the north.
Celia W. Dugger (NYT)


INDIA: A LAMA'S PLEA -- The 16-year-old who is recognized by most of the Tibetan
Buddhist Kagyu Sect as the 17th Karmapa Lama, one of its holiest figures,
appealed to the government to let him travel to the Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim,
in the northeast, the home of the 16th Karmapa. The government has barred the
teenager, who escaped from China last year, from going to Sikkim. There is a
dispute within the sect over the identity of the 17th Karmapa; a rival lives in
a monastery near Sikkim.
Barry Bearak (NYT)

INDONESIA: BLOW TO PRESIDENT -- Parliamentary censure of President Abdurrahman
Wahid became more likely when Vice President Megawati Sukarnoputri said she
supported the right of the assembly to move against him. Parliament is to meet
on Monday to discuss the move, which could lead to Mr. Wahid's impeachment.
Seth Mydans (NYT)

PHILIPPINES: TALKS WITH REBELS RESUME -- Government negotiators met in Norway
with Communist rebels to resume talks aimed at ending a faltering decades-old
insurgency. The agenda includes social reforms demanded by the guerrillas.  Seth
Mydans (NYT)

UNITED NATIONS

VIETNAM HUMAN RIGHTS PLEA -- Vietnamese-American human rights advocates met a
high-ranking United Nations official to ask that a special envoy be sent to
Vietnam to monitor what they call a worsening situation there. The group,
organized by Hong Lien Nguyen of the Council for Human Rights in Vietnam, says
that attacks on minorities and religious groups are rising and that public
criticism sessions are being used to intimidate democracy advocates.
Barbara Crossette (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

YEMEN: ARRESTS IN BOMBING OF U.S. SHIP -- The police have arrested three more
men in the attack on a United States destroyer on Oct. 12, which killed 17
American sailors, according to a report in a weekly newspaper published by
Yemen's armed forces. The arrests bring to 31 the number of people in detention
as a result of the inquiry into the attack in Aden harbor. No trial date has
been set.  (AP)

EUROPE

RUSSIA: ARMS DEAL WITH NORTH KOREA -- In advance of an expected visit by North
Korea's leader, Kim Jong Il, Russian officials met in Moscow with Defense
Minister Kim Il Chol and signed an agreement to upgrade some of North Korea's
Soviet-era weapons. Russia's deputy prime minister, Ilya I. Klebanov, said the
agreement would not harm South Korea's interests as the Kremlin seeks to entice
the North Korean leader to Russia for talks to promote reconciliation on the
peninsula.
Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)

RUSSIA: SHAKING UP THE BRASS -- The longstanding independence of Russia's
strategic nuclear forces came to an end yesterday as Russia's new defense
minister, Sergei B. Ivanov, announced that the service was being folded into a
new chain of command that removes its special status. Mr. Ivanovc said that the
rocket forces' commander in chief, Gen. Vladimir Yakolev, was being replaced by
Col. Gen. Nikolai Solovtsov, whose title will be "commander of the strategic
missile force." The changes signal new momentum in plans to reform the military.

Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)

BOSNIA: CRACKDOWN ON CROATS -- Wolfgang Petritsch, head of the international
administration in Bosnia, dismissed the Bosnian Croat police chief in Mostar,
Dragan Mandic, and suspended four officials for their support of self-rule for
the Croats and inciting civil unrest. Mr. Mandic said he was honored to join
other dismissed Bosnian Croat officials.
Carlotta Gall (NYT)

ARMENIA: PARLIAMENT ADAMANT ON ENCLAVE --
Parliament declared that either independence for Nagorno-Karabakh or its
integration into Armenia were the only acceptable solutions to the conflict with
neighboring Azerbaijan over Karabakh, the Armenian enclave in southwestern
Azerbaijan. The requirement is unlikely to be acceptable to Azerbaijan, which
has offered a high degree of autonomy to the district.
Doug Frantz (NYT)

BRITAIN: SOME ANSWERS ABOUT ORGANS -- Health authorities said 100 hospitals
would begin responding to the 20,000 requests from people seeking information
about dead family members whose organs may have been taken by hospitals that did
not inform relatives. Official inquiries found that hospitals were storing more
than 50,000 body parts, and that doctors at a hospital in northern England had
removed hearts from 2,000 dead children and retained other infants' organs
without informing parents.  Alan Cowell (NYT)

AFRICA

RWANDA: BISHOP CHARGED WITH GENOCIDE -- A former Anglican bishop in Rwanda was
arrested in Kenya and taken to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in
Arusha, Tanzania. The bishop, Samuel Musabyimana, 44, was charged with genocide,
conspiracy to commit genocide and crimes against humanity for publicly
advocating attacks on ethnic Tutsi and for paying militias who carried out
killings in the area in April and May 1994.
Barbara Crossette (NYT)

ZIMBABWE: COURT VICTORY FOR OPPOSITION -- A court has thrown out the results of
three races in last year's parliamentary elections, including one lost by Morgan
Tsvangirai, president of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change. Mr.
Tsvangirai had contested his loss to a candiate of the governing party, saying
balloting in the district was tainted by violence and intimidation.
Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos Map of Azerbaijan highlighting Nagorno Karabakh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (76%); RELIGION (75%); ASIAN
AMERICANS (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(69%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (69%); MILITARY VESSELS (65%); ARRESTS (65%);
INVESTIGATIONS (64%); BOMBINGS (64%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (64%); ARMED FORCES
(60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

PERSON: KIM JONG IL (50%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: SIKKIM, INDIA (93%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); INDIA (93%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); VIET NAM (93%); YEMEN (92%); ASIA (92%);
SRI LANKA (92%); CHINA (79%); AZERBAIJAN (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); INDONESIA
(79%); TIBET (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); NORWAY (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             186 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

America the Outcast: Lessons From a Vote

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 128 words


To the Editor:

In "Slavery Triumphs" (column, May 7), William Safire arrives at the specious
conclusion that those countries that voted to put some country other than the
United States on the United Nations Human Rights Commission somehow "sold out"
the fundamental rights of human beings.

In fact, the three countries that were elected to the commission over the United
States -- France, Sweden and Austria -- by some estimation have better human
rights records than we do.

All three of these countries have abolished the death penalty, while the United
States continues to execute criminals.

While we may have the loudest voice when it comes to hurling accusations of
rights violations, we certainly do not have the best record.

RAHUL RAJKUMAR
New Haven, May 7, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (67%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SAFIRE, WILLIAM; RAJKUMAR, RAHUL

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); FRANCE (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             187 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Myanmar's Incorrigible Leaders

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 459 words


A few months ago it looked as if the military junta in Myanmar might ease its
repressive rule slightly. The regime was talking with the country's courageous
pro-democracy leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, and there even seemed to be a
possibility that she would be liberated from the prolonged house arrest the
government has enforced. But those hopes have all but vanished. If the Bush
administration means to speak out against human rights abuses abroad and
pressure governments to treat their citizens humanely, Myanmar would be a fine
place to start.

The military leaders of Myanmar, formerly called Burma, are among the world's
cruelest violators of human rights. The junta has tortured and executed
political opponents, exploited forced labor and condoned a burgeoning traffic in
heroin and amphetamines. In the clearest indication that the regime has little
intention of reforming, the United Nations special envoy who acted as a catalyst
for the talks between the government and Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi has been denied
permission to visit the country since January. Also, an anticipated release of
political prisoners has failed to materialize, as has a pledge by the junta that
Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's party, the National League for Democracy, would be
allowed to resume activity.

Earlier this year the junta released 120 mostly youthful members of the party
who had been imprisoned the previous year, but it is still believed to be
holding as many as 1,700 political prisoners, including 35 people who were
elected to Parliament in 1990. Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's party won more than
three-quarters of the seats in that election, but the junta annulled the
results.

The United States and the European Union have cooperated to isolate Myanmar, and
in 1997 the Clinton administration banned new American investments there. But
some Asian countries have been reluctant to join in sanctions. China, in
particular, has helped sustain the junta with military aid. Regrettably, last
month Japan broke ranks with a Western-led 12-year ban on non-humanitarian
assistance to Myanmar by approving a $29 million grant for a hydroelectric dam.

Last year the International Labor Organization, responding to concerns about
forced labor, voted to urge governments and international donors to impose
further sanctions on Myanmar. Washington should consider a ban on imports from
that nation, including textiles. Myanmar is rapidly increasing apparel exports
to the United States. Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's allies have argued that the
hard-currency earnings primarily benefit the military, not the laborers who make
the garments. Washington should certainly be using its influence with Japan and
other Asian countries to deter any further non-humanitarian assistance.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); MILITARY RULE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (89%); FORCED LABOR (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (86%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (85%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); TORTURE (76%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (76%); IMPORT TRADE
(75%); EXPORT TRADE (73%); IMPORT CONTROLS (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); HOUSE
ARREST (71%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (69%); GRANTS & GIFTS (64%); TRADE DISPUTES
(62%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER (60%); TEXTILES (60%); FINES & PENALTIES (58%);
HEROIN (54%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (50%); DAMS & RESERVOIRS (50%)
EDITORIALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;  FOREIGN INVESTMENTS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (56%) EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI (90%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (92%); ASIA (92%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (86%)

REGION: MYANMAR;  CHINA;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             191 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tibetans Going to Meeting

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 22


Two Tibetan exile organizations usually barred by China from international
events got the go-ahead today to participate in a United Nations conference on
racism and other forms of discrimination to be held this summer in Durban, South
Africa.

The Tibetan Center for Human Rights and Democracy, and the International
Campaign for Tibet, both with ties to the Dalai Lama, were backed by a committee
of nations meeting in Geneva to plan the conference.

The organization Human Rights in China, based in New York, was excluded,
however. Xiao Qiang, the organization's executive director, said that China had
turned the application process into a political litmus test, and that a majority
of South American nations as well as South Africa had voted against his
organization.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); RACE & RACISM (88%); POLITICS
(85%) MINORITIES (US);  DISCRIMINATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS; TIBETAN CENTER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY; INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN FOR TIBET; HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA

PERSON: DALAI LAMA (58%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (92%); XIZANG, CHINA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: TIBET (99%); CHINA (95%); SOUTH AFRICA (91%); UNITED STATES (79%);
SOUTH AMERICA (79%); SWITZERLAND (72%)

REGION: CHINA;  TIBET

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             192 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Oil and Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 166 words


To the Editor:

Your May 16 front-page article about the Chad-Cameroon oil project did not
mention two major risk factors associated with the $3.7 billion project: that
the territory in and around the Doba oil fields has been militarily contested
for the last 40 years, and that the Chadian government has an abysmal human
rights record, with some of the worst abuses occurring in the oil field region.

Chadian government security forces are reported to routinely use extrajudicial
executions, disappearances and various forms of torture to control peaceful
dissent by government opponents. The pipeline project has the potential to
exacerbate existing conflicts and further deteriorate the already appalling
human rights situation. Thus far, ExxonMobil, the lead oil company on the
project, has failed to reveal a specific plan to ensure that this will not
happen.

MORTON WINSTON
Timonium, Md., May 21, 2001

The writer is chairman, Business and Economic Relations Group, Amnesty
International USA.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (88%); PIPELINE
TRANSPORTATION (88%); TORTURE (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%)
OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  PIPELINES

COMPANY: EXXON MOBIL CORP (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (56%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (56%)

PERSON: WINSTON, MORTON

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHAD (94%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHAD;  CAMEROON

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mother Superior Guilty in Rwanda Killings

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, June 8


A highly unusual trial ended today when four Rwandans, two of them Roman
Catholic nuns, were sentenced in a Belgian court to lengthy prison terms for war
crimes committed during the mass killings in their homeland in 1994.

Vincent Ntezimana, a physics professor, and Alphonse Higaniro, a factory manager
and former government minister, were sentenced respectively to 12 and 20 years.
The two Benedictine nuns, Sister Gertrude and Sister Maria Kisito were given 15-
and 12-year terms.

The guilty verdicts, which were delivered earlier today, were remarkable not
only because they were pronounced some 4,000 miles from Rwanda, where some
500,000 people were killed in what was repeatedly described in court as
"Africa's Holocaust." The eight-week trial has also made legal history because
it was the first time a jury of ordinary citizens was asked to sit in judgment
of war crimes in another nation.

Until now, only military or civilian magistrates had decided such cases.

The four Rwandans were found guilty by 12 Belgian men and women, ages 30 to 50,
all of them white, among them a cook, a teacher, a hairdresser and a truck
driver.

In the view of lawyers and human rights advocates from several countries who
have followed the case, the trial represented a major step in the application of
international justice that may provide a springboard for future cases in other
countries.

"This is a strong signal that international justice can and should become normal
justice, which can be heard by a jury of ordinary citizens," said Reed Brody,
advocacy director of Human Rights Watch. "In a democracy, international justice
need not be something for which you need a military tribunal or a panel of
international judges."

The trial took place here because the accused had fled to Belgium, which has
kept close ties with Rwanda, its former colony. The case was based on complaints
filed by relatives of victims more than six years ago. The legal foundation was
laid in 1993, when Belgium adopted new laws to comply with the Geneva
Conventions, which codify the laws of war and give signatories the right and
obligation to try war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Still, the trial was long stalled because of political pressure, lawyers for the
victims said. But last year a new government decided to let the case proceed.

None of the accused were charged with genocide because genocide clauses were not
included in the domestic penal code until 1999, five years after the events in
Rwanda, the chief prosecutor, Alain Winants, said in an interview.

In court today, however, Mr. Winants warned that the sentences "will show that
Belgium is not, and will not become, a sanctuary for perpetrators of genocide."

Today's decisions in Brussels are likely to have an impact in other European
countries, including France, Germany and Switzerland, where Rwandans fled after
the genocide and where the law allows ordinary courts to try war crimes.

Switzerland is the only European country aside from Belgium that has tried a
case involving genocide in Rwanda, but it was handled by a military court. In
that case, in 1999, a former Rwandan mayor received a life sentence, which was
reduced to 14 years after an appeal.

Most criminal proceedings dealing with the massacres in Rwanda have taken place
in Rwanda itself, where the backlog of cases remains enormous: 4,500 people have
been tried, but more than 100,000 are waiting in overcrowded jails. The United
Nations tribunal for Rwanda in Arusha, Tanzania, long plagued by delays and
reported ineptness, has delivered eight convictions of high-ranking former
officials and is now trying another nine of its 44 detainees.

Alison des Forges, an American historian and author of "Leave None to Tell the
Story: Genocide in Rwanda," said she was impressed by the proceedings in
Brussels, where jurors and lawyers had to deal with a vastly different culture
and accounts of stunning violence.

"People maybe don't even realize just how revolutionary this jury trial, so far
from the events, really is," she said during a pause in the proceedings. Ms. des
Forges, who said she had followed several dozen trials in Rwanda, said the trial
here, while imperfect, "has been done with a great deal more depth than those in
Rwanda."

"Here the investigation has been more extensive and the defense lawyers have
been given much more time to express themselves," she said.

The four defendants were not among the presumed architects of the massacres,
which were directed by the Hutu-led government against its moderate opponents
and the Tutsi minority. But investigators said the two convicted men were major
figures in Butare, a town in the south.

Mr. Higaniro, 52, a close friend of former President Juvenal Habyarimana, was
accused of playing an important role in inciting killings and financing and
organizing the local militia by siphoning off funds from the partly state-owned
factory he ran. He was convicted of homicide in the death of eight people.

Mr. Ntezimana, 40, a former physics professor at Butare University, was found
guilty of complicity in the murder of at least six Tutsi, including a colleague,
his wife and their children, by betraying them to Hutu killers.

Sister Gertrude, 42, was the former mother superior of the Benedictine convent
at Sovu. She and Sister Maria Kisito, 36, were found guilty of collaborating
with Hutu militia by expelling Tutsi refugees from the convent grounds. Up to
7,000 refugees were killed in and around convent buildings. At the time, 22
family members of Tutsi nuns were still hidden in the convent, undisturbed by
the militia. But Sister Gertrude was accused of summoning the local mayor and
the police in order to drive them from the building. All were killed as they
left.

Witnesses said the family of one nun paid the police the equivalent of $15 to be
shot rather than be hacked to death.

In her defense, Sister Gertrude, a Hutu, argued that she wanted to save the
convent and the nuns from retaliation by Hutu gangs. But investigators said she
had also told the local militia leader that she feared she might be killed by
Tutsi refugees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sister Gertrude and Sister Maria Kisito, Benedictine nuns, were
convicted yesterday with two other Rwandans for mass killings. (Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); RELIGION (91%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); VERDICTS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
LAW OF WAR (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); MAGISTRATES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); LEGISLATION
(61%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (61%) DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; GERTRUDE (NUN); KISITO, MARIA (NUN); HIGANIRO,
ALPHONSE; NTEZIMANA, VINCENT (PROF)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (90%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (94%); AFRICA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY
(79%); FRANCE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: RWANDA;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 13, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Myanmar: Accusations Of Forced Labor

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 63 words


Two leading human rights groups said the military government in the former Burma
continues to employ forced labor in a practice that was recently condemned by
the International Labor Organization. The groups, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
International, said the authorities had failed to enforce their own law, passed
last October, that bans forced labor.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FORCED LABOR (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATION (80%) LABOR;  SLAVE LABOR;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%) INTERNATIONAL LABOR ORGANIZATION

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             198 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The House Votes Strongly in Favor of Putting Pressure on Sudan

BYLINE:  By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


The House expressed outrage today at Sudan's government for its involvement in
human rights abuses by voting to bar foreign oil companies that do business
there from raising capital in the United States or listing their securities in
American financial markets.

Lawmakers voted 422 to 2 for a series of measures aimed at pressuring the
Sudanese government, to seek an end to hostilities that stretch back 18 years
and have killed two million people as well as resulting in reports of slavery,
the conscription of children and bombings of civilian areas. American companies
are already barred from doing business in Sudan under United States sanctions
imposed on Khartoum.

Rebels in Sudan's mostly Christian and animist south say that oil revenues are
used to finance the war effort of the Muslim-dominated government, and
international aid groups maintain that the oil companies working in Sudan are
abetting government human rights violations.

"We should not help foreign oil companies who are helping prolong this bloody
slaughter," said Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California. He called it
"shameful" that foreign oil companies could raise money in the United States and
use it to back what he considers genocide.

The foreign oil companies operating in Sudan include China National Petroleum
Corporation of China, Gulf Petroleum Corporation of Qatar, Lundin Oil
Corporation of Sweden, Petroliam Nasional Berhad of Malaysia, TotalFinaElf of
France and Talisman Energy Corporation of Canada. The House action would force
the companies off the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq.

Several company representatives said they had been expecting a less stringent
measure from the House that would require them to report on their activities in
Sudan as a condition of participating in American markets. That measure was
indeed approved, but so was an amendment introduced by Representative Spencer
Bachus, a Republican from Alabama, forbidding the companies from any involvement
in American financial markets if they continue oil and gas operations in Sudan.

David Mann, a spokesman for Talisman Energy, said his lawyers' reading of the
legislation was that it applied to companies actually operating in Sudan and not
parent corporations like Talisman. Talisman owns a Dutch subsidiary, which owns
a share of Greater Nile Petroleum Operating Company, which operates oil fields
in Sudan. But supporters of the legislation said they intended the measure to
apply to companies like Talisman.

Mr. Mann argued that his company is pushing for positive change in Sudan and
might be replaced by less helpful interests if it pulled out.

"Talisman leaving does not stop oil production in Sudan," he said. "We play a
role in trying to improve the situation there. We're building clinics and
hospitals. Tens of thousands of southern Sudanese have benefited from clean
drinking water, education and medicine directly because of Talisman being
there."

During a visit to Africa in late May, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell pledged
to seek an end to the conflict. He announced the first American food aid to
drought victims in the government-controlled north since 1989. The House bill
requires Secretary Powell to submit an annual report that notes whether relief
aid has been manipulated by the government, the extent of aerial bombardments by
the government, and the status of Sudan's construction of oil pipelines.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); CRUDE OIL &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); STOCK EXCHANGES (89%); PETROLEUM & COAL
PRODUCTS MFG (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); PARENT COMPANIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); BANKING &
FINANCE (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); FUNDRAISING (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); CHILDREN (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%);
BONDS (72%); BOMBINGS (71%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (69%); LAWYERS (63%); CLINICS
& OUTPATIENT SERVICES (50%) LAW AND LEGISLATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  OIL
(PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  STOCKS AND BONDS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  SUDAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

COMPANY: CHINA NATIONAL PETROLEUM CORP (82%); PETROLIAM NASIONAL BHD (67%);
TALISMAN ENERGY INC (54%); NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE LLC (54%); TOTAL SA (54%)

ORGANIZATION: TALISMAN ENERGY CORP

TICKER: TLM (TSX) (54%); TLM (NYSE) (54%); TTA (LSE) (54%); TOT (NYSE) (54%);
TOT (BIT) (54%); FP (PAR) (54%); FP (BRU) (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC1389 OIL & GAS FIELD SERVICES, NEC (82%); NAICS213112 SUPPORT
ACTIVITIES FOR OIL & GAS OPERATIONS (82%); NAICS211112 NATURAL GAS LIQUID
EXTRACTION (54%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (54%);
SIC1321 NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS (54%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (54%);
NAICS325211 PLASTICS MATERIAL & RESIN MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (54%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (54%); SIC2821 PLASTICS
MATERIALS, SYNTHETIC & RESINS, & NONVULCANIZABLE ELASTOMERS (54%)  SIC1311 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS;

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (58%); SPENCER BACHUS (58%) LACEY, MARC

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); MALAYSIA (79%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: SUDAN;  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             202 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Falun Gong Deaths Set Off Dispute on Suicide Report

BYLINE:  By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI, Wednesday, July 4


At least 10 followers of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement were reported
on Tuesday to have died at a labor camp in northeast China last month, either in
a group suicide or from torture.

The Hong Kong-based Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy said 10
women killed themselves to protest their treatment at the Wanjia labor camp
outside Harbin in Heilongjiang Province.

A government spokesman in Beijing said early today that 14 followers had
committed suicide at the camp. Another 11 attempted suicide but were stopped by
camp guards, he said.

Falun Gong's Web site (www.minghui.org), based in the United States, was quick
to denounce the rights group's report on Tuesday of a mass suicide, saying that
15 women at the camp had been tortured to death and that the camp had labeled
their deaths suicide to cover up its crime.

Thousands of Falun Gong adherents have been sent to labor camps since the
government banned the movement two years ago, arguing in part that it was a
dangerous cult that had persuaded people to forgo necessary medical care or even
kill themselves. Since the ban, there have been persistent reports of torture
and deaths of followers by the authorities. Falun Gong's Web site says 236
followers have died as a result of confrontations with the police or prison
guards.

The government has acknowledged a handful of deaths, but has attributed them all
to natural causes or to suicide. And it says it thwarted several group-suicide
attempts by followers. In May, the government took a group of Western reporters
on a tightly controlled tour of Masanjia labor camp in northeastern Liaoning
Province, which Falun Gong had also accused of torturing followers. The
reporters saw nothing untoward.

Without independent reporting, it is impossible to determine which accounts are
factual, and independent reporting on the subject is strictly forbidden.

Falun Gong's founder, Li Hongzhi, has spoken out against suicide in the past,
though he has been silent on the subject after recent suicide reports, most
notably the self-immolation of five followers on Tiananmen Square in January.
Other Falun Gong members have denied that the five who set themselves on fire
were actually followers, and charged that the government staged the event.

Meanwhile, Mr. Li's cryptic exhortations to followers on the Falun Gong Web site
have grown increasingly strident, chastising those people who cannot endure
torture or even death in defense of his cosmology, which holds that Falun Gong
is engaged in a struggle with evil beings for the redemption or destruction of
the universe.

"Even if a dafa cultivator truly casts off his human skin during the
persecution, what awaits him is still consummation," Mr. Li wrote a few days
after the labor camp deaths. Dafa means great law or dharma, and refers to Falun
Gong, which can be translated as Law Wheel Practice. Consummation is an
apparently transcendent event that is the goal of all followers.

"Any fear is itself a barrier that prevents you from reaching consummation," Mr.
Li wrote.

No account of the labor camp deaths could be immediately verified.

A woman from the home village of Zhao Yayun, one of the dead followers
identified in the reports, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday that Ms.
Zhao had indeed practiced Falun Gong and committed suicide.

"She died in jail," said the woman in Lequn, Heilongjiang Province, declining to
give her name. "She killed herself -- everybody is talking about it."

The human rights group quoted a relative of one of the dead women as saying that
16 Falun Gong followers tried a group suicide on June 20 and that 10 had died.
It said the 16 were among 30 followers who had gone on a hunger strike in
mid-June. The 16 hanged themselves with ropes fashioned from bedsheets after the
camp extended their sentences by up to six months in punishment for the strike,
the report said.

The human rights group said an officer from the township police station and a
township official named Wang Guonan confirmed Ms. Zhao's death and the group
suicide attempt.

The Falun Gong report, meanwhile, said that the women had all been tortured to
death and that 15 had died. It said Ms. Zhao "died with injuries all over her
body," but gave no information to substantiate the claim.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUICIDE (92%); CULTS & SECTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); DEATHS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CORRECTIONS (75%); CORRECTIONS
WORKERS (70%) SUICIDES AND SUICIDE ATTEMPTS;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: FALUN GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

PERSON: SMITH, CRAIG S

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); HEILONGJIANG, CHINA
(92%); EAST CHINA (79%); LIAONING, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); HONG KONG (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             204 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1036 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

Pinochet Unfit for Trial, A Chilean Court Rules
An appeals court ruled that Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 85, is mentally unfit to
stand trial on charges that he covered up the killings of political opponents by
a death squad shortly after he seized power in Chile in 1973. Human rights
lawyers plan to appeal.   A1

Colombian Rebels Criticized
Human Rights Watch said the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the largest
rebel group, regularly violated noncombatants' rights by attacking civilians,
kidnapping for ransom and recruiting children.   A4

Mexico Pressed on Torture
Amnesty International, in a report to be published today, will urge President
Vicente Fox to fulfill his promises to end the use of torture and the concocting
of confessions by the police, and it will ask him to review cases it cites as
prominent victims of trumped-up political charges.   A4

Japan Firm on Textbooks
The government said it would order no further revisions of textbooks that many
critics say whitewash Japan's record of imperial-era atrocities in East Asia.
There were immediate protests in China and South Korea.   A3

Indonesian Leader's Threat
President Abdurrahman Wahid said he would declare a state of emergency and call
new elections unless Parliament dropped plans to begin proceedings to remove him
from office.   A8

Palestinian Homes Destroyed
Israeli crews demolished 14 homes at the edge of a Palestinian refugee camp in
East Jerusalem. Mayor Ehud Olmert said the structures had been built without
permits.   A8

U.S. Rebuff on Small-Arms Pact
The Bush administration warned that it would not join a pact to curtail the
international flow of illegal small arms if it infringed on the American right
to own guns.   A8

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A10-16

Pentagon to Seek Funds To Test Missile Defense
The Pentagon is preparing to ask Congress for money to build a missile defense
test site in Alaska that could also become the command center for a working
antimissile system as early as 2004, military officials said. If it became
operational, the site would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty.   A1

Caution on Soft-Money Bill
Sponsors of legislation to rewrite campaign finance laws said they were
uncertain that they could hold together a House coalition to pass a ban on
unlimited, unregulated political donations. Debate begins today.   A1

Bush Appeal on Patients' Bill
President Bush urged Congress to pass a patients' rights bill that addressed his
concern for limiting lawsuits, portraying himself as a proponent of -- not an
obstacle to -- legislation most Americans support.   A14

California Power Talks Fail
A federal mediator ended two weeks of negotiations about California's demands
for electricity refunds, with the state and power suppliers seemingly no closer
to a settlement than when the talks began. The talks' failure shifts the burden
of resolving the yearlong dispute to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
A14

Urban Economic Engines
The vast majority of jobs and economic wealth created in the United States in
the past decade were generated within metropolitan areas, an analysis for the
nation's mayors shows. Were the New York metropolitan area a country, its $437.8
billion economy would rank 14th in the world, just behind South Korea, but ahead
of Australia and Taiwan.   A10

Hearing for Ex-Klansman
A judge in Birmingham, Ala., confronted with conflicting psychiatric
evaluations, began hearing evidence on whether Bobby Frank Cherry, 71, a former
Ku Klux Klansman, is competent to stand trial as the final defendant in the 1963
church bombing that killed four black girls.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Staten Island Power Plant Can Operate, Judge Rules
A state judge in Staten Island refused to halt operation of a new minipower
plant in the borough, ensuring that the generator and nine others central to a
Pataki administration plan to avoid summer blackouts in New York City would be
used, at least for now. A state appeals court is still to rule on whether the
New York Power Authority skirted its own requirements in building the plants.
B1

Medical License Regained
Dr. Steven J. Bier, the owner of a Bronx radiology clinic who was accused of
failing to diagnose breast cancer because of faulty tests, regained his license
in a settlement of state charges, but he must undergo retraining before
practicing mammography again. Retesting has found cancer in 25 of his patients.
B3

ARTS   E1-10

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Genome Effort Gets a Customer
Celera Genomics said it had signed an agreement with the National Cancer
Institute that would give the institute's researchers access to Celera's genome
database. The institute is part of the publicly financed consortium that is
Celera's rival in the race to decode the human genome.   A13

Health & Fitness   F7

FASHION   B7

OBITUARIES   A17

SPORTS   D1-8

Ivanisevic Prevails
Goran Ivanisevic, the wild-card entry from Croatia, beat Patrick Rafter of
Australia, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, 2-6,
9-7, in the men's Wimbledon final.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Online Grocer Shuts Down
Webvan, which epitomized the buoyant optimism that the Internet could
revolutionize even the most entrenched industries, closed after spending nearly
all the $1.2 billion put up by investors, saying it would seek bankruptcy
protection.   A1

Time Executive to Lead CNN
Walter Isaacson, 49, the editorial director of Time Inc. and a former managing
editor of Time magazine, was named to succeed Tom Johnson, who resigned two
weeks ago as chairman and chief executive of CNN, which is battling Fox News
Channel, MSNBC and CNBC.   C1

Assessing Proposed Cable Deal
AT&T cable subscribers would probably see a more efficient operation if Comcast
acquired AT&T's cable operation, analysts said, though that efficiency might not
translate into lower prices or better programming.   C1

Comcast shares dropped 7 percent, to $39.30, as investors absorbed the company's
unsolicited $44.5 billion offer for AT&T's cable business.   C4

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Reform's "killer amendments"; welcome to New York, Mr. President;
legalizing abuses in Colombia.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (89%);
LEGISLATION (87%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (85%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); APPEALS
(78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (76%);
LAWYERS (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (74%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (74%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); TEXTBOOKS (73%); ENERGY & UTILITY
TRADE (72%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (72%); REFUGEES (72%); RIGHT TO
BEAR ARMS (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (69%);
MISSILE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%); ELECTRIC
POWER INDUSTRY (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (57%)

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (55%); GEORGE W BUSH (54%); EHUD OLMERT (54%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%); COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); JAPAN (92%); CHINA (79%); ISRAEL (79%); KOREA,
REPUBLIC OF (79%); EASTERN ASIA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); ASIA (79%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             208 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 20, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

House Kills Effort to Restore China Trade Barriers

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


Siding with President Bush, the House turned back an effort today to end normal
trade relations with China. Lawmakers deplored China's human rights record but,
as in the past, decided not to use trade to punish the Beijing government for
its behavior.

The annual vote on whether to disapprove the president's decision to extend
normal trade relations with China could be the last: Congress voted last year to
make trade relations permanent once China gains access to the World Trade
Organization, which could happen this year. The vote against the disapproval
resolution was 259 to 169.

Under a 1974 law, the president must extend an annual waiver to continue trade
relations with Communist states. That waiver has been granted for China every
year since 1980, and Congress, despite strong resistance in the years after the
1989 military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, has
never been able to overturn that decision.

In requesting the waiver on June 1, Mr. Bush had emphasized that "fair trade is
essential not only to improving living standards for Americans but also for a
strong and productive relationship" with China.

Opponents of normal trade relations said the annual arguments that trade would
bring political and economic change to China had proved hollow. They cited
China's recent persecution of the Falun Gong spiritual movement, the arrest of
dissidents and the treatment of the crew of an American spy plane that collided
with a Chinese plane and was forced to land on Chinese soil.

Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California and author of the
disapproval resolution, said lawmakers should vote against normal trade "to
protect our country's national security as well as to call attention to the
gross violations of human rights now taking place on the mainland of China." He
said China was using its $80 billion trade surplus to strengthen a military
hostile to the United States.

Representative Sander Levin of Michigan, a Democratic spokesman on trade issues,
said it would be "true irony" if the United States restored trade barriers with
China just as that country is about to enter the W.T.O. and abide by its rules
on open trade.

"The appropriate course is one of continuing engagement and also of vigorous
pressure," he said.

This vote was the first of several trade issues Congress is expected to take up
in the coming months, including measures to normalize trade with Vietnam and
establish a free trade relationship with Jordan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CULTS & SECTS (90%); MOST FAVORED NATION STATUS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%);
POLITICS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (73%); GOODS &
SERVICES TRADE BALANCE (73%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); POLITICAL
PROTESTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); LIVING STANDARDS (67%); ESPIONAGE
(64%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (55%) INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET;
CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION (83%) WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION; FALUN
GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); DANA ROHRABACHER (58%); SANDER M LEVIN (58%) BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             212 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan Says Race Conference Must Chart Way for Future

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, told the National Urban League
today that the world conference against racism next month is aimed at preventing
future problems, not becoming mired in old ones.

Though he did not explicitly say so, Mr. Annan seemed to be supporting the
stance of the Bush administration, which warned last week that it may not attend
the conference, which is organized by the United Nations and will be held in
Durban, South Africa, because the agenda includes discussion on viewing Zionism
as racism and on demands for compensation for slavery.

In his speech here today, Mr. Annan acknowledged that those two issues had
"opened up deep fissures" and asked organizers of the conference to reach an
understanding that would encourage all nations including, by implication, the
United States, to take part.

"If this conference is to succeed, there is an acute need for common ground,"
said Mr. Annan. "The conference must help heal old wounds without reopening
them; it must confront the past, but most important, it must help set a new
course against racism in the future."

The issue of the conference today occupied the House of Representatives, which
overwhelmingly passed a nonbinding resolution supporting the conference but
urging the sponsors to omit from the agenda the issue of considering Zionism as
a racist idea.

The secretary general, a Ghanaian, concentrated on Africa in his speech to the
largely black gathering, centering his remarks on United Nations efforts to
fight AIDS and to end conflicts on the continent. But he said prejudices and
ethnic or racial hatred are widespread.

"That is why it is essential that nations of the world come together to exchange
experiences in their local struggles against a global enemy," he said, referring
to the conference, formally called the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.

In his keynote speech on Sunday, Hugh B. Price, president of the Urban League,
asked the administration to send Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, the first
African-American to hold that position, to lead a delegation to the conference.

In preparatory meetings, other nations have quarreled about the aims of the
conference, with developing nations raising the issue of reparations for
colonialism as well as for slavery.

In testimony before the Senate, Secretary Powell raised the idea that the
conference could be derailed by those questions.

But pressure from civil rights and human rights groups has been growing, and the
United States sent a representative to Geneva this week to negotiate the
conference's formal agenda.

Trying to answer some of the United States' concerns, Human Rights Watch issued
a statement today saying it, too, was troubled that many countries were trying
to single out Israel for condemnation.

"If the conference were going to name countries that practice severe forms of
racism, its list should be much longer," said the statement.

The advocacy group has been a leading critic of Israel's treatment of
Palestinians.

In his speech today, Mr. Annan avoided mentioning any country by name and
suggested that the conference would not look for a single remedy or "one size
fits all solution" that would pit one group of countries against another.

"No country is immune from the costs inflicted by prejudice and intolerance," he
said. "What works in one place will not necessarily work somewhere else."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kofi Annan addressed the National Urban League yesterday.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); EMERGING MARKETS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); AIDS & HIV (52%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SLAVERY;  REPARATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE (93%) UNITED NATIONS;
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE

PERSON: ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); BECKER, ELIZABETH; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); ISRAEL (90%); AFRICA (79%);
GHANA (77%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  DURBAN (SOUTH AFRICA)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 721 words


INTERNATIONAL   3-15

Symbolic Mideast Tactics Underscore Growing Divide
The Israelis and the Palestinians have each turned to making targets of some of
each other's important symbols, a strategy that was conspicuously evident last
week in a series of attacks and reprisals that widened the already considerable
divide and all but guaranteed that more violence lay ahead.   8

Dutch Brothels, by the Book
The Netherlands is trying to invent a system to regulate its prostitution
industry after legalizing brothels nine months ago. But critics say that efforts
to protect the rights of sex workers by bureaucrats unfamiliar with the business
have only made the workers more vulnerable by pushing them further underground.
1


Dublin Urges Ulster Home Rule
Dublin urged Britain to quickly end its suspension of Northern Ireland's home
rule that it imposed on Friday, which has raised fears that the I.R.A. might
respond by withdrawing an offer to place its arsenal of weapons totally and
verifiably beyond use.   4

Reconsidering Indonesia Ties
The Bush administration plans to renew its relationship with the Indonesian
military, the most powerful institution in a country considered a potential
anchor for a stable South East Asia. Relations have been circumscribed since the
early 1990's over human rights abuses there.   11

Macedonian Slavs Assert Abuse
Road workers who were kidnapped last week by Albanian guerrillas alleged they
were tortured, forced to perform sexual acts on each other and had their
initials carved into their backs, according to a report by Human Rights Watch.
8

NATIONAL   18-30

2-Parent Families Rise After Changes in Welfare
The proportion of poor American children living in households with two adults is
on the rise five years after Congress overhauled welfare laws. But nagging
questions remain about the stability of these new households and the well-being
of the children growing up in them.   1

Divided on Stem Cell Research
President Bush's decision to support limited embryonic stem cell research has
divided the long-reliable coalition against abortion.   1

Congress is gearing up for a fight over the Bush proposal that could last into
next year.   26

Dry Land at Water's Edge
Water shortages have been appearing in places that have never doubted the future
of their supply, like counties around Lake Michigan.   1

New Cards Have Few Uses
Smart credit cards, with embedded computer chips, are now more common. But there
are not many ways to use them in the United States.   1

Texans Clash Over Health Care
The Texas attorney general is at odds with many of the state's public hospitals
over whether they can provide illegal immigrants with free or discounted health
care.   18

Helms to Decide on Retirement
Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina is about to announce whether he will
retire after 30 years, as a host of aspirants wait in the wings.   18

Energy Crisis Helps Miners
The engery crisis and a new interest in coal have brought better times to coal
towns like Finleyville, Pa.   22

NEW YORK/REGION   33-39

Hog Farming Is Growth Industry In the Finger Lakes Region
In just the last few years, the Finger Lakes, a region best known for its deep
waters and bucolic beauty, has become the hog farming capital of New York. But
with that distinction has come controversy, touching almost every facet of life
there and casting an awkward spotlight on the people most associated with the
animals -- Mennonite farmers.   1

Power Demand Easing Up
Several thousand households in the metropolitan region spent much of yesterday
without power as utilities struggled to repair damage caused by Friday's storm.
But power-system managers said the cooler weather after the storm had eased the
strain on the power system.   36

Campaign Displays Gun Issues
Bret D. Schundler, the Republican candidate for governor in New Jersey, publicly
altered his position on gun control last week, an act that highlights the vastly
different, often confusing handgun laws of Connecticut, New Jersey, and New
York.   37

Hevesi's Erudite Oratory
As Alan G. Hevesi, the city comptroller, campaigns for the Democratic mayoral
nomination he seems to take genuine delight in the arcana of municipal
government and finance while avoiding flowery expressions of compassion.   35

Fresh Air Fund   39

OBITUARIES   40

Chess   39
Weather   41
Sunday Q & A   30

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); CHILDREN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEALTH CARE (87%); BIOETHICS (87%);
PARENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%);
IMMIGRATION (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); TORTURE (71%); PUBLIC HEALTH &
WELFARE LAW (69%); FAMILY (69%); WATER CRISES & SHORTAGES (65%); BIOTECHNOLOGY &
GENETIC SCIENCE (64%); STEM CELL RESEARCH (62%); ABORTION (61%); HOSPITALS
(60%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (60%); EMBEDDED SYSTEMS (50%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (50%);
CREDIT CARDS (50%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: WATER'S EDGE SOFTWARE (52%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (52%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: DUBLIN, IRELAND (91%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); LAKE MICHIGAN (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); INDONESIA
(92%); IRELAND (91%); ISRAEL (90%); MIDDLE EAST (90%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);
ASIA (79%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (75%); ALBANIA (75%); NETHERLANDS (72%);
MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (70%)

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             214 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Too Timid in Iran

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 154 words


To the Editor:

Re "Iran Leader Vows to Enact Reforms in His Second Term" (front page, Aug. 9):
We should be cautious in assessing President Mohammad Khatami's willingness to
carry out the reforms he has been promising since 1997. Since his landslide
re-election victory in June, the president has repeatedly failed to act against
unlawful arrests of journalists and activists and closings of newspapers.

After being sworn in, Mr. Khatami was asked by an Iranian journalist to comment
on the illegal closing of newspapers and the arrests of journalists. His reply
was, "How do you know that these were against the law?"

If President Khatami is to make a difference in human rights conditions, he must
speak out unequivocally against injustices as they arise.  Otherwise he risks
becoming a shield for Iran's unacceptable status quo.

ELAHE SHARIFPOUR-HICKS
New York, Aug. 9, 2001

The writer is a researcher at Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (88%); POLITICS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

PERSON: SHARIFPOUR-HICKS, ELAHE; KHATAMI, MOHAMMAD (PRES)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             215 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 20, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A World Court With a Mandate

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 169 words


To the Editor:

In "Bush Faces New Dispute Over Payment of U.N. Dues"(news article, Aug. 17),
you quote a Republican aide who says that the International Criminal Court lacks
a mandate and calls it "an independent counsel for the world."

In fact, the court's treaty requires it to focus exclusively on the most heinous
human rights crimes, genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, whose
definitions correspond to prohibitions in American law.

Unlike unaccountable independent counsels, the court's prosecutor will be
elected by the governments that ratify the treaty, mostly American allies, and
can be removed for misconduct by their majority vote.

The treaty contains numerous safeguards against unfair prosecutions. The United
States can bolster these protections by staying engaged with the court and
building a culture of respect for due process, but the Republican leadership is
self-defeatingly trying to preclude that engagement.

KENNETH ROTH
Exec. Dir., Human Rights Watch
New York, Aug. 17, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DUE PROCESS (88%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); MISCONDUCT (53%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Court Rules Detentions In Asylum Cases Violate Rights

BYLINE:  By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 7


In an unexpected blow to Britain's tough immigration policy, the High Court
declared today that four Kurdish asylum seekers sent to a government detention
center had been held in violation of their human rights.

The center opened in Oakington, Cambridgeshire, 18 months ago to fanfare,
including government statements that it would help ease the growing refugee
crisis. Designed for asylum seekers whose cases are considered most likely to be
decided quickly, the center can hold 350 people.

The court ruled that it was illegal to hold the Kurds, and by implication the
11,000 others who have passed through Oakington, because they had committed no
crimes and were not considered likely to flee. Inmates are locked in the center,
which is surrounded by high fences and barbed wire, and they cannot leave until
their asylum claims have been acted on, usually within a week.

Home Secretary David Blunkett said that he was deeply disturbed by the ruling
and that the government would appeal. If the government loses the case, lawyers
said, it would most likely have to end the policy of locked doors at Oakington.
The government might also have to pay damages to the four Kurds and to other
detained refugees.

For the time being, a spokesman for the Home Office said, asylum seekers will
continue to be held at Oakington. "They're not allowed to leave Oakington, but
security is minimal, in that people can move freely within it," the spokesman
said. "It's part of a firm, fast and fair way to deal with the asylum issue."

Human rights groups and advocates for asylum seekers, many of whom have fled
violent governments, praised the decision.

"The fundamental principle at stake here is whether it is right to detain people
who have committed no crime," said Nick Hardwick of the Refugee Council, an
advocacy group. "We have always maintained that locking up innocent men, women
and children is unacceptable."

A spokesman for the National Council for Civil Liberties, Roger Bingham, said
the current system was manifestly unfair. "The whole basis of the government's
detention policy needs to be fairer and more transparent," he said.

Oakington represents one of many steps the government has taken to tighten its
immigration policy in response to growing domestic pressure to stem the tide of
migrants, whom many Britons consider "bogus" asylum seekers. Although many of
the refugees pouring into the country -- there were more than 83,000 last year
despite tighter border controls -- are seeking only a better way of life, others
come from countries where they face torture, imprisonment or death.

In 1999, the government passed a tough law that set up a network of prisonlike
detention centers for asylum seekers whom it considers likely to abscond. There
are six in addition to Oakington, which the government calls a reception center.
As of May 31, the Home Office said, 1,787 people were being detained.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL ASYLUM (94%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (92%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES
(90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
VERDICTS (78%); TORTURE (78%); LAWYERS (75%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(73%); DAMAGES (73%); BORDER CONTROL (70%) IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  KURDS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

PERSON: LYALL, SARAH

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%)

REGION: GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             218 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru, Pressing Japan, Issues an Order for Fujimori's Arrest

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, Sept. 13


Peru issued at international arrest order today for Alberto K. Fujimori, the
exiled former president, on charges that he shared responsibility for 25
death-squad slayings in the early years of his decade-long rule.

Buffeted by accusations of corruption and repression, Mr. Fujimori fled to Tokyo
in November. The warrant was intended to press Japan to extradite the former
president so he can stand trial on a wide assortment of charges.

Japan has insisted that Mr. Fujimori, whose parents emigrated to Peru from
Japan, is a Japanese citizen and will not be forced to return to Peru. Leaders
in Tokyo had no response to the announcement today.

Judge Luis Locaros of the Supreme Court said on national radio that the warrant
had been forwarded to Interpol and that he had asked the international police
agency to search for and capture Mr. Fujimori. The charges, Judge Locaros said,
included aggravated homicide and forced disappearance.

The widely expected order was issued a week after Attorney General Nelly
Calderon had filed charges that Mr. Fujimori had "co-authored" two massacres
that became notorious in the Peruvian press and exposed the existence of the
death squad, the Colina Group, in the early 1990's.

Mr. Fujimori's government reportedly set up the group to fight two terrorist
insurgencies that were responsible for almost daily bombings around Lima and
other major cities.

Mr. Fujimori has on numerous occasion denied any connection to the group, and he
has said he was a victim of a witch hunt.

In a report filed to Congress in May, the attorney general cited evidence that
three former members of the death squad had said Mr. Fujimori's former spy
chief, Vladimiro L. Montesinos, had kept the former president abreast of the
group's activities.

A special prosecutor who is investigating human rights violations, Ronald
Gamarra, said Mr. Fujimori had recommended the promotion of and offered
congratulations to members of the Colina Group on three occasions. "He gave them
impunity," Mr. Gamarra said in an interview.

Mr. Gamarra said Mr. Fujimori had used his influence to impede the Congress from
investigating the squad and granted its members an amnesty to keep them from
disclosing information. Former army officers have also told investigators that
Mr. Fujimori was aware of the group's operations, law-enforcement officials
said.

One operation is reported to have been on Nov. 3, 1991, when a group of men
armed with rifles outfitted with silencers stormed a chicken barbecue party in a
tenement building in an impoverished neighborhood of Lima, Barrios Altos, a
stronghold of the Shining Path terrorist group. Fifteen people, including an
8-year-old, were killed.

According to the attorney general's report to Congress, Mr. Fujimori went to the
headquarters of Mr. Montesinos's National Intelligence Service to celebrate with
intelligence officers after the massacre.

The Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled last year that the massacre could
not be covered by an amnesty that Mr. Fujimori granted for the armed forces in
1995.

In a second action tied to the death squad, armed hooded men stormed La Cantuta
University on July 18, 1992, and carried away nine students and a professor.
Their bodies were buried but later found.

Mr. Fujimori governed Peru from 1990 to 2000, was twice freely elected and
retained high popularity through much of his two terms, even after suspending
Congress and the Supreme Court in 1992. But his administration began to crumble
last year, after he had won a third term in an election that international
monitors said was marred by rampant fraud.

Shortly after his inauguration in July 2000, a videotape surfaced that showed
Mr. Montesinos supposedly bribing a lawmaker. Mr. Fujimori could not control the
fallout, and both officials were eventually forced to flee the country. Mr.
Montesinos was apprehended in Venezuela in June and awaits trial.

President Alejandro Toledo, who unsuccessfully ran against Mr. Fujimori two
times but finally won a third election in April, has said he will continue to
press Japan to extradite Mr. Fujimori.

Law-enforcement officers said the arrests of the former Chilean dictator, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, and the Yugoslav leader, Slobodan Milosevic, in recent years
should strengthen their case in Japan.

"I believe he can be extradited," Mr. Gamarra said, "although this is not just a
legal matter. It is, above all, political."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (91%); EXTRADITION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(87%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); EVIDENCE (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%);
ESPIONAGE (77%); LAWYERS (76%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (74%); BOMBINGS (73%); POLITICS (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); SUPREME
COURTS (71%); TERRORISM (70%); ARMIES (65%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (65%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); SLUM DWELLINGS (63%); AMNESTY (62%) EXTRADITION;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL) (56%)

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (90%); LIMA, PERU (89%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (94%); PERU (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             223 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Italy's Premier Calls Western Civilization Superior to Islamic World

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Sept. 26


The Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, in a briefing for journalists,
praised Western civilization today as superior to that of the Islamic world and
urged Europe to "reconstitute itself on the basis of its Christian roots."

Mr. Berlusconi, here to discuss international cooperation against terrorism with
the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, and the German chancellor, Gerhard
Schroder, gave vent to views likely to outrage Turkey and other Islamic allies
of the West and infuriate antiglobalization protesters, besides.

As it designs a strategy against terrorism, Mr. Berlusconi said, the West should
trust in the supremacy of its values.

"We should be confident of the superiority of our civilization, which consists
of a value system that has given people widespread prosperity in those countries
that embrace it, and guarantees respect for human rights and religion," Mr.
Berlusconi said. "This respect certainly does not exist in Islamic countries."

The West "is bound to occidentalize and conquer new people," he said. "It has
done it with the Communist world and part of the Islamic world, but
unfortunately, a part of the Islamic world is 1,400 years behind. From this
point of view, we must be conscious of the strength and force of our
civilization."

Mr. Berlusconi, who has been criticized for the force Italian police used
against antiglobalization protesters in Genoa in July, said he saw "a singular
coincidence" between the protesters and the terrorists who attacked New York and
Washington.

The terrorists were trying "to stop the corrupting effect of Western
civilization on the Islamic world," he said, while "the antiglobalization
movement criticizes from within Western civilization the Western way of life,
trying to make Western civilization feel guilty."

Mr. Berlusconi was speaking in an on-the-record briefing to Italian journalists
covering his visit here. Some of the comments were then reported on the Italian
wire service ANSA, and others were later relayed in full by an Italian
journalist for Corriere della Sera who was at the briefing.

Later, in a joint news conference with Mr. Schroder, Mr. Berlusconi spoke highly
of Mr. Putin and his cooperation on terrorism in solidarity with the United
States. Like Mr. Schroder on Tuesday, Mr. Berlusconi soft-pedaled criticism over
Moscow's human-rights abuses in the rebellious province of Chechnya, which has
been fighting Russia for independence off and on since the time of the American
Civil War.

On Tuesday, Mr. Putin gave a well-received speech in German to the German
Parliament, in which he asserted that the Chechen rebellion was also a prime
example of Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism and asked for a better
understanding of Russia's predicament there. The West's new shyness to discuss
human-rights abuses in Chechnya appears to be the price of Russia's new alliance
with Washington and NATO against terrorism.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (95%); RELIGION (95%); GLOBALIZATION (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
JOURNALISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); MISSING PERSONS (62%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
ISLAM;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY

PERSON: SILVIO BERLUSCONI (91%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (78%); GERHARD SCHRODER (76%)
BERLUSCONI, SILVIO (PRIME MIN); ERLANGER, STEVEN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (86%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); BERLIN, GERMANY
(79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ITALY (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); GERMANY
(93%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ITALY

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             230 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 3, 2001 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico to Extradite an Argentine Accused of Genocide to Spain

BYLINE:   By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 2


Mexico decided today to extradite a former Argentine Navy officer, accused of
abuses committed under Argentina's dictatorship 20 years ago, to face charges in
Madrid.

Ricardo Cavallo will be handed over to the Spanish Embassy to face charges of
genocide, torture and terrorism against Spaniards, Mexico's Foreign Ministry
said in a news release.

The decision by Foreign Minister Jorge G. Casteneda follows a Mexican judge's
ruling last month that Mr. Cavallo could be extradited.

Human rights experts said that never before had a person accused of crimes
against humanity been sought for trial in a second nation and extradited by a
third. The decision, they said, establishes the principle that human rights laws
transcend national borders.

Mr. Cavallo ran Mexico's national motor vehicle registry until he was arrested
in Cancun in August. Days before, he was publicly identified through survivors'
testimony as a military officer who helped run a torture chamber under
Argentina's military junta, which jailed and killed tens of thousands of people
between 1976 and 1983.

The arrest warrant was signed by the same Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon, who
last year asked Britain to extradite Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator
of Chile. The British government declined. General Pinochet now has been
indicted by a Chilean judge on charges of homicide and kidnapping.

The government of Argentina, which has imposed a sweeping amnesty protecting the
junta's soldiers from prosecution, argued against the extradition of Mr.
Cavallo. It said that under the principle of territoriality, no one should be
tried abroad for crimes in his native land.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 7, 2001



CORRECTION: An article on Saturday about Mexico's decision to extradite to Spain
a former Argentine Navy officer accused of genocide and torture of Spaniards
misstated the year in which a Spanish judge first asked Britain to extradite
Gen. Augusto Pinochet in a similar case. In was 1998, not last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (98%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); JUDGES (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); MILITARY RULE (78%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); AMNESTY (75%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); TERRORISM (72%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (69%) EXTRADITION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  AMNESTIES;  ARMAMENT,
DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

PERSON: WEINER, TIM; CAVALLO, RICARDO

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%); SPAIN (94%); ARGENTINA (94%); CHILE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%)

REGION: ARGENTINA;  MEXICO;  SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             232 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Begins to Shine Light on Use of Torture

BYLINE:  By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 12


Soon after his arrest on trumped-up charges, Li Kuisheng was beaten to a bloody
mess.

Mr. Li, a prominent lawyer in the central city of Zhengzhou, had crossed the
police by trying to defend an official suspected of corruption, and found
himself charged with concocting evidence.

In a two-week ordeal intended to make him confess, he was forced to jog naked in
the snow, handcuffed and shackled. Then one arm was forced back over his
shoulder, the other arm was forced up from behind and his thumbs were tied
together, an agonizing position that he says left him wishing to die. He was
deprived of sleep for days on end, had rifle butts repeatedly slammed into his
back and served as a target dummy for flying kung fu kicks.

Last month, after 26 months in custody, Mr. Li was cleared of all charges and
released.

What was unusual about Mr. Li's case was not that he was tortured by the police,
legal experts say, but that fellow lawyers were able to raise enough of a fuss
to get him freed.

Increasingly, instances of police torture are reported in the official press, as
Mr. Li's was. And in rare cases, though apparently not including his, the
offending officials have been prosecuted. But public reports and prosecutions,
experts say, have barely scratched the surface of what one Chinese scholar has
called the legal system's "chronic illness."

A report issued today by Amnesty International, the London-based human rights
group, reviews scores of torture allegations involving not just the police but
also tax collectors, birth-control officials and other authorities and
concludes, "Torture and ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners is widespread
and systemic in China."

While acknowledging that internal debate over police abuses is rising, the
report also highlights evidence of a major new wave of police violence against
members of the outlawed Falun Gong spiritual group, more than 100 of whom have
reportedly died in police custody.

Whether torture is actually spreading here, as the Amnesty report suggests, or
is more frequently exposed is not clear. But several Chinese scholars and
articles in the official press have also described a pervasive pattern of
torture by the police and prosecutors, usually with the acquiescence of the
courts.

In a recently published book called "Fighting Torture," Chen Yunsheng, of the
Law Institute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, describes the police
abuse of detainees, especially to extract confessions, as "rampant" and a
"chronic illness." He says that only a tiny fraction of such violations are
investigated.

"For a minority of legal personnel," he wrote, "beating people has simply become
an everyday thing."

In addition to such tried methods as beating prisoners with clubs or pistols,
using stun guns on the genitals or flashing bright lights in the eyes, he wrote,
an increasingly popular technique has involved wrapping the victim with a
telephone cord in a manner that produces an excruciating electric shock.

"The real problem," said a recent commentary in the Legal Daily, is that solving
criminal cases wins acclaim and promotions for officials "no matter what methods
are used."

In another recent Legal Daily article, a scholar at Beijing University, Chen
Xingliang, criticized Chinese courts for routinely accepting confessions
obtained through torture and said a more explicit rule was needed to bar
evidence gained through abuses.

China is a party to a United Nations treaty banning torture, but has exempted
itself from the clause allowing outsiders to investigate alleged torture cases.

For the last several years, the United Nations special rapporteur on torture,
Sir Nigel Rodley, a British law professor, has sought to arrange a fact-finding
visit to China. But Beijing has refused to agree to the usual conditions of such
a visit including access to installations without advance notice and unmonitored
prisoner interviews, Sir Nigel said.

China's own laws do forbid torture of prisoners. But the country's long
tradition of primary reliance on confessions for conviction, and the informal
ties linking the local police, prosecutors and judges, have hampered progress.

Chinese scholars and the report from Amnesty International propose major changes
in legal practice that could help curb abuses.

One would be to grant defendants the right to remain silent and avoid
self-incrimination -- a standard protection in the West, but one that flies
against tradition here.

But real progress, experts here say, would require changes in attitudes and
training of legal officers as well as changes in the legal code.

"The government has acknowledged for many years that torture is a serious
problem but has done little about it," the Amnesty International report asserts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE MISCONDUCT (91%); LAWYERS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (86%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); CORRUPTION
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); MISCONDUCT (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MARTIAL
ARTS (74%); CHRONIC DISEASES (69%); CULTS & SECTS (67%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL
SCIENCE (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%) TORTURE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: ECKHOLM, ERIK

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (69%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             233 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian War Trial Focuses on Sex Crimes

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1535 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 16


Witness No. 50 was just 15 when the soldiers picked her out at the detention
center. Her mother and her grandmother watched her leave, still nurturing their
dream that one day their girl would wear her veil, just as they had done, for a
Muslim wedding in the village, with everyone dancing to Bosnian music under the
trees.

When she was brought back, shaking and crying, she kept her eyes down.

She would not say a word or look her mother in the face. Night after night, it
kept happening, soldiers taking her away and raping her, sometimes four or five
at a time.

Witness No. 50, as she is known to the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The
Hague, is now a troubled refugee, old at 23, one of the many whose lives were
changed forever by the Bosnian war of 1992-95.

For eight years, she did not speak of the hellish months in 1992 when she and
other imprisoned women were trapped in "quasi brothels" in the town of Foca in
southeastern Bosnia, passed around from soldier to soldier. She became pregnant.
Eventually, her mother was raped. And finally, last year, she blurted out her
story in the eerie silence of the tribunal's courtroom.

"I was ashamed before," she told the judge, Florence Mumba of Zambia. "Those
words could not come out of my mouth."

Her account, delivered between sobs and bursts of anger, has been uncomfortably
common at the Foca trial, the first to focus entirely on wartime crimes of
sexual violence and the first in an international court to prosecute sexual
slavery.

Other sexual crimes, specifically rape, have already been judged by this
tribunal, as well as the parallel United Nations court that judges crimes of the
Rwandan genocide of 1994.

But at the end of the Foca trial, the most extensive investigation yet into
wartime sexual abuse of women, the tribunal is expected to deliver a new and
wider definition of slavery.

Those in the dock are three former Bosnian Serb fighters who are charged with
mass rape and forced prostitution involving dozens of women, some only 12 and 13
years old.

"After World War II, tribunals dealt with slavery only in the form of slave
labor," said Patricia Sellers, a legal adviser for sexual crimes to the
prosecutor. "But forced prostitution was never tried."

In court, prosecutors have repeatedly used the term "sex slaves" to describe the
plight of Witness No. 50 and the others like her who were forced to service
their captors. During the 11-month proceedings, the prosecution has employed the
language of the Slavery Convention of 1926 and also expanded it.

Legal scholars and human rights groups say they are now looking to the judges'
verdict, planned for next Thursday, as a crucial ruling that may well set an
important precedent. Prosecutors are asking for prison sentences ranging between
15 and 35 years for the accused.

The story of the Muslim women of Foca, a small town on the banks of the Drina
river, may not be much different from others, because countless women were
raped, humiliated and tortured on all sides of Bosnia's war. But theirs has
become one of the tribunal's best documented cases of organized sexual abuse.

Many dark secrets remain. No one knows exactly how many children were born from
Foca's rapes. The armed Serbs who took control of Foca forced some women to have
their "Serb" babies, while others had abortions, according to prosecutors and
human rights workers. Some mothers reportedly kept their infants and others
abandoned them at hospitals. Many of the raped women still have chronic
gynecological problems; others have died.

The case has taken five years of investigations, countless informants and more
than 30 witnesses for the prosecution, more than half of them Muslim women from
Foca. "The prosecution has to show what happened to this group," Mrs. Sellers
said. "Some women were killed, and we may never know more about them. Some have
not come forward to testify. We don't have to prove the number of crimes, but
the crimes themselves."

The three Bosnian Serb fighters on trial agree that they participated in the
attack on the town of Foca and its surrounding villages in the spring of 1992.
Dragoljub Kunarac commanded a reconnaissance unit of the Bosnian Serb army and
Radomir Kovac and Zoran Vukovic were paramilitary leaders, according to the
prosecution. The indictment says that after the attack, which aimed to drive
Muslims from the area, many non-Serb men who remained were imprisoned, while
women and children were sent to separate detention centers in motels, a sports
hall and local schools.

Serb soldiers, who according to a witness, had passes signed by the local police
commander, would come in at night to rape the Muslim women in those centers or
to take them away. There, the three accused, according to the indictment, also
picked out young women to use them in "quasi brothels" for themselves and other
soldiers. Sometimes the soldiers kept them for several days, sometimes for
weeks, the indictment says; at times, they rented or sold them for cash.

The three accused have denied the charges of torture, rape and enslavement.

As witnesses appeared, prosecutors showed blown-up pictures of buildings,
seemingly humdrum places in the center of an average town of the old Yugoslavia
-- an apartment block, a motel, several homes, the Partizan sports hall. Yet
witness after witness described one or other site as places of horror, where
they slept on the floor, got almost no food and were beaten, raped and often
threatened with knives and guns.

One such place, according to prosecutors, was known as Karaman's house, named
for its Muslim owners, who had fled.

Mr. Kunarac, prosecutors said, used it for his men to rest between missions. He
also kept up to seven young women here.

Witness No. 75 was one of them. She told the court of the day that she was raped
at Karaman's house. She said that for more than three hours, 15 soldiers
assaulted her. One threatened to cut off her breast with his knife.

"When she came back, she was all blue," another witness, a former neighbor,
testified. "She screamed and cried and she was bleeding. Even her nose was
bleeding. It took a long time to stop."

Witness No. 87 was 15 when she, her 19-year-old sister and her mother were
locked up at a motel. On the first afternoon, four soldiers raped her, she said.
"What did you feel?" asked the prosecutor. "I felt dirty and soiled," she said.
"Did you tell your mother?" the prosecutor asked.

"No," was the reply, "she never asked me and I never told her, but she knew."

That was only the beginning of No. 87's servitude. With some 200 other women,
she spent several weeks as a prisoner at the Partizan sports hall. Serb soldiers
would come and select her and other girls, "sometimes every night, sometimes
every other night." She was taken to houses, she said, where she was raped and
had to do domestic chores. For four months, she was kept at an apartment with
other girls where soldiers would come and go. She lost count of how many times
she was raped, or by how many people. She remembers the pain, sometimes so
strong that she could not walk.

Finally she got away, she said, because Mr. Kovac, one of the accused, sold her
and another young woman for 500 German marks each to passing soldiers from
Montenegro. There, she managed to escape.

In every case in this trial, the women who testified had their voices scrambled
but their real sobbing sometimes could be heard through the prosecutor's
microphones. Blinds were pulled over the glass wall of the public gallery to
hide the women from view. But they always did come face to face with the
accused.

"Look around the courtroom and see if you recognize Zoran Vukovic," the
prosecutor at one point asked Witness No 50. "Yes," came the reply. Mr. Vukovic
looked down, his jaw tightening.

She also recognized Mr. Kunarac as one of her victimizers. He had been very
violent, she said. "He wanted to hurt me, but he could never hurt me as much as
my soul was hurting me." Asked why she had never, until that day, told her
story, she said she had wanted to spare her family. So why was she talking now?
"Because I took the oath to speak the truth," she replied.

Witness No. 50 was the third woman of her family to appear in court. Her mother,
who was also raped, had appeared a day earlier. Her grandmother, the day before
that, had described how soldiers had cut off her husband's ears and then killed
him.

The six lawyers for the defense have rejected all the charges. They presented
alibis for Mr. Kunarac and brought testimony from a doctor who said that Mr.
Vukovic had become temporarily impotent due to an accident and could not have
raped anyone during the relevant time.

While not denying that rape took place, they argued that prosecutors had not
proved rape because some of the women had liked the soldiers. The women and
girls, they argued, were not enslaved because the accused were not permanently
"in possession" of the women.

"They did not prove that the alleged victims of rape were exposed to any severe
physical or psychological suffering," said the chief defense counsel, Slavisa
Prodanovic, in his summary. He added, drawing gasps from the visitors' gallery,
"The rape in itself is not an act that inflicts severe bodily pain."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Three Bosnian Serbs are on trial for sexual crimes in the
1992-95 war. They are, from left, Zoran Vukovic, Dragoljub Kunarac and Radomir
Kovac. (Pool photographs by Dusan Vranic)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); SLAVERY
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); PROSTITUTION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); SENTENCING
(74%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); WORLD WAR II (73%);
REFUGEES (70%); VERDICTS (70%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (66%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  SEX CRIMES;  SLAVERY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KUNARAC, DRAGOLJUB; KOVAC, RADOMIR; VUKOVIC, ZORAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); NETHERLANDS (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(89%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  FOCA (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Death in Colombia

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 155 words


To the Editor:

President Andres Pastrana of Colombia says he is cracking down on paramilitary
groups (news article, Feb. 27), but during his presidency the human rights
situation has deteriorated and paramilitary groups are now responsible for 80
percent of Colombia's politically motivated killings. According to the State
Department, there were some 4,000 of these deaths last year, a significant
increase.

In 1989, President Virgilio Barco declared paramilitary groups illegal in
Colombia. Every successive president has made similar promises. Now President
Pastrana says he is developing new strategies, but what is needed is not
strategies but action. The government must hold the military and paramilitary
architects of human rights violations accountable for their crimes. The Bush
administration and Congress should insist on no less.

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Executive Director
Amnesty International U.S.A.
New York, March 1, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (73%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: SCHULZ, WILLIAM F

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             236 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico's New Leader Vows to End Longstanding Impunity for Torture in Justice
System

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, March 17


Torture, a tool used in Mexico for centuries, must now end, says the new
president, Vicente Fox. But his advisers say it will require radical changes in
the justice system, from lowly patrolmen to the high courts.

For the first time, Mr. Fox has acknowledged that police officers and soldiers
use torture to extract confessions from subjects. Judges accept confessions
wrung through torture; they are legally admissible in court. In fact, they are
often the only evidence brought against suspects by police officers who lack
investigative skills but possess the power to beat people into signing
statements.

The United States appears to have played a supporting role. Mexican police and
security forces bought more than $15 million worth of American-made shock
batons, stun guns, straitjackets, shackles and similar equipment from January
1997 through February 2000, say Commerce Department statistics obtained by
Amnesty International.

While the Commerce Department has approved export licenses for those tools, the
State Department reports that the police in Mexico "regularly obtain information
through torture."

Now Mr. Fox says Mexico will "eradicate torture forever." He has appointed a
special ambassador on human rights, Mariclaire Acosta, whose portfolio includes
stamping out the practice.

But "torture is very frequent," Ms. Acosta said. "A confession is the most
important source of evidence in the investigation of a crime. How do you produce
a confession? Unfortunately, through torture."

Mexico's laws, like those of the United States, prohibit cruel and unusual
punishment. "And yet it continues," she said. Ending the practice, she said,
will require "enormous political will."

"The eradication of torture requires an overhaul of the justice system," she
said. "It's not a matter of passing laws but changing the nature of criminal
investigations" and judicial standards. Under present procedures, a victim of
torture, confronted with a false confession extracted through force, has to
convince a judge that he was beaten or half-drowned, often weeks or months after
the fact.

"The judge says there is no evidence," Ms. Acosta said, "and yet the people were
tortured with beatings, immersion in water, electric shock, prolonged periods
without water and food. And all this, of course, happens in situations where
people are held incommunicado."

Pierre Sane, the secretary general of Amnesty International, met with President
Fox and other top Mexican officials this week, and he said in an interview that
Mr. Fox's admission was a significant first step.

"The climate is different," in Mexico, under Mr. Fox, the first opposition
politician to take power in Mexico in seven decades, Mr. Sane said.

"If everyone from the chief of the armed forces to the smallest police precinct
hears the president say, 'We need to stop torture,' that has an effect," he
added. "But it needs to be followed by concrete actions."

He called on Mr. Fox to free three men whom Amnesty International regards as
"prisoners of conscience": an Army brigadier general, Jose Francisco Gallardo,
and two peasant farmers, Rodolfo Montiel and Teodoro Cabrera.

General Gallardo was arrested in November 1993 on charges of slandering the
armed forces by criticizing abuses against civilians. The charges were dismissed
a year later, yet he remains in prison. Mr. Montiel and Mr. Cabrera protested
wildcat logging by local political bosses, and were imprisoned in May 1999 on
dubious gun and drugs charges, despite official findings that they were
arbitrarily detained, then tortured.

What these and other human-rights cases in Mexico have in common, Mr. Sane said,
is impunity -- the fact that officials can break the law in the name of the law,
and get away with it. "Very seldom do you see officers prosecuted for torture"
or other crimes, he said.

This, Amnesty said in its latest report in Mexico, explains "the profound lack
of faith of most Mexicans in their country's administration of justice." Mr. Fox
has promised to renew that faith, but his own aides say he must tear down a
corrupt labyrinth before building a new foundation of law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(89%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (79%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLICE FORCES (77%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); APPROVALS (72%);
ARMED FORCES (72%); EXPORT TRADE (68%); EXPORT CONTROLS (68%) CRIME AND
CRIMINALS;  TORTURE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (91%) WEINER, TIM; FOX QUESADA, VICENTE (PRES);
ACOSTA, MARICLAIRE

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             258 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Chile: Delay For Pinochet

BYLINE:  By Clifford Krauss (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 87 words


Retired Gen. Augusto Pinochet won a third judicial delay in having his
fingerprints and mug shots taken while he awaits a possible future trial for
human rights violations that occurred during his rule over the country.

Citing the former dictator's ailing health, a court of appeals suspended a
judge's order that he be registered officially with the police, a process his
supporters consider unnecessary. Human rights lawyers say it is important that
General Pinochet be treated like any suspect.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EVIDENCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); LAWYERS (86%); JUDGES (85%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (84%); APPEALS COURTS (54%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

PERSON: PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

COUNTRY: CHILE (93%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             259 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Grim Olympic Precedent

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

"An I.O.C. Report Gives Three Cities High Marks" (Sports pages, May 16) says
that a number of International Olympic Committee delegates "seem to have been
swayed by the argument that awarding the Olympics to Beijing would spur reform
and would lead to an improvement of human rights inside China."

The Olympic movement has experience with a regime notorious for its human rights
violations.

In 1936, the Olympics were held in Berlin. Not only did the Olympics not have a
positive effect on German Nazism, but that regime also soon began carrying out
some of the worst crimes of the 20th century.

Experience teaches us that the argument that the Olympics will have a positive
effect on China is absolutely ludicrous.

LAWRENCE D. WEINBERG
Overland Park, Kan., May 16, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (93%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) OLYMPIC GAMES;  SUMMER GAMES (OLYMPICS)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (84%)

PERSON: WEINBERG, LAWRENCE D

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%); BERLIN, GERMANY (68%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); GERMANY (77%)

REGION: CHINA;  BEIJING (CHINA);  BERLIN (GERMANY)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             260 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Trial for Idi Amin?

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

Idi Amin could be brought to trial in his exile in Saudi Arabia, back in Uganda
or indeed anywhere else (Sunday Q & A, May 20). The crimes against humanity of
which he is accused are not subject to statutes of limitations or claims of
immunity and may be prosecuted by any country, as in the Pinochet case.

What is lacking is the political will. A Saudi ambassador told me that once
someone is a guest in your tent, Bedouin hospitality forbids you from asking him
questions. In fact, Bedouin rules say that after three days, you can ask
questions. International law says you should.

REED BRODY
Advocacy Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, May 20, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (87%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: AMIN, IDI; BRODY, REED

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (93%); UGANDA (91%)

REGION: UGANDA;  SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Chile: Book Him, Court Says

BYLINE:  By Clifford Krauss (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 66 words


A Santiago appeals court ruled that Gen. Augosto Pinochet should be
fingerprinted and photographed by the police as he awaits a possible trial on
charges of human rights violations.

Human rights lawyers, opposed by the general's lawyers, have been pushing for
such a ruling for months, arguing that the former dictator should be treated as
any criminal suspect would be.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); FINGERPRINTING (88%); LAWYERS (88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); APPEALS COURTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); APPEALS (86%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (83%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (92%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             265 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Putin Talks, Bring Up Chechnya

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 175 words


To the Editor:

Re "Engaging With Russia," by Robert S. Strauss (Op-Ed, June 12):

An important element in the relationship of trust that needs to be established
between President Bush and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has to be the
Russian military's performance in Chechnya.

Troops there have murdered, tortured, raped and looted civilians, but Russia's
shoddy investigations have all but guaranteed impunity.

Russia has closed its doors to United Nations monitors who could investigate
these violations and help get to the truth. On Saturday, President Bush should
ask Mr. Putin to allow United Nations monitors access to Chechnya, and to
provide a detailed accounting of investigations and prosecutions of human rights
violations.

The United States cannot develop a fully cooperative relationship with Russia in
international security matters until Russia cleans up the mess left by its
"dirty war" in Chechnya.

RACHEL DENBER
New York, June 12, 2001

The writer is deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia Division, Human
Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); ARMED FORCES (71%); TORTURE (70%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             266 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
One Love, One Heart, Or a Sweatshop Economy?

BYLINE:  By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg.
18

LENGTH: 879 words


The term "globalization" is so tinged with rosy one-world optimism that it's
easy to assume the essential benignity of an economic philosophy whose name
vaguely connotes unity, equality and freedom. But as Stephanie Black's powerful
documentary "Life and Debt" illustrates with an impressive (and depressing)
acuity, globalization can have a devastating impact on third world countries.
The movie offers the clearest analysis of globalization and its negative effects
that I've ever seen on a movie or television screen.

"Life and Debt," which opens the Human Rights Watch Film Festival this evening
at the Walter Reade Theater and continues its run on Saturday at Cinema Village,
focuses on the deeply troubled economy of Jamaica and how that country's
long-term indebtedness to international lending organizations have contributed
to the erosion of local agriculture and industry.

Far from being a dry exegesis crammed with graphs, pie charts and talking heads
spewing abstract mumbo-jumbo, the film goes directly to the farmers and factory
workers whose livelihoods have been undermined. In basic everyday language, they
explain how high interest rates have helped devalue the local currency, raising
prices for their produce and permitting wealthier countries to import the same
products and sell them more cheaply.

The hard-nosed lending policies of organizations like the International Monetary
Fund, the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank may not
deliberately set out to undermine fragile third world economies dependent on
their aid. But as the movie shows, the market forces that operate once these
organizations become involved are an economic form of Darwinism. The fittest
economies prosper while the weaker ones tend to be snared in an endless and
escalating cycle of debt repayment that eventually erodes the debtor country's
economic base. The banks' lending policies are, of course, determined by the
wealthier countries, especially the United States and those of Western Europe.

These dry economic realities are leavened by the cool, ironic lyricism of a
voice-over narration by Jamaica Kincaid, who adapted the text from her
nonfiction book, "A Small Place." Adopting the alluringly soothing tone of a
subversive tour guide, Ms. Kincaid informs potential tourists of the things that
will be hidden from sight should they visit Jamaica.

"When you sit down to eat your delicious meal, it's better that you don't know
that most of what you are eating came off a ship from Miami," she says.

That's just one of a long list of things she mentions -- from primitive hotel
sewage systems that empty directly into the ocean to the dire poverty of
Kingston's slums -- that all but the most intrepidly curious visitors to the
country will not see. Recurring through the film are unsettling images of jolly,
overfed American tourists engaged in activities like beer-drinking contests in
Jamaica's luxury hotels.

One result of the country's crumbling economy is the vulnerability to
exploitation of Jamaica's needy labor force. A segment about Jamaica's free
trade zones introduces us to workers who toil five or six days a week in
near-sweatshop conditions for the legal minimum wage of $30 a week sewing
garments for American manufacturers. No unionization is permitted in these
foreign-owned garment factories where shiploads of material arrive tax-free for
assembly before being transported back to foreign markets. Those who dare to
make waves are fired.

The movie visits a plant that used to sell high-quality chickens for Jamaican
consumption but whose business has been undermined by the dumping of cheaper,
low-grade chicken parts from the United States under the guise of free trade.
And until recently, Jamaica's banana industry flourished thanks to an agreement
with Britain allowing a tax-free import quota. But through the World Trade
Organization, the United States has protested the agreement, forcing Jamaica to
compete with multinational corporations based in Central and South America where
labor is cheaper.

These are just a few of the stories told in a film that despite all the bad news
it delivers refuses to raise its voice. Among the prominent Jamaicans
interviewed the most eloquent voice belongs to Michael Manley, the former prime
minister who reluctantly signed some of the agreements that have damaged the
country's economy.

Speaking more in sorrow than in anger, he acknowledges that his country made
mistakes along the way. But the overall impression left by this devastating film
is of the global economy as a dog-eat-dog world where the usual culprits, the
United States and its multinational corporate clients, have the advantage.

LIFE AND DEBT

Produced and directed by Stephanie Black; narration written by Jamaica Kincaid,
based on her book "A Small Place"; directors of photography, Malik Sayeed, Kyle
Kibbe, Richard Lannaman and Alex Nepomniaschy; edited by Jon Mullen; music by
Ziggy Marley and the Melody Makers, Bob Marley, Dean Fraser, Buju Banton,
Sizzla, Harry Belafonte, Mutabaruka, Rolando E. McLean, Peter Tosh and Anthony
B.; released by Tuff Gong Pictures. Opens tomorrow at Cinema Village, 22 East
12th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 86 minutes. This film is not
rated.

WITH: Belinda Becker (narrator).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: LIFE AND DEBT (MOVIE)

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene in a Jamaican sweatshop in Stephanie Black's documentary
"Life and Debt," which opens the Human Rights Watch Film Festival. (Jeremy
Francis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MOVIE REVIEWS (90%); GLOBALIZATION (90%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (90%); GARMENT
WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); FILM (90%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (90%); EXTERNAL
DEBT (89%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); PUBLIC DEBT (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (77%); DEBTOR NATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (76%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (76%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); FESTIVALS (75%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (73%);
DEVALUATION (71%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (71%); FACTORY WORKERS (68%); FOREIGN
LENDING (68%); SLUM DWELLINGS (60%); NON FICTION LITERATURE (57%); INTEREST
RATES (52%); ECONOMIC NEWS (52%) MOTION PICTURES;  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH FILM
FESTIVAL;  REVIEWS

COMPANY: INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (82%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (54%);
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS921130 PUBLIC FINANCE ACTIVITIES (82%); NAICS521110 MONETARY
AUTHORITIES - CENTRAL BANK (82%); SIC6082 FOREIGN TRADE & INTERNATIONAL BANKING
INSTITUTIONS (82%)

PERSON: BLACK, STEPHANIE; KINCAID, JAMAICA; HOLDEN, STEPHEN

CITY: KINGSTON, JAMAICA (71%)

COUNTRY: JAMAICA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             267 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

20-Year Sentence for New Yorker After 2nd Terrorism Trial in Peru

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1609 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, June 20


Lori Berenson, the 31-year-old New Yorker who has been held for more than five
years in Peruvian prisons on terrorism charges, was convicted tonight by a
civilian court of collaborating in a foiled terrorist plot to take the entire
Peruvian Congress hostage. She was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

The three-judge tribunal ruled that Ms. Berenson had rented a house in Lima with
a co-conspirator for the express purpose of providing a base for a Marxist
terrorist organization, bought various computer and communications gear for the
group, and then used press credentials as a cover to scrutinize the halls of
Congress and facilitate an eventual attack.

After her first trial she was sentenced to life in prison, and her second
conviction was widely expected. This time, however, the court made the point
that they considered her a collaborator rather than a militant.

The court said she would be released in 2015 because she has already served more
than five years in prison. Upon release, she will be immediately expelled from
Peru. In addition to the prison sentence, which was the minimum requested by the
prosecution. In addition to the prison term, Ms. Berenson was fined
approximately $28,000.

After the sentencing Ms. Berenson was handed a microphone by her lawyer and
said, "I believe this is an unjust decision."

With her eyes beginning to tear up, she added, "I am innocent."

Tonight her parents and lawyer said they would appeal to the Peruvian Supreme
Court and international human rights tribunals.

In Washington tonight, a State Department spokeswoman said the department would
not comment on the verdict as long as an appeal was planned in Peru.

As a court official read the charges, Ms. Berenson took notes with a shaking
hand. Then she stood to hear a clerk read a long review of the case, holding her
hands clasped before her waist and swaying back and forth slightly.

Hours before her sentencing, Ms. Berenson was ushered into the court accompanied
by a pair of female guards wearing bulletproof vests.

Given a final chance to defend herself, she pleaded her innocence in a measured
45-minute speech in fluent Spanish filled with references to the teachings of
Pope Paul VI and the martyred Salvadoran archbishop, Oscar Arnulfo Romero, who
argued for "preferential treatment of the poor."

Ms. Berenson appeared in a prison court that was especially arranged for a
throng of journalists and their cameras. She was dressed in a pressed beige
jacket, gray turtleneck, black pants and dangling fish earrings. She again
refused to condemn the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, or M.R.T.A., with
which she was alleged to have collaborated. But she said she never knew of a
rebel plot to attack the Congress, or even if the plot existed, or that her
housemates were rebels.

"I am not a terrorist and I condemn terrorism," Ms. Berenson said in a voice
that sometimes shivered in controlled emotion, raising her eyebrows and biting
her lower lip from time to time to accent her points. "I have been treated as a
symbol of political violence and terrorism for five years and that is an
injustice."

Ms. Berenson said she strongly suspected that the verdict would not go her away,
and she often looked to the cameras to appeal directly to the Peruvian people in
an apparent effort to ease the way for an eventual pardon by the interim
president, Valentin Paniagua, or the president-elect, Alejandro Toledo, who
takes office July 28. Mr. Paniagua has not taken a position on the trial; his
justice minister, Diego Garcia Sayan, said he believed it was fair.

"I did not come to Peru to hurt anyone," Ms. Berenson said. "I have been in jail
for believing in what I do but I continue to have faith in humanity and the
Peruvian people."

Today's proceedings culminated a long road of unlikely twists for Ms. Berenson,
who grew up in Queens and Manhattan, the daughter of college professors. As a
young girl she was more interested in music and science than politics, until she
went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the late 1980's and discovered
Latin America.

She protested the United States involvement in Central America, then dropped out
of M.I.T. to go to Nicaragua and El Salvador. She became personal secretary for
a Salvadoran rebel commander as the Salvadoran civil war was winding down.

Ms. Berenson was arrested in Lima in November 1995, hours before the police
raided a four-story house she rented. The police met stiff resistance from
rebels in the house and ultimately found 8,000 rounds of ammunition and 3,000
sticks of dynamite.

Three rebels and one police officer died in the shootout, and among the 14
terrorists captured was Miguel Rincon, third in command of the M.R.T.A.

Six weeks after her arrest, she was convicted of treason and sentenced to life
without parole in a trial at which she faced hooded judges in a military court
that did not allow her lawyer to cross-examine witnesses. She has spent the
better part of the last five years in a freezing prison cell 12,000 feet high in
the Andes.

But after years of pressure from Washington and a spirited campaign led by Ms.
Berenson's parents, a military tribunal ruled last August that she deserved a
retrial in a civilian court on the lesser charges of "terrorist collaboration"
and "illicit association," with the prosecution requesting a 20-year sentence.

It is likely the new trial was granted as part of an effort by Peru's former
president, Alberto K. Fujimori, now in exile, to improve relations with the
United States as his government was crumbling.

Over the last three months, the prosecution offered essentially the same
evidence presented in her first trial, evidence gathered by a police force that
human rights activists say frequently doctored evidence to prove their cases.

The prosecution argued, as it did in her first trial, that Ms. Berenson had
posed as a foreign correspondent in order to rent a safe house for the rebels
and to gain access to Congress accompanied by a photographer who was herself an
underground terrorist. The rebel objective, the prosecution said, was to take
the Congress hostage for an exchange of M.R.T.A. prisoners in jail.

The prosecution showed a forged Peruvian voting identification card bearing Ms.
Berenson's photograph that was found in the M.R.T.A. safe house during the 1995
police raid. They showed a coded seating plan of the Congress, as well as
printouts of several rebel documents with scribbled editing corrections, which
police handwriting experts say are in Ms. Berenson's hand.

Ms. Berenson and her lawyer have suggested that the identification card and the
scribbled corrections could be forgeries and that she never saw the printed
documents before. Her lawyer said it was a conflict of interest to use police
handwriting experts who took orders from police officials.

The prosecution and judges openly expressed skepticism that Ms. Berenson could
have rented a house for a year inhabited by more than 15 M.R.T.A. rebels and
hired a photographer who was the wife of a terrorist leader without ever
suspecting the identities of the people she so closely associated with.

The presiding judge, Marcos Ibazeta, said a "spider web of coincidences" tied
Ms. Berenson to the rebels.

But Ms. Berenson said the people she lived with gave false names, and that she
never went up to the fourth floor where the terrorists preparing for a raid on
the Congress were living because she respected their privacy and did not want to
pry. She said she spent most of her time in a second, smaller apartment that she
rented in the months before the raid.

The prosecution's principal witness against Ms. Berenson was Pacifico
Castrellon, a Panamanian architect and painter who constructed a model and maps
for the rebel Congress attack. He testified that she introduced him to Nestor
Cerpa Cartolini, a M.R.T.A. leader, in Quito, Ecuador, before she and Mr.
Castrellon went to Peru together. He said the rebels paid for their housing, car
and food.

"This wasn't a woman who on a whim came as a tourist," said a prosecutor, Carlos
Navas, in his closing remarks two weeks ago. "She came with the intent of
collaborating with the M.R.T.A." But Ms. Berenson and her lawyer say that much
of Mr. Castrellon's story is a lie because he wants a reduction in his own
sentence in a new trial. Several convicted M.R.T.A. rebels have testified in
court that Mr. Castrellon was a longtime collaborator and that Ms. Berenson knew
neither of the plot to take over the Congress nor their true identities.

Some of the testimony given by several rebels in this trial has directly
contradicted what they told police six years ago, but now they assert they were
under duress during initial interrogations.

In her speech to the court, Ms. Berenson only apologized for appearing strident
when she was first arrested, when she shouted, her fists clenched to her sides,
"There are no criminal terrorists in the M.R.T.A.; it's a revolutionary
movement!" That image has made her an unpopular figure in Peru to this day.

Today, she attempted to correct that remark by saying, "If I offended anyone, I
apologize. That's not the impression I want to leave, nor does it represent who
I am or what I think."

After the proceedings tonight, Mark and Rhoda Berenson, Ms. Berenson's parents,
stormed out of the court and got into a car. "You can't get a fair trial in
Peru," Mr. Berenson told reporters. Jose Sandoval, Ms. Berenson's lawyer, said
the court system remained deeply influenced by Mr. Fujimori and his former
intelligence chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, who is a fugitive.

"I still do not think there is a just judicial process in Peru," Mr. Sandoval
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lori Berenson listened to the court's verdict in Lima
yesterday. (Associated Press)(pg. A1); Lori Berenson standing and making a
statement to a three-judge tribunal during her trial yesterday in San Juan de
Lurigancho Prison in Lima. (Associated Press)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); SENTENCING (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (92%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (89%); APPEALS (89%); VERDICTS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (86%);
LAWYERS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HOSTAGE
TAKING (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (64%); RELIGION (60%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (60%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (55%) TERRORISM;  DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  HOSTAGES;
LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; BERENSON, LORI

CITY: LIMA, PERU (91%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: PERU;  LIMA (PERU)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             268 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 15, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: War Crimes in Africa;
Where Justice Takes a Back Seat to Just Ending War

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1013 words


AFRICA is where most of world's warfare is now. Since civilians are often the
targets there, it stands to reason that Africa may also be fertile ground in
this new era of international justice. So: what signal did the delivery of
Slobodan Milosevic to the Hague in exchange for $1.3 billion in assistance to
Serbia send to Africa and its often appalling leaders?

John Githongo, head of Transparency International in Kenya, an anti-corruption
group, believes that the message is mostly a good one for ordinary Africans:
that some of their worst leaders may be held to a long-overdue accounting.

But that does not stop him from wondering about a new era of confusion and
abuse, alongside the hope for greater justice. After all, $1.3 billion is a lot
of money -- roughly one-tenth the crippling amount that the continent pays each
year to service its debt. What's more, the search for justice for past crimes
may provide a way of hiding new ones, or at least major shortcomings in a new
regime that may not be much better than the last.

Handing over an old leader to The Hague, Mr. Githongo said, "would have an
enormous effect on legitimizing the new regime by saying, 'We haven't done very
much but the reason we haven't done very much is that the people before us made
such a cockup of everything.' It does distract people."

Most experts dismiss the possibility that the precedent with Mr. Milosevic and
the cash promised to Serbia could create "an export industry in dictators along
with diamonds, gold and cobalt," as Richard H. Dicker, director of the
international justice program at Human Rights Watch, jokingly put it.

But the Milosevic extradition, like that of Augusto Pinochet of Chile, does
raise " unique challenges to leadership in Africa," Mr. Githongo said. "And it's
only now being discussed."

Africa never had a Nuremberg trial, the decisive point at which Europeans
defined what was acceptable and what was not. There is a tribunal to try
suspects for the genocide in Rwanda, but some experts argue that its effect has
been small, in part because the crimes, while horrific, were so local, and
because, until recently, it had achieved few convictions. In any event, Africa
experts note that for decades during the cold war, all manner of crimes, both
military and economic, were overlooked in the name of geostrategic positioning.
Thus Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire, Mohamed Siad Barre of Somalia or Samuel Doe of
Liberia essentially got a pass to act as they pleased.

All that changed with the end of the cold war, and perhaps more pointedly, as
the borders of justice dropped to the point where suspects in the Rwandan
genocide in 1994 were tried this year in a Belgian court. But many leaders in
Africa were slow to recognize those changes and now, in theory, they face a
completely new set of rules from the same people who wrote the older, more
lenient ones. That could create complications for the imposers of trans-border
justice.

"If Mobutu was being taken to court, his lawyers would argue, 'Well, why not the
United States government and France and Belgium, who bankrolled him?" asked
Salih Booker, executive director of Africa Action, an advocacy group in
Washington. "That is the only refuge of African dictators that has some basis in
fact."

There are some worries that, at least in the short run, the new rules may
already be having the effect of prolonging conflict and keeping corrupt leaders
in power.

In Burundi, for example, ethnic Tutsi leaders have reportedly expressed fear of
prosecution for their part in the civil war there, a clear disincentive to
leaving office soon. It is analogous to the situation in Kenya, where there have
not been questions about crimes against humanity, but where a grant of amnesty
on corruption issues has reportedly been put forward as the key to persuading
President Daniel arap Moi to end his long rule there.

Mr. Githongo argues that for African societies, the international prosecution of
former leaders is not yet compatible with more pressing goals. Those societies
have a deep need for peace, he said, and focusing narrowly on prosecution now
may stir up more immediate conflict. He noted the apparent success of achieving
peace in Mozambique after granting some amnesty to end the civil war there a
decade ago.

"There are other important issues like reconciliation," he said. "Terrible
things have been done. Let's go through a transitional process but let's keep a
low profile. Let's not be vindictive."

His argument also raises the larger question of whether trying war criminals is,
in fact, the most pressing need for Africa -- a variation of the argument often
heard in Africa that AIDS deserves attention but only as one of many problems.

Mr. Booker of Africa Action argues that " justice is almost a necessity for
democratic development," but he adds: "At the same time, I would tend to be
critical of the conventional human rights community that focus almost entirely
on the legalistic approach to justice, to a court-based approach that does not
address what may be the greater injustices: denial of access to clean water or
to health care or corruption that are the consequences of dictatorial rule."

DESPITE the questions, African nations have largely signed on to the idea of a
permanent tribunal for crimes against humanity (even as the United States has
dragged its feet). And many argue that international justice provides a new set
of laws that ordinary Africans can look to, even if their own leaders ignore
them in their own lands.

"When Milosevic was overthrown, the next day in the Ivory Coast people were
demonstrating and citing Serbian democracy as an example," said Harold Hongju
Koh, a Yale law professor who served as President Clinton's chief adviser on
human rights. "So we know that images and educational lessons are now carried
through those channels."

This sends the message, he said, that "a page has been turned, that what was
tolerated in the past will not be tolerated in the future. And that has the
potential to raise both the communal standards and the continental standards."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Amputations by Sierra Leone's rebels in the 1990's rank among
Africa's most gruesome recent abuses. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); EXTRADITION (88%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (87%); GENOCIDE (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); CORRUPTION (76%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); EXPORT TRADE (72%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(71%); COLD WAR (68%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (50%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (97%); SERBIA (94%); RWANDA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
KENYA (92%); NETHERLANDS (88%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); SOMALIA (79%); CHILE (79%); EUROPE (79%); LIBERIA (79%);
BELGIUM (53%); GERMANY (50%)

REGION: AFRICA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             274 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 7, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ARAB FURY RISING AT ENEMY WITHIN

BYLINE:  By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: NABLUS, West Bank, Aug. 6


Munzer Hafnawi had the despairing look of a man who sensed that his remaining
days on this earth might be few. He blinked hard and often. He muttered to
himself. Even when he spoke in a full voice, he could barely be heard yards
away. Several times, he asked for a glass of water.

He was well aware that nearly everyone around him wanted him dead, the sooner
the better.

In a Nablus courtroom, there was an explosion of applause today when a
prosecutor for the Palestinian Authority demanded that Mr. Hafnawi, 43, be
sentenced to death as a collaborator with Israel.

"You are filth -- you are a coward," a spectator named Sana Madani shouted at
the defendant.

The more than 100 men and women in the stifling room understood her anger, and
shared it. Her brother, Mahmoud Madani, 25, was killed by Israeli soldiers in
February on the outskirts of Nablus. He had been active in the militant Islamic
movement called Hamas. And if what the prosecution says is so, he was set up by
Munzer Hafnawi, a clothing-store owner who had confessed to having had dealings
with Israeli security forces going back to 1979.

The applause gave way to groans of disappointment when the three-judge court
said it needed three more days to reach a decision. But the courtroom outburst
suggested that the verdict was already in on the streets of Nablus and other
Palestinian cities, where anger over suspected collaborators is running high in
the last week since the Israeli Army renewed its campaign of killing
Palestinians that it believes are security threats.

It is taken for granted by most Palestinians that turncoats among them are
helping Israel track down men on its wanted list. That has fed demands that the
Palestinian police make a priority of rounding up collaborators -- the preferred
word in Israel is "cooperators" -- and indications are that the police are doing
so.

Reports over the weekend said about 60 Palestinians were arrested last week
after the army killed eight people in Nablus, including a Hamas leader described
by the Israelis as a terrorism mastermind.

At the same time, Palestinian security courts, like the one that has put Mr.
Hafnawi on trial, sentenced four people to death by firing squad for treason.
And Palestinian vigilantes killed three or four men last week who were suspected
of working with Israel.

A "let's take the law into our hands" mood has taken hold, said Bassam Eid,
general director of the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group in Jerusalem.
While human-rights organizations, both here and abroad, have protested in the
past that the Palestinian Authority's collaborator trials are inherently unfair,
there is a tendency now among most Palestinian groups to stay quiet "for
nationalistic reasons," Mr. Eid said.

Before the start of the Palestinian uprising more than 10 months ago, "there was
support for abolishing the death penalty -- people who wanted to build a
democratic society," he said. "Now you have just a handful of groups
protesting."

His own organization still speaks out against rushed, dead-of-night trials in
which the accused sometimes does not even have a lawyer. But Mr. Eid said:
"There is no doubt that the P.A. is between the international hammer and the
Palestinian society anvil. Palestinian society is demanding to have
collaborators killed in 24 hours."

In the uprising, or intifada in Arabic, this is as emotional an issue as you can
find.

Few lawyers are willing to defend accused collaborators, either because they
feel they cannot win or, more commonly, because they fear that they may be
ostracized. Indeed, the lawyer representing Mr. Hafnawi in his two-day trial is
on the payroll of the Palestinian police. With the desultory closing statement
that he offered the judges today, he was not about to be mistaken for Johnnie
Cochran.

The fear of being shunned is so great that some Palestinian hospitals reportedly
will not accept the bodies of executed collaborators. After two men were shot
for treason in January -- executions that took place before thousands of
spectators, producing an outcry from international rights groups and the
European Union -- the mother of one of them would not claim his body.

Killings of collaborators were also a phenomenon in the first intifada, which
began in December 1987. But as that anti-Israel uprising dragged on for years,
it veered toward chaos. After a while, it became clear that some "collaborator
killings" were nothing more than cold-blooded murders to settle old grudges and
family feuds.

Glimpses of that past can be seen today, as in the recent death of one so-called
collaborator. It later turned out that he had been having an affair with the
wife of the man who killed him.

But Col. Talal Dwaikat, the Palestinian Authority's intelligence chief in
Nablus, insisted that the authorities would not permit vigilantism this time. In
addition, death sentences must be approved by Yasir Arafat, the authority's
chairman, before they may be carried out.

"We don't care if the street is angry or not," Colonel Dwaikat said in an
interview. "We will deal with collaborators in a lawful way. Even Hamas is
convinced that these cases should be done by the authority and not factions or
individuals."

Still, he acknowledged the emotionalism. A big difference between now and the
late 1980's, he said, is that working with Israel used to lead to arrests of
Palestinians. Now, it often means that people get killed.

The high emotions could be felt today at Mr. Hafnawi's trial, where relatives of
the slain Mr. Madani held aloft posters showing his portrait above a sketch of
the Dome of the Rock shrine in Jerusalem.

For the most part, the spectators were orderly, and the judges questioned the
defendant in quiet tones. Mr. Hafnawi, under heavy guard behind a high barrier,
insisted that he was innocent and that his confessions to having helped the
Israelis had been coerced. But his story kept changing, and he did not deny
having received 2,000 shekels, about $500, from the Israelis in February.

Whatever the judges may ultimately decide, the crowd clearly did not believe
him. "They should execute him today," Nihad Madani, the dead man's mother, said
as she left the courtroom. Her voice was calm, as if she was confident about
getting what she wanted, if not today, then soon.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Munzer Hafnawi at his trial in Nablus yesterday. He is charged
with having helped Israel kill a Hamas activist. (Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ARMIES (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); HAMAS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); TREASON (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (85%); SENTENCING (76%); LITIGATION (76%); VERDICTS (76%); MIDDLE EAST
PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ASSASSINATION
(74%); RELIGION (72%); JUDGES (71%); ARRESTS (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%) PALESTINIANS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  ASSASSINATIONS AND
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  TERRORISM;  TREASON;  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%) HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST MOVEMENT)

PERSON: HAFNAWI, MUNZER; HABERMAN, CLYDE

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  NABLUS (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             275 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 7, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Reports Progress in Fighting Bias; Rights Groups Are Critical

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Aug. 6


The United States has made significant strides in reducing discrimination
against minorities, Bush administration officials contend in the first report by
the United States to the United Nations body that monitors discrimination
worldwide.

"There is considerable good news emanating from the century-old struggle of the
United States against racism and bigotry," said Ralph Boyd Jr., a former
prosecutor who is the new director of the civil rights division of the Justice
Department, as he presented the report here.

African-Americans "in significant numbers serve at the highest levels of
government," as well as in numerous other professions, Mr. Boyd said.

The presentation and questioning took place on Friday and today, under
procedures established for the 157 countries that have signed the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which was
approved by the General Assembly in 1965 and which Washington joined in 1994.

The report was prepared by the State Department, beginning under the Clinton
administration in 1997, with input from the White House and other agencies.

But human rights groups, 12 of which presented their views here, rejected the
report, saying that the government had ignored the pervasiveness of racial
discrimination in the United States and that the report had omitted pledges of
action to solve remaining problems.

Nancy Chang, of the Center for Constitutional Rights, one of the groups that
addressed the panel, said at a news conference that "almost every member of the
committee raised the question of why there are vast disparities with respect to
race in every aspect of American life, from education, housing, health, welfare
and criminal justice."

Signers of the convention agreed to submit periodic updates, and the American
report was long overdue. The reports were supposed to have been filed by each
country every two years, but signers routinely miss the schedule.

The United States government filed its report while it continues an internal
debate on whether to take part in the first United Nations conference on racism,
scheduled Aug. 31 in Durban, South Africa.

Mr. Boyd told the review panel here that the Bush administration is committed to
stepping up antidiscrimination efforts, including eliminating racial profiling,
enforcing fair-housing and disability laws and ensuring voting rights reform.
Widespread reports by black voters that they had been disenfranchised in the
presidential election last year have prompted the administration to commit
itself to ensuring that "it will never occur again," he said.

The panel questioned him and the State Department's human rights director,
Michael E. Parmly, on a range of issues, from bombing practice on Vieques Island
in Puerto Rico to the rights of Alaskan natives. They also asked why Washington
had refused to sign the portion of the treaty barring racist speech.

"The right to speech is deeply rooted in America," Mr. Boyd replied. "The right
to speak freely, even views repugnant to others, is virtually an article of
faith. Our answer is more and better speech, not censorship."

The United Nations panel will deliver its conclusions on American compliance and
suggestions for improvements later this month.

The American report coincided with the final preparatory session to iron out
issues over which the United States has raised objections before the World
Conference on Racism in Durban this month. The preparatory session, the third,
was scheduled recently because of deep disagreements over whether compensation
for slavery and stringent criticism of Israel should be included in the
conference agenda.

That left officials from the State and Justice Departments shuttling between the
room where the experts were asking questions to other meetings down the corridor
to work out compromises. The administration has said it will not take part
unless language singling out Israel is dropped.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); TRENDS (78%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (77%); CRIMINAL LAW (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (75%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); RACIAL
PROFILING (73%); APPROVALS (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (72%); VOTERS &
VOTING (70%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (60%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
BLACKS;  DISCRIMINATION;  SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  MINORITIES (US)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%); CENTER FOR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (54%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); OLSON, ELIZABETH; BOYD, RALPH S JR

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); PUERTO RICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             277 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 8, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Protest, British Halt Screening of Travelers in Prague

BYLINE:  By PETER S. GREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE, Aug. 7


British immigration officers screening travelers at Prague's international
airport will be withdrawn on Thursday, Czech and British officials said today,
after politicians and human rights groups accused them of racial bias by
deliberately preventing Czech Gypsies from traveling to Britain.

British diplomats said the three-week-old controls were ended because they had
been successful in virtually halting a flood of Czech asylum seekers, nearly all
of whom were Gypsies. The diplomats denied the charges of racial bias, and said
they reserved the right to reimpose the controls at any time.

"It was suspended on operational grounds because it's been effective," said
Denis Keefe, charge d'affaires at the British Embassy. "The number of asylum
claims has fallen dramatically. If we see an operational need, we are ready to
reintroduce" the screening.

Human rights groups said the end of the controls was a small step in the right
direction.

"I don't want to call a return to the normal situation a victory," said
Dimitrina Petrova, executive director of the European Roma Rights Center, an
advocacy group for Gypsies. "What happened was a shame and a violation of all
international practices. People who had their passports and didn't need a visa
were subjected to humiliating inspections."

Some 1,200 Czechs, nearly all of them Gypsies, or Roma as they prefer to be
called, requested asylum in Britain this year before the controls were
introduced on July 18. In a joint statement, the British and Czech governments
said the controls had cut the number of Czechs reaching Britain to seek asylum
from 204 in the three weeks before controls were introduced, to only 12 in the
last three weeks.

Some 270,000 to 300,000 Gypsies live in the Czech Republic, about 2.5 percent of
the population. Many are at the bottom of society, segregated in dilapidated
housing projects and trapped by poor education, unemployment, discrimination,
teenage pregnancy and drug and alcohol abuse. Reliable estimates say that
between 11 and 30 Gypsies have been killed in racially motivated attacks in the
last decade.

The British government has been under pressure at home to halt the influx of
asylum seekers, who are widely seen as a drain on British taxpayers.

The controls have generated enormous controversy in the Czech Republic, where
opposition politicians and newspaper commentators lambasted the government for
forcing Czechs to undergo interrogation by British officials on Czech soil.

Two weeks ago, using hidden cameras, reporters for Czech television showed
British officials letting a light-skinned Czech woman through to travel to
Britain but barring a darker-skinned Gypsy reporter.

Human rights workers, who monitored the British officers with the backing of the
Czech government, said it was clear that Gypsies were being singled out and
barred from flying to Britain.

"When you saw the situation on the spot, that the Roma travelers were almost
automatically taken aside and entry was refused, then the suspicion was that the
only criterion was the color of the skin," said Jana Chrzova, executive director
of the Czech Helsinki Committee.

British officials said no bias was involved. "The people who were turned away
were people who didn't meet our immigration requirements," Mr. Keefe said. "We
didn't take any decision on whether people were Roma."

Czech Gypsy leaders said the suspension of controls would not stop Gypsies from
wanting to leave the Czech Republic.

"As long as they kill Roma here because of the color of their skin, the Czech
Republic will remain a dangerous place for Roma," said Emil Scuka, president of
the International Romany Union. "I think they will go on leaving, whether to
England or somewhere else, if the situation doesn't change soon."

As part of its efforts to halt the flow of Gypsies, the British government
announced that it would add $:85,000 ($120,000) to the $:200,000 it has spent in
the last two years helping Czech organizations improve the lot of Gypsies at
home.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); ROMANI PEOPLE
(90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(90%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); REFUGEES (78%);
AIRPORTS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%);
DISCRIMINATION (78%); EXECUTIVES (73%); HATE CRIME (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(72%); JOURNALISM (64%); ADOLESCENTS (62%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (61%); PREGNANCY &
CHILDBIRTH (50%); ALCOHOL ABUSE & ADDICTION (50%) GYPSIES;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

PERSON: GREEN, PETER S

CITY: PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (99%); CZECH REPUBLIC (98%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%)

REGION: GREAT BRITAIN;  CZECH REPUBLIC;  PRAGUE (CZECH REPUBLIC)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Racism Talks Are Stumbling On Language About Israel

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Aug. 11


Negotiations to prepare for a United Nations conference on racism ended Friday
mired in disagreement over whether language critical of Israel should be
included on the agenda, and with American participation still uncertain.

Delegates from more than 100 countries met through the week to draft an agenda
and work on the wording of a final declaration for the racism conference, which
is to open Aug. 31 in Durban, South Africa.

But the efforts foundered over the insistence by Islamic and Arab countries that
the conference text include wording accusing Israel of racist practices against
Palestinians.

As the contentious meeting closed, a senior State Department official took to
the floor on Friday night to accuse some delegates of taking "extreme positions
masquerading as flexibility."

The reference appeared to be to a text offered this week by the 56-country
Organization of Islamic States. This text dropped language that equated Zionism
with racism, an accusation made frequently in the past, but included references
to "racist practices of the occupying power" -- Israel -- and "racial
discrimination against the Palestinians."

The Bush administration has indicated that it may refuse to take part in the
conference if language singling out Israel is included.

As the talks wound down, the United Nations commissioner for human rights, Mary
Robinson, insisted that a "real breakthrough against racism, racial
discrimination and related intolerance" was still possible at Durban, but many
delegates indicated that such accords would be hard to come by given the amount
of unresolved language.

Although the possible withdrawal by the United States shadowed the session, the
mood here was generally positive until the Islamic countries introduced a
seven-page proposal with language that referred, for example, to the "Jewish
holocaust in Europe." Using a lower-case "h" to refer to the Holocaust
diminished Jewish suffering under Hitler, Jewish human rights groups insisted.

Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California and a member of the American
negotiating team, described the document as "dripping with hate," and said that
without changes, he would recommend that the State Department boycott the
conference.

But a Palestinian delegate, Nabil Ramlawi, said the conference would be a
vehicle "not to condemn racism, but to protect it" unless the text referred to
the "suffering of the Palestinian people due to Israeli racist practices."
Egypt's delegate, Fayza Aboulnaga, argued that countries could not "turn a blind
eye to the Palestinian situation, or it will make a mockery of a conference to
combat racism."

Mrs. Robinson, who is the secretary general of the conference, urged negotiators
to take into account the "historical wounds of anti-Semitism and of the
Holocaust on the one hand" and the "accumulated wounds of displacement and
military occupation on the other."

Progress was apparently made on another contentious issue, compensation for the
slave trade. African countries agreed to drop language calling for reparations,
which the United States and other Western countries had opposed.

Yet to be settled was whether to press for a "formal apology" for slavery, which
Mrs. Robinson said could be construed as laying the legal groundwork for
compensation, and whether slavery would be defined as a crime against humanity.

With so much unsettled, Mrs. Robinson said negotiations would most likely resume
when delegates meet in Durban. But Israel's delegate, Yaakov Levy, said his
country would have to consider whether to take part in Durban, and the State
Department is expected to announce in the coming week whether it will attend.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (95%); RELIGION (92%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(92%); RACE & RACISM (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (87%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); SLAVERY (65%) PALESTINIANS;  UNITED
NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  ISLAM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; ORGANIZATION OF ISLAMIC
STATES

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (51%) OLSON, ELIZABETH

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); ISRAEL
(94%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             281 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 28, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru's Congress Votes to Allow Charges Against Ex-President

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Tuesday, Aug. 28


Congress voted unanimously tonight to allow charges to be filed against the
disgraced former president, Alberto K. Fujimori, who has been accused of crimes
against humanity in connection with two massacres in the early 1990's.

In a special session, Congress voted 75-0 to lift the constitutional immunity of
Mr. Fujimori, who lives in exile in Japan, so that prosecutors could charge him
with homicide and forced disappearances carried out by a paramilitary death
squad.

The attorney general's office has five days to file the charges.

Approval of the "constitutional accusation" had been expected. Mr. Fujimori's
party, which once controlled the legislature, now has only 3 seats in the
120-member body.

Congressman Daniel Estrada, head of the investigative committee, told Congress
that evidence collected by his group showed clearly that the death-squad
killings were part of the Fujimori government's strategy to battle leftist
guerrillas.

Peruvian officials argue that forced disappearances and politically motivated
killings against groups of people qualify as "crimes against humanity," charges
that require trial under international treaties on human rights violations.

Peruvian legal experts hope such new charges, the most serious brought so far,
could force Japan, where Mr. Fujimori fled last fall, to extradite the former
president. But since Japanese law bars Japan from sending Mr. Fujimori to Peru,
the experts believe that Japan would at least have to try him in its courts
because it has signed international human rights treaties.

Mr. Fujimori, 63, was granted citizenship by Japan, his parents' homeland. At
the time, corruption scandals involving his former intelligence chief, Vladimiro
Montesinos, had brought down his 10-year government.

Mr. Fujimori says he will stay in Japan indefinitely rather than return to Peru,
where he says he would face "a circus" instead of a fair trial.

Japan and Peru have no extradition treaty, and Japanese officials have said they
would not force Mr. Fujimori to return to Peru.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (79%);
EVIDENCE (78%); SCANDALS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); POLITICS
(78%); HOMICIDE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%);
IMMUNITY (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); APPROVALS (75%); LIBERALISM
(73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%); CITIZENSHIP (52%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  IMMUNITY
FROM PROSECUTION

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: LIMA, PERU (69%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); PERU (97%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             283 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 30, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Press India on Kashmir

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Ready to End Sanctions on India to Build Alliance" (front page, Aug.
27):

India has been using bullets and brutality to suppress the Kashmiri people's
movement for independence.

Earlier this month, the Indian government granted sweeping arrest and
interrogation powers to security forces in four districts in the state of Jammu
and Kashmir. On Aug. 19, India's home minister, Lal Krishna Advani, announced a
plan to offer amnesty to troops facing charges of human rights violations while
fighting in Kashmir.

These developments foreshadow more suffering and pain for the people of Kashmir.

The Bush administration should use any new influence it may gain from expanding
ties with India to persuade the Indian government to end human rights abuses in
Kashmir and to start a genuine peace process.

USMAAN AHMAD
St. Louis, Aug. 27, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); AMNESTY (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); CIVIL WAR
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); PEACE PROCESS
(50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: AHMAD, USMAAN

STATE: KASHMIR (97%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (93%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (98%); ASIA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: INDIA;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             284 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 5, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Danger of Walking Out at Durban

BYLINE:  By Michael Lerner;  Michael Lerner is editor of Tikkun magazine, rabbi
of Beyt Tikkun synagogue in San Francisco and editor of "Best Contemporary
Jewish Writing" for 2001.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


The walkout by the United States and Israel from the United Nations conference
on racism in Durban, South Africa, was a predictable and unfortunate consequence
of the irresponsibility of those in the Arab world who sought to make Israel a
central issue. In supporting this shortsighted choice, the Arab states have
played into the hands of right-wing politicians, in both Israel and the United
States, who will benefit from the moral discrediting of the antiracist efforts
that many had hoped would be the center of the conference.

American right-wingers who resist confronting the damaging legacy of slavery and
segregation in the United States and the issue of reparations for slavery can
hide behind the claim that in repudiating the Durban conference, they were
standing up against racist anti-Semitism.  Israeli right-wingers can use the
record of intolerance at the conference to discredit criticism of the violence
inherent in the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, the bulldozing of
Palestinian homes, and stonewalling on the issue of Israeli responsibility for
the fate of Palestinian refugees. "See," they can now say, "all these criticisms
are merely the latest attempt to label Zionism as racism, another episode in the
eternal history of anti-Jewish sentiments and double standards among the
nations."

On its face, the charge against Israel is ludicrous. Anyone visiting Israel is
immediately struck by the fact that it is one of the most multiethnic societies
in the world. It is, to be sure, a state for those who have accepted Judaism.
But that includes black Jews from Ethiopia, Jews from India and China who bear
all the racial characteristics of people in those societies, Jews who escaped
persecution in Arab lands and are racially indistinguishable from Arab Muslims.
The fact is that whatever your racial background, you can convert to Judaism and
be accepted with full rights in Israel.

Moreover, unlike South Africa under apartheid, which targeted anyone born of a
certain race, regardless of religion, Israel has given its largest minority, the
Israeli Arabs, the vote and the right to representation in the Knesset. Israeli
Arabs have an easier time having their votes counted than blacks in some parts
of Florida do. Israel has no segregated movie theaters or beaches. And the
patterns of segregation in housing are not sanctified by the law.

Israel, of course, gives special privileges to Jews -- but this has nothing to
do with race. It has a great deal to do with the history of the Jewish people,
who have been persecuted for thousands of years for being part of a particular
religious community. It was in light of that history that Israel was created by
the United Nations -- as a kind of international affirmative action to rectify a
long history of abuse by other nations.

In its treatment of Palestinians, Israel has engaged in activities that are
morally unacceptable -- violations of fundamental human rights -- and deserve to
be criticized. Every day I get death threats from various Jews around the world
for the role that my magazine, Tikkun, plays in insisting that Israel end the
occupation, dismantle the settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, and take
responsibility for reparations for Palestinian refugees. But to single out
Israel for special focus, as the Durban conference has done, is totally out of
proportion to the realities of the world today.

The genocidal war against the Chechen people by Russia, the Chinese occupation
of Tibet and destruction of Buddhism there, the murder of hundreds of thousands
of Africans by tribes pitted against one another, the acts of Serbia in Bosnia
and Kosovo -- these are only the beginning of the list of events that merit the
continued attention of the world. Similarly, the long history of oppression
against minorities in Arab countries (for example, the treatment of the Kurds)
must also be recognized. The double standard in singling out Israel's
transgressions against the Palestinians is a living embodiment of the very
racism that makes Israelis feel the need for a state that gives them special
protections and rights.

If the world wants to help the Palestinian people, it needs to alleviate rather
than intensify Jewish fears that everyone wants to destroy us. Similarly, if we
Jews want to end Palestinian terrorism, we need not only to end the occupation
and dismantle settlements, but also to approach Palestinians with the same
spirit of generosity, open-heartedness and atonement that we wish we were
receiving from the rest of the world.

By failing to criticize Israeli human rights violations adequately, world Jewry
made itself vulnerable to the illegitimate criticisms at Durban. And the
short-term protection from the racism of the resolutions at Durban achieved by
joining the American walkout masks a deeper danger: Jews risk becoming
identified with the forces in the world that oppose the struggle against racism.

It would be far better for Jews to acknowledge the distortions in Israeli policy
and argue against them with the same intensity that we use in arguing against
the distorted attempt to represent Israel's situation as worse than those of
many other countries. Jewish safety lies in a world without racism.

By driving Jews into the hands of the political right wing, the Arab nations
have done far more lasting damage to the Jewish people than they could through
any military offensive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Christoph Niemann)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); RACE &
RACISM (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%);
RIOTS (75%); SLAVERY (75%); TERRORISM (73%); REFUGEES (73%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
(50%) PALESTINIANS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM;  UNITED NATIONS WORLD
CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: LERNER, MICHAEL

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED STATES
(95%); SOUTH AFRICA (91%); ETHIOPIA (78%); INDIA (73%); CHINA (54%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             286 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

After a Delay, U.S. Envoy Starts in Post At the U.N.

BYLINE:  By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 19


John D. Negroponte, the new United States ambassador to the United Nations,
formally presented his credentials to Secretary General Kofi Annan today. The
presentation ended a hiatus of eight months without an American representative
just as the world organization confronts the challenge posed by the terror
attack last week.

"As President Bush said this morning, we're all working hard to form this
international coalition against terrorism," Mr. Negroponte told Mr. Annan. "I
look forward to working with you, your colleagues and other permanent
representatives at the United Nations on this highly important project."

Mr. Negroponte's delayed nomination was initially perceived as a sign of the
Bush administration's disdain for the United Nations. Until last week, a series
of confrontations like the ouster of the United States from the United Nations
Human Rights Commission and the American delegation's walkout at a conference in
South Africa on racism promised a period of tension for the new ambassador.

But the World Trade Center and the Pentagon attacks abruptly changed the scene,
and they are widely expected to dominate the work of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

Mr. Negroponte's arrival coincided with the presentation of a $31 million check
from Ted Turner's United Nations Foundation. Mr. Turner pledged the sum last
year to help seal a deal under which Washington agreed to start paying back debt
to the United Nations. The Congress is generally expected to make a $582 million
payment this year toward a debt that it calculates at $1.3 billion.

The negotiations that broke the deadlock on dues were led on the American side
by Richard C. Holbrooke, who stepped down as the United Nations representative
on Jan. 20. In the interim, an acting representative, James B. Cunningham, has
filled the role.

Mr. Negroponte was confirmed with unexpected ease. In hearings the day after the
terror attacks, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, evidently aware that a
representative was urgently needed at the United Nations, approved Mr.
Negroponte, 14 to 3. The full Senate followed with unanimous consent.

The hearings had been expected to focus sharply on Mr. Negroponte's work as
ambassador to Honduras from 1981 to 1985, when he was a pivotal figure in the
Reagan administration efforts to unseat the leftist Sandinista government in
adjacent Nicaragua. For weeks before the hearing, committee staff members
questioned him on whether he had deliberately turned a blind eye to human rights
abuses to advance the administration's policies.

At the hearing, Mr. Negroponte fended off the questions, saying: "I do not
believe then, nor do I believe now, that these abuses were part of a deliberate
government policy. To this day, I do not believe that death squads were
operating in Honduras."

None of the senators questioned Mr. Negroponte's experience. His first
assignment in the Foreign Service was Vietnam, after which he was an adviser to
Henry A. Kissinger at the Paris peace talks. He was also ambassador to Mexico
and the Philippines and deputy assistant secretary of state for oceans and
fisheries. After retiring from the government in 1997, he became an executive at
McGraw-Hill.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
PUBLIC POLICY (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); BUDGETS (71%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
CREDIT;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS FOUNDATION (82%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS FOUNDATION

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (71%); RICHARD HOLBROOKE (58%)
SCHMEMANN, SERGE; NEGROPONTE, JOHN D; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); TURNER, TED

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); HONDURAS (92%); NICARAGUA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA
(79%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             287 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ALLIANCE;
MILITARY CALLED JUST ONE ELEMENT IN WAR ON TERROR

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO with PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, Sept. 26


Facing some skepticism from NATO allies over going to war to eradicate
terrorism, the Bush administration said today that military operations would not
be the "primary piece" of its campaign.

At a meeting of NATO defense ministers that offered the administration a first
opportunity to convey detailed plans to the alliance, some European states
pressed for, but did not get, a detailed showing of evidence that would justify
any attack on Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda network in Afghanistan.

Rudolf Scharping, the German defense minister, said he had expected Paul D.
Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, to arrive with a "white paper" spelling
out the evidence connecting terrorist acts to Al Qaeda.

But administration officials are still debating how much information to make
public since much of it rests on secret communications intercepts. The allies
had been led to expect more by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell's statement
last Sunday that the government would "put before the world, the American
people, a persuasive case." Page B4.

After the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, NATO
invoked for the first time an article of its founding treaty that says an attack
on one member will be considered an attack on all. A sustained alliance military
campaign against terrorism seemed possible, but today Mr. Wolfowitz said: "If we
need collective action, we will ask for it. We don't anticipate that for the
moment."

Before the NATO meeting, a senior Pentagon official told reporters that the
United States would ask the alliance for logistical, intelligence and other
support, but "the military piece is not the primary piece."

Some American military planners expressed private frustration today about the
unattractive array of military options in war-torn Afghanistan, where destitute
refugees were reported to be in flight toward the sealed borders of Iran and
Pakistan.

As a result, the Bush administration was being forced to broaden the scope of
its planning for a possible humanitarian disaster while also lowering somewhat
expectations for a major military campaign, officials said. Expectations had
been raised by a steady buildup of American troops and aircraft in the Persian
Gulf and elsewhere.

"The people of Afghanistan are already beginning to suffer the humanitarian
consequences from this -- just in anticipation of events," a senior Pentagon
official said, referring to possible military strikes against Mr. bin Laden's
network.

Russia has helped decisively in preparations for any military action in
Afghanistan and today it was rewarded. The United States, in a clear shift,
stated for the first time that the Al Qaeda network played a role in inciting
the bloody rebellion in the Russian territory of Chechnya, where the Russian
Army has been accused of using indiscriminate force against civilians and
committing numerous human rights abuses in putting down the revolt.

Mr. Wolfowitz provided an overview of the administration's case against Mr. bin
Laden, but did not go into detail, officials said.

In public remarks, Mr. Wolfowitz said the "evidence is there for the whole world
to see."

"Many of the people in this room watched it live on television," he said,
referring the images of aircraft crashing into the World Trade Center. "There is
no question that the Al Qaeda organization has been convicted in courts of law
for acts of terrorism, including the bombing of our embassies in East Africa."

The desire of some ministers for more evidence caused tension, but in the end
there was at least public backing from the allies for the administration's
antiterror campaign.

Still, as Mr. Wolfowitz explained that the United States would seek different
kinds of help from NATO states, some worried that the American approach could
lead to a wider war. "Most people in Europe would like to see that only the ones
who are found guilty are hunted down and penalized," one NATO official said.

The NATO secretary general, Lord Robertson, questioned whether it was even
necessary for "an ally to produce evidence."

Even as administration officials voiced confidence that Mr. bin Laden was
guilty, they seemed less sure that he could be brought to justice simply by
military strikes.

"The diplomatic instrument with the intelligence instrument with the military
instrument," a senior administration official said, "are much more effective
than any one of them individually." It is important to understand, the official
emphasized, "that if we take military action, one of the major objectives of
that action will be to get more information; there is nothing more important in
this war than information."

Administration officials said today that they were urgently trying to marshal
food aid for the Afghan people.Just a week ago, White House officials were
opposed to efforts to send more aid, saying it would fall into the hands of
Taliban fighters.

The International Monetary Fund today approved a $135 million loan installment
for Pakistan in a sign that economic policy was being used to shore up critical
allies.

The shift in the administration's Russia policy was first announced at the White
House, when Mr. Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, delivered a strong expression
of gratitude and support to the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, for
aligning Russia with the United States against terrorism. In doing so, another
senior Bush administration official said, "We know that Al Qaeda has exploited
the war in Chechnya, may have even helped to provoke it."

These remarks showed how much importance the Bush administration attached to Mr.
Putin's identification with the Western cause. Russia agreed to open air
corridors and played a decisive role in persuading Central Asian states to open
bases for military and relief operations on Afghanistan's northern flank.

Mr. Fleischer's remarks were a sharp reversal of Mr. Bush's tone on Chechnya.
During the presidential campaign, Mr. Bush said that international financing for
Russia should be cut off because of Mr. Putin's crackdown in Chechnya. "This
guy, Putin, who is now the temporary president, has come to power as a result of
Chechnya," Mr. Bush said in a television interview in February 2000. Mr. Putin
dealt with Chechnya in a way "that's not acceptable to peaceful nations," he
said.

At a meeting with Muslim leaders today, Mr. Bush stopped short of Mr.
Fleischer's comments, saying that Mr. Putin should "deal with the Chechnya
minority in his country with respect" for human rights.

"I would hope that the Russian president while dealing with the Al Qaeda
organization also respects minority rights within his country."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a NATO meeting yesterday, Paul D. Wolfowitz, deputy secretary
of defense, offered an overview of the case against Osama bin Laden. (Associated
Press)(pg. B2)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (91%); WAR ON
TERROR (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); LEGISLATION (75%); REFUGEES (73%); MISSING PERSONS (62%);
AIRLINES (62%) TERRORISM;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  MISSING
PERSONS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); AL-QAEDA (91%) NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (91%) DAO, JAMES; TYLER, PATRICK E; WOLFOWITZ, PAUL D
(DEPUTY SEC); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (52%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);
EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); BELGIUM (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); GULF STATES (53%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             289 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. SIGNS TREATY FOR WORLD COURT TO TRY ATROCITIES

BYLINE:  By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1377 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


The United States signed a treaty today to establish a permanent international
criminal tribunal, after President Clinton overrode objections from the Pentagon
and defied Republicans in the Senate.

Mr. Clinton's decision, in the waning days of his second term, is not legally
binding without Senate approval, which appears unlikely any time soon. Still, it
represents a powerful American endorsement of the treaty's goals, and poses a
political and diplomatic challenge for the incoming administration of George W.
Bush.

Senior advisers to Mr. Bush, like many Republicans in Congress, have strongly
opposed the treaty. One of them is Mr. Bush's selection for secretary of
defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld, who joined 11 other prominent retired policy makers
last month in signing a letter warning that "American leadership in the world
could be the first casualty" of the tribunal.

The treaty, if ratified by 60 nations, will create the International Criminal
Court, the world's first standing court with jurisdiction to try individuals on
charges of genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity.

It was a measure of the influence of Mr. Clinton's action that Israel reversed
its position on the treaty in the course of day, announcing just hours before
the New Year's deadline set by the United Nations that it, too, would sign,
though the Israeli cabinet had voted not to do so.

In a statement released by the White House, Mr. Clinton said he remained
concerned about "significant flaws" in the treaty that he hoped would be
corrected in negotiations before the court becomes a reality. He said that,
nevertheless, it was important to sign the treaty to "reaffirm our strong
support for international accountability" and to place the United States in a
better position to negotiate changes in the court's structure and rules.

"With signature," he said in his statement "we will be in a position to
influence the evolution of the court. Without signature, we will not." Text,
Page A6.

David J. Scheffer, the administration's ambassador at large for war crimes
issues, signed for the United States at the United Nations this evening.

"I do so today in honor of the victims of these crimes," he said as he signed,
"and also in honor of the United States armed services, who uphold these laws of
war and have been so responsible for the foundations of the principles
underlying this treaty."

In response to a question, he said he believes that the treaty has a large
number of safeguards, and that, by signing, "we remain in the game, negotiating
and continuing to represent the interests of the United States government and
the United States military."

In addition to Israel, Iran also signed the treaty today, bringing the total of
signers to 139. Twenty-seven nations have already approved it, nearly half of
the 60 needed for the court to come into being.

When the treaty was negotiated in Rome in 1998, President Clinton refused to
endorse it. While administration officials have strongly supported the creation
of an international court, Mr. Clinton had until today heeded warnings from the
Pentagon that such a court would subject American troops, diplomats and other
officials to frivolous or politically motivated prosecutions.

Mr. Clinton, in Camp David for the weekend, made his decision after a final,
spirited debate within his administration in recent weeks. While Secretary of
State Madeleine K. Albright and others at the State Department supported signing
the treaty, civilian and military officials at the Pentagon remained opposed,
said senior officials in both departments.

In announcing his decision, only hours before the critical deadline for
submitting notice of signing at the United Nations, Mr. Clinton took the unusual
step of saying that he would neither submit the treaty for Senate approval nor
recommend that his successor do so immediately.

Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the president-elect, declined to discuss Mr.
Clinton's action today. "We're going to continue to follow our policy that our
nation speaks with one voice on foreign policy, and through Jan. 20 that voice
is Bill Clinton's," he said.

In his statement, Mr. Clinton said: "The United States has a long history of
commitment to the principle of accountability -- from our involvement in the
Nuremberg tribunals that brought Nazi war criminals to justice to our leadership
in the effort to establish the international criminal tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Our action today sustains that tradition of moral
leadership."

Even without a ratification fight, Mr. Clinton's decision could face vigorous
challenges from Republicans in Congress and from Mr. Bush's administration.

Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the influential Republican chairman of
the Foreign Relations Committee, has not only vowed to block any attempt to
ratify it but he has also introduced legislation to block any American effort to
support the court.

In a pointed statement today, Senator Helms called Mr. Clinton's decision "as
outrageous as it is inexplicable," saying that none of the concerns about the
court's reach had been resolved satisfactorily.

"Today's action is a blatant attempt by a lame-duck president to tie the hands
of his successor," Senator Helms said. "Well, I have a message for the outgoing
president: This decision will not stand."

Once in office, Mr. Bush could also challenge Mr. Clinton's action, though to do
so would now have greater diplomatic consequences. While he cannot reverse the
fact that the United States has signed the treaty, Mr. Bush could renounce it
and declare the United States' intention never to ratify it. He could also
submit it to the Senate and advocate its rejection.

Under the treaty's provisions, nations had until the end of today to sign, a
step that amounts to a statement of intent to support the court, which will
ultimately be created in the Netherlands. After today, nations could only become
party to the treaty by taking the formal step of ratification.

An administration official involved in deliberations over the court said today
that the administration was not tying Mr. Bush's hands by signing the treaty. He
argued that Mr. Clinton in fact had left his successor in a stronger position to
seek additional provisions to protect Americans from the court's jurisdiction
now that approval by 60 countries appeared very likely.

"It actually enhances the flexibility of the future administration," the
official said.

The official said that American negotiators, led Mr. Scheffer, had already had
success in ongoing discussions at the United Nations, reaching agreements, for
example, that require more precise definitions of crimes and impose strict
procedures for future prosecutors to follow.

In Washington, however, the treaty remains a contentious subject -- on both
ideological and practical grounds.

Opposition is particularly deep within the military, whose leaders fear that the
United States' global reach could leave American troops involved in peacekeeping
or other operations vulnerable to prosecution.

Senator Helms and Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, chairman of
the Armed Services Committee, wrote earlier this month to Secretary of Defense
William S. Cohen and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Henry H.
Shelton, urging them to stand by their opposition to the court.

They said it "could inhibit the ability of the United States to use its military
to meet alliance obligations and participate in multinational operations,
including humanitarian interventions to save civilian lives."

At the same time, international legal experts and advocacy organizations,
including the American Bar Association and the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, had pressed Mr. Clinton to sign the treaty before leaving office.

Richard H. Dicker, director of the international justice program at Human Rights
Watch in New York, called Mr. Clinton's decision courageous, saying it would
reinforce the concept of international accountability for the worst atrocities
committed around the world.

"By signing this treaty, President Clinton offers the hope of justice to
millions and millions of people worldwide," he said. "He has made history by
taking a great step for international justice."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); APPROVALS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); GENOCIDE (73%); WAR & CONFLICT
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (68%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             290 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Words: 'The Right Action'

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


Following is the text of President Clinton's statement today authorizing the
United States to sign the Treaty on the International Criminal Court:

The United States is today signing the 1998 Rome Treaty on the International
Criminal Court. In taking this action, we join more than 130 other countries
that have signed by the December 31, 2000 deadline established in the treaty. We
do so to reaffirm our strong support for international accountability and for
bringing to justice perpetrators of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against
humanity. We do so as well because we wish to remain engaged in making the
I.C.C. an instrument of impartial and effective justice in the years to come.

The United States has a long history of commitment to the principle of
accountability, from our involvement in the Nuremberg tribunals that brought
Nazi war criminals to justice to our leadership in the effort to establish the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Our
action today sustains that tradition of moral leadership.

Under the Rome Treaty, the International Criminal Court (I.C.C.) will come into
being with the ratification of 60 governments, and will have jurisdiction over
the most heinous abuses that result from international conflict, such as war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The Treaty requires that the
I.C.C. not supersede or interfere with functioning national judicial systems;
that is, the I.C.C. prosecutor is authorized to take action against a suspect
only if the country of nationality is unwilling or unable to investigate
allegations of egregious crimes by their national. The U.S. delegation to the
Rome conference worked hard to achieve these limitations, which we believer are
essential to the international credibility and success of the I.C.C.

In signing, however, we are not abandoning our concerns about significant flaws
in the treaty. In particular, we are concerned that when the court comes into
existence, it will not only exercise authority over personnel of states that
have ratified the treaty, but also claim jurisdiction over personnel of states
that have not. With signature, however, we will be in a position to influence
the evolution of the court. Without signature, we will not.

Signature will enhance our ability to further protect U.S. officials from
unfounded charges and to achieve the human rights and accountability objectives
of the I.C.C. In fact, in negotiations following the Rome Conference, we have
worked effectively to develop procedures that limit the likelihood of
politicized prosecutions. For example, U.S. civilian and military negotiators
helped to ensure greater precision in the definitions of crimes within the
Court's jurisdiction.

But more must be done. Court jurisdictions over U.S. personnel should come only
with U.S. ratification of the Treaty. The United States should have the chance
to observe and assess the functioning of the Court, over time, before choosing
to become subject to its jurisdiction. Given these concerns, I will not, and do
not recommend that my successor submit the Treaty to the Senate for advice and
consent until our fundamental concerns are satisfied.

Nonetheless, signature is the right action to take at this point. I believe that
a properly constituted and structured International Criminal Court would make a
profound contribution in deterring egregious human rights abuses worldwide, and
that signature increases the chances for productive discussions with other
governments to advance these goals in the months and years ahead.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
JURISDICTION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); WORLD WAR II (70%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (79%); GERMANY (58%)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             291 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Psychological Tests Ordered for Pinochet

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Jan. 2


A judge ordered Gen. Augusto Pinochet today to undergo two days of psychological
testing to determine his fitness to stand trial for suspected human rights
abuses in his dictatorship from 1973 to 1990.

The tests are to begin on Sunday at the Military Hospital here.

Judge Juan Guzman ordered the examination after a ruling by the Supreme Court on
Dec. 20 that blocked his order for General Pinochet's arrest. The Supreme Court
said General Pinochet should be tested before his arrest. The law requires
testing to determine the fitness for trial of anyone older than 70.  General
Pinochet, 85, could avoid trial if he is declared mad or demented.

Judge Guzman placed the general under house arrest on Dec. 1.

The order for tests was issued shortly before President Ricardo Lagos had a
scheduled meeting with military leaders at the National Security Council. Mr.
Lagos is widely expected to try to soothe tensions over the effort to take
General Pinochet to trial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); DEMENTIA (88%); HOUSE ARREST (88%);
MILITARY HOSPITALS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (66%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TESTS AND TESTING;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  MENTAL
HEALTH AND DISORDERS

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (92%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             294 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 920 words


ASIA

INDIA: KASHMIR WARNING -- Home Minister L. K. Advani warned militant groups in
Kashmir that continued terrorist acts would jeopardize the government's
cease-fire in the disputed Himalayan region. This admonition comes after a
failed assassination attempt against Kashmir's chief minister, Farooq Abdullah.
The cease-fire, due to expire on Jan. 26, may be renewed if guerrilla groups
diminish their attacks.   Barry Bearak (NYT)

EUROPE


FRANCE: APPEAL UPHELD -- An appeals court has upheld a lower court decision to
drop corruption charges against Xaviere Tiberi, the wife of the embattled mayor
of Paris, Jean Tiberi. Mrs. Tiberi had been accused of accepting about $36,000
for writing a 36-page report on a subject she knew nothing about, a job some
witnesses testified was arranged for by her husband. Mrs. Tiberi was first
convicted of abusing public funds, but the verdict was set aside on a
technicality. Mr. Tiberi is the object of several other corruption inquiries.
Suzanne Daley (NYT)

RUSSIA: CHECHNYA VOW -- The Kremlin's human-rights monitor promised to bring
more cases against troops accused of atrocities in Chechnya, saying "there is no
other way" to allay European concerns about Russia's human-rights record. The
monitor, Vladimir Kalamanov, told visiting officials of the Council of Europe
that prosecutions had lagged because of the breakdown of Chechnya's judicial
system. The council's parliament suspended Russia's voting rights in the body
last year to protest Russia's human-rights record in Chechnya.   Michael Wines
(NYT)

RUSSIA: MAYOR QUIZZED -- The mayor of Moscow, Yuri Luzhkov, was called on by
prosecutors to answer written questions in the fraud investigation of the media
mogul Vladimir Gusinsky, Interfax reported. Investigators asked Mr. Luzhkov, a
longtime ally of Mr. Gusinsky, for information about the city's relations with
Mr. Gusinsky's conglomerate, Media-Most. A top Moscow finance official was
accused by prosecutors last week of allowing Media-Most to pay its debts to the
city in bonds that prosecutors said were worthless.   Sabrina Tavernise (NYT)

SPAIN: MAD COW PROTESTS -- Thousands of farmers have begun an indefinite
blockade of the nation's slaughterhouses to press for action to alleviate the
mad cow crisis that they say threatens Spain's beef industry. They are demanding
a better compensation system for beef farmers, who they say risk bankruptcy
because consumption has plunged 70 percent since the first cases appeared in
November.   Emma Daly (NYT)

ITALY: MAD COW ALERT -- Scientists have found Italy's first suspected case of
mad cow disease in an animal at a slaughterhouse that supplies meat to
McDonald's 295 restaurants in Italy and elsewhere in Europe. Until the
discovery, Italy had been considered mad-cow-free. The only cases reported there
were in two cows in 1994 imported from Britain.   (AP)

IRELAND: LEGISLATOR JAILED -- A member of Parliament was sentenced to three
months in prison for contempt of court after he refused to answer questions
about his financial affairs before a government tribunal. Liam Lawlor will
probably spend only a week in jail, with the rest of the sentence suspended. He
must also pay a $12,000 fine and the state's legal fees, which could reach more
than $100,000.   Brian Lavery (NYT)

AFRICA

IVORY COAST: LOW TURNOUT -- Only 13 percent of eligible voters turned out in
elections held Sunday in northern areas, where legislative elections were unable
to be held in December. The ruling party won no seats, while the Democratic
Party, formerly in power, won a majority of the races. The Rally of the
Republicans, led by Alassane D. Ouattara, who has been excluded from running,
boycotted the election.   Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

ZIMBABWE: OPPOSITION LOSS -- The opposition lost a parliamentary seat to the
governing party of President Robert Mugabe in a hotly contested by-election this
weekend, state television announced. A governing party supporter was killed and
scores of opposition supporters were arrested during the campaigning for the
seat. The defeat leaves the opposition with 56 of 150 seats in Parliament.
Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

NIGERIA: FLOGGING PUT OFF -- Under mounting international pressure, an Islamic
court has reduced and indefinitely postponed the flogging scheduled for Jan. 27
of a 17-year-old Muslim girl who says she was pressured by her father to have
sex with three men, officials said. The girl was sentenced to 180 lashes with a
cane in September, later reduced to 100 lashes.   (AP)

THE AMERICAS

MEXICO: APPEAL TO REBELS -- President Vicente Fox and a prominent bishop called
on the Zapatista rebels to put down their guns. Mr. Fox, left, said the rebels
should "lay down their arms so we can get down to working for peace." Bishop
Felipe Arizmendi, in the capital of Chiapas, said the rebels would win "sympathy
and support" if they disarmed. The rebel leader, who calls himself Subcommander
Marcos, said he would lead a march from the jungles of Chiapas to the capital
for peace talks set to begin in eight weeks.   Tim Weiner (NYT)

CANADA: GAY MARRIAGES -- Challenging Canada's ban on same-sex marriages, a gay
couple and a lesbian couple were married in a double ceremony at a Toronto
church Sunday. The Rev. Brent Hawkes performed the ceremony for Kevin Bourassa
and Joe Varnell and for Anne and Elaine Vautour. Masked protesters gathered
outside the church and a 57-year-old woman was charged with assault after being
accused of attacking Mr. Hawkes at the ceremony.   James Brooke (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRUPTION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY (89%); MAMMALS (84%);
ANIMAL SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING (84%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TERRORISM
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (76%); APPEALS COURTS (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); FINANCIAL
CRIME COUNTERMEASURES (75%); TESTIMONY (75%); LITIGATION (75%); VERDICTS (75%);
FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (75%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); ASSASSINATION (73%);
WITNESSES (70%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (68%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (65%);
BEEF (65%); BEEF CATTLE FARMING (65%); RESTAURANTS (64%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM
NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (54%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (95%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); ASIA (95%); ITALY (94%); EUROPE (94%); SPAIN
(92%); INDIA (92%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             297 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putin Scaling Down Chechen War Despite New Fighting

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 22


President Vladimir V. Putin effectively downgraded Russia's war in Chechnya
today from a military to a counterterrorist operation, saying he planned to cut
Russia's 80,000-member force in the rebellious province by nearly three-quarters
in coming months.

That plan, combined with an order turning over control of Chechen operations to
his domestic intelligence agency, the Federal Security Service, suggests that
the Kremlin considers its war against the separatist rebels largely won.

But reports during the weekend cast doubt on that. Russian television and news
agencies reported a damaging surprise attack on Sunday against Russian troops in
the town of Gudermes -- which the Kremlin chose last week as Chechnya's new
capital -- killing between 5 and 20 soldiers.

The Kremlin's spokesman on Chechnya, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, acknowledged a brief
firefight and bomb explosion in a cafe, but he called reports of heavy Russian
casualties absurd. There was no way to verify any of the conflicting reports.

Mr. Putin announced the changes in his war strategy on national television after
a cabinet meeting. While he gave no timetable, he and aides said the government
intended, eventually, to reduce forces there to a 15,000-member army division
and 7,000 troops from the Interior Ministry.

Other officials said the army alone now keeps about 40,000 troops in Chechnya. A
"supplementary" force will remain until the province is stabilized, the
government said, giving no indication how large that force would be or how long
it might stay.

An armed forces official said later that a timetable for withdrawals was being
drawn up and would be released later.

"This does not mean the end of the counterterrorist operation," Mr. Putin said
in remarks broadcast on the independent NTV television network. "On the
contrary, it will be continued, and not less intensively but with the use of
different means and forces, and with a different emphasis."

That seemed to signal a move toward smaller operations aimed at wiping out
militant leaders, whose movements are more restricted now that government troops
rule most of the province, at least during the day.

A spokesman for the Federal Security Service said that the agency's forces
already in Chechnya would be beefed up and that more effort would go into
special operations and searches for rebel forces, but that traditional military
operations would also continue.

"The currently existing plans of action will not be done away with," said the
spokesman, Gen. Aleksandr Zdanovich. But he said that "all the plans will be
coordinated within the framework of a single design, and special services
activity will be concentrated on eliminating individual bandit formations and
their leaders."

Officially, Russia has lost about 2,700 troops and suffered 7,900 injuries since
the current war in Chechenya began in the summer of 1999, nearly three years
after the end of an earlier war there. Some outside analysts say the casualty
total is far higher. The military says it has reduced rebel forces from about
20,000 at the current war's beginning to perhaps 1,000 now.

But while Chechnya is nominally under Russian government control, the rebels
continue by most accounts to be a feared presence. Guerrilla attacks, bombings
and nighttime sniping are regular occurrences, and civilians in some areas
continue to give the militants support.

Mr. Putin's actions follow a decree, signed Friday, that gave pro-Moscow Chechen
leaders expanded powers to re-establish government services and a working
economy in the bombed-out region.

In Moscow, the government's human rights ombudsman, Oleg Mironov, applauded the
decision to reduce forces in Chechnya, saying the move would reduce deaths of
innocent people in a war in which Russian operations have been widely accused of
causing indiscriminate civilian casualties.

Separately, the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly decided today in
Strasbourg to suspend Russia's voting rights and other powers in the
organization to protest the nation's human rights record in Chechnya, but left
the action open for reversal later.

The assembly, which deals mostly with human rights issues throughout Europe,
said it would take up the matter again on Thursday after a new report on the
Chechen situation was filed and committees issued recommendations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); POLITICS (74%); BOMBINGS (73%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (91%) WINES, MICHAEL; PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRIME MIN)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             299 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 896 words


EUROPE

NORTHERN IRELAND: DAY 4 OF VIOLENCE
The Ulster Defense Association, a Protestant paramilitary group, was blamed for
the placement of bombs under two cars in Belfast in a fourth straight day of
violence against Roman Catholic homes, churches and schools across Ulster.
Leaders of the U.D.A. said their members had lost faith in the peace accord, but
they denied responsibility for the outbreaks and said the group was still
observing a cease-fire.  Warren Hoge (NYT)

BRITAIN: BLAIR TO VISIT BUSH
Prime Minister Tony Blair and his wife, Cherie, will visit President and Mrs.
Bush in Washington and Camp David on Feb. 23 and 24. British officials said Mr.
Blair, who had a very close relationship with President Clinton, had emphasized
the "special relationship" between the United States and Britain in a brief
phone conversation with Mr. Bush.  Warren Hoge (NYT)


SPAIN: DEADLY CAR BOMB
The Basque separatist group E.T.A. was accused of claiming its first victim of
the year, killing a cook for the Spanish Navy with a bomb attached to his car.
Ramon Diaz, 51, a civilian, was described by the police as "an easy target,"
whose killing was intended to make up for the failure of several recent E.T.A.
car bombings. Thousands of people across Spain turned out at noon for a silent
protest against the killing of Mr. Diaz, who was married with two children.
Emma Daly (NYT)

FRANCE: LE PEN VICTORY
The far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen appeared set to regain his European
Parliament seat after a court overturned a decision to bar him from the assembly
for a year after he assaulted an opponent. The Parliament said a European Union
court had overruled a decision by its president, Nicole Fontaine. A spokesman
for Ms. Fontaine said the ruling was on technical grounds.  (Reuters)

GERMANY: PENSION VOTE
The lower house of Parliament passed legislation to trim back the nation's
generous retirement benefits and provide incentives for people to put more money
into private pension funds. But the bill is likely to be blocked for months by
the Christian Democratic Party, which controls the upper house.  Edmund L.
Andrews (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CHILE: PINOCHET IN HOSPITAL
Augusto Pinochet was admitted to a Santiago hospital after suffering a possible
stroke, an army spokesman said. The retired general is waiting for a judge to
decide whether he is fit enough to stand trial on abuse of human rights charges
stemming from his 1973-1990 dictatorship. General Pinochet, who is said to have
suffered two strokes in the past, will stay in the hospital for tests.
(Reuters)

CHILE: PLEA ON THE MISSING
President Ricardo Lagos called on the armed forces to be more forthcoming with
information on leftists who disappeared during the 1973-1990 Augusto Pinochet
dictatorship in accordance with an agreement officers made with human rights
lawyers. The military submitted a report specifying what happened to about 200
victims, but the fates of hundreds more remain unknown.  Clifford Krauss (NYT)

CANADA: PORNOGRAPHY RULING
The Supreme Court has diluted a ban on possession of child pornography, ruling
that a person could not be prosecuted for writing child pornography or creating
child pornographic photographs solely for the creator's use. The ruling alarmed
groups fighting for the rights of children and crime victims. The case involves
a 67-year-old retiree accused of having pornographic photographs of boys. He
will now stand trial on charges of possession of child pornography with intent
to distribute.  James Brooke (NYT)

EL SALVADOR: U.N. SEEKS AID
The United Nations is seeking $35 million in international donations over the
next six months to feed, shelter and treat 200,000 people displaced by the
recent earthquake in El Salvador. The quake and ensuing mudslides killed at
least 726 people and destroyed about 75,000 houses.  Christopher S. Wren (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: NORWEGIAN EMBASSY
Norway, current head of a United Nations Security Council committee on Iraq,
said it planned to reopen its embassy in Baghdad as a center for assessing
United Nations sanctions. Foreign Minister Thorbjoern Jagland said he wants to
target the sanctions more directly against President Saddam Hussein and ease the
suffering of ordinary Iraqis.  (Reuters)

ASIA

EAST TIMOR: ELECTIONS SET
The United Nations special representative for East Timor, Sergio Vieira de
Mello, left, told the Security Council that elections for a constituent assembly
would be held this summer in the former Indonesian territory, which voted to
break away in 1999. But Mr. de Mello said East Timor, now administered by the
United Nations, would continue to need help from foreign specialists and
peacekeepers after its transition to eventual self-rule.  Christopher S. Wren
(NYT)

AFRICA

ANGOLA: DEFENSE CHIEF FIRED
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos fired his longstanding army chief in an
unexplained move. A decree issued in Luanda said Gen. Joao Baptista de Matos,
who had served since 1992 and was credited with success against Unita rebels,
would be replaced by Deputy Defense Minister Armando da Cruz Neto.  (Agence
France-Presse)

SIERRA LEONE: BRITONS STAY ON
Britain is to extend the training program it runs for the Sierra Leone Army, the
Ministry of Defense in London said. The program will run until September and
will cover 1,500 Sierra Leonean soldiers in addition to the 6,500 Britain has
already trained.  (Reuters)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); RELIGION (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); EUROPEAN
UNION (89%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); PENSION & RETIREMENT PLANS (85%); ARMIES (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CHILDREN (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (75%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); NAVIES (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (70%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (69%); LEGISLATION (69%); PENSION FUNDS (67%); STROKES (64%);
EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (75%); BILL CLINTON (57%); JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (50%)

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); SPAIN (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND
(92%); CHILE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             300 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Panel Says Strict Saudi Laws Violate Rights

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 259 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Jan. 26


In a rare public rebuke, a United Nations panel criticized Saudi Arabia today,
saying it discriminated against women, harassed youths who violated dress codes
and applied "inhuman" forms of punishment, including flogging and stoning.

The panel, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, said "narrow
interpretations of Islamic texts" by Saudi authorities have led to violations of
an international agreement protecting the rights of children.

The committee's comments came after it examined Saudi Arabia's compliance with
the United Nations treaty on children's rights. The inquiry marked the first
time Saudi Arabia has allowed a public review of its human rights record.

Saudi officials could not be reached for comment today, the Muslim Sabbath.

Saudi Arabia follows Shariah, a strict interpretation of Islamic law. Courts may
hand down sentences of amputation for robbery and public execution for murder,
rape, sodomy and drug trafficking. Women are not allowed to drive and must be
covered head to toe in public.

"The committee is concerned by the persistence of discrimination," the panel
said in a statement. It highlighted treatment of girls, children born out of
wedlock and Saudi women married to foreigners.

The panel said Saudi law did not define the age of adulthood, leading to concern
that people under 18 may be put to death.

The panel also voiced concern at "restrictions on the freedom of religion" and
about reports that the religious police in Saudi Arabia "routinely harass and
assault persons under 18 for dress code infractions."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); CHILDREN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); GENDER EQUALITY
(90%); CHILD WELFARE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (77%); SEX
OFFENSES (73%); MURDER (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (71%); POLICE FORCES
(71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (53%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  APPAREL;  CORPORAL PUNISHMENT;  WOMEN

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (94%)

REGION: SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             301 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Legal Obligations to Suspects Are Questioned in Bombing Case

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1167 words


Within weeks of the bombings of two American Embassies in East Africa in August
1998, American investigators and prosecutors flew from New York to Kenya and
Tanzania to search for the bombers and their handlers. On Aug. 12, five days
after the attacks, the American agents accompanied the Kenyan police as they
entered a dingy hotel in a village outside Nairobi known by the nickname Little
Somalia.

A 21-year-old man, wounds on his wrists and hands, was led out of the hotel and
taken back to Nairobi. There, over two weeks, he was interrogated by an F.B.I.
agent and a prosecutor in a small library at the headquarters of the Kenyan
authorities. After the two weeks, American prosecutors say, the man gave a
detailed confession, spelling out his role in the bombings, acts he described as
a "martyrdom operation."

Over the coming weeks and year, prosecutors say, they obtained detailed
statements from two other suspects, one in Nairobi, another in Cape Town.

For the American prosecutors, the three statements were expected to be among the
most powerful pieces of evidence they would present in the bombing conspiracy
trial that is under way in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Now, however, each of those statements and the means by which they were gained
are under attack. Lawyers for at least two of the men have argued that the
American agents who questioned their clients overseas never properly advised
them of their right to a lawyer, and did not provide one when asked.

Already, a judge, Leonard B. Sand, has ordered that one of the confessions not
be admitted at trial, but withdrew his decision after prosecutors asked for
another chance to argue for its use. The judge is considering the admissibility
of the statements and said he would try to rule by Monday.

While it is impossible to know the full details and dimensions of the
government's case being tried in Manhattan, a decision to ban the use of the
statements could not be anything but a blow to the prosecution.

Because of the court secrecy in the case, it is not known precisely why Judge
Sand ordered the suppression of the statement of the one defendant, Mohamed
Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, the man who was interrogated in that Nairobi room.

But a partial reconstruction of his interrogation suggests the judge is
confronting a murky area, one that may recur in future terrorism investigations:
when is someone like Mr. al-'Owhali considered to be in American custody? And
what are the obligations of American officials when they are interrogating
non-American suspects on foreign soil?

When Mr. al-'Owhali was arrested outside Nairobi, he was placed in a covered
pickup truck, in which F.B.I. agents were waiting. One agent, Stephen Gaudin,
has testified that he tried to keep Mr. al-'Owhali calm on the drive back,
offering him hard candies, like butterscotch.

Mr. al-'Owhali was taken to the headquarters of the Kenyan Criminal
Investigation Department, or C.I.D., where, prosecutors say, he was advised of
his rights by a New York police detective.

"We read it to him very slowly," Agent Gaudin recalled, "sentence by sentence,
pausing to have eye contact with him to see if he was getting confused." They
asked if he understood everything. "He said he did. We asked him to sign it, and
he did."

But the rights read to Mr. al-'Owhali were slightly different from those used in
the United States, records show. For example, he was told, "Because we are not
in the United States, we cannot ensure that you will have a lawyer appointed for
you before any questioning."

There were also concerns about how well Mr. al-'Owhali, a Saudi with a limited
command of English, understood what he was being told. The questioning was
stopped until an interpreter could be found.

In his effort to have his statements suppressed, Mr. al-'Owhali has given an
affidavit describing what he contends were the unfair conditions of his
interrogation. For example, he says he was told by one F.B.I. agent that if he
did not talk to the Americans, he would be left in the hands of the Kenyans,
whom he feared.

"I was trapped into a position that either I speak to the Americans, whose
country protected human rights, including defendants' human rights," Mr.
al-'Owhali wrote, "or speak to agents of a third-world country where human
rights receive no consideration whatsoever."

Mr. al-'Owhali's lawyers argue that for all intents and purposes, their client
was in American custody. They point to the presence of Patrick J. Fitzgerald,
the lead prosecutor in the bombings case, who participated in the interrogation
and, they say, fully intended to bring Mr. al-'Owhali to the United States to
face charges.

As a result, they say, Mr. al-'Owhali should have been entitled to the same
constitutional protections -- including an appointed lawyer -- that he would
have had in the United States.

Prosecutors disagree. They say that American investigators were in Kenya with
the permission of that country, and that for the better part of the two weeks
after Mr. al-'Owhali's arrest, there was no agreement with the Kenyans that the
suspects would be sent to the United States.

The American government acknowledges that it led the questioning of Mr.
al-'Owhali in Nairobi, but maintains that he was in Kenyan custody when he
confessed, and had no right under Kenyan law to a lawyer. Mr. al-'Owhali, the
government says, "was not generally entitled to the protections of the Bill of
Rights." But because he was interacting with America agents, "he was entitled to
due process," the government says.

"Al-'Owhali embraced the opportunity to speak with the American officials,"
prosecutors say, and "did so voluntarily and with full knowledge of the
consequences of his actions."

Mr. al-'Owhali was interviewed by American and Kenyan agents on at least 9 of
the 14 days after his arrest. For much of that time, he gave a false name and
said he was from Yemen. He says one agent threatened to hurt his family, refused
to let him pray and said, "You will be hanged from your neck like a dog."

Another time, he says, Kenyan agents, out of the presence of the Americans, led
him blindfolded through a passage and up stairs, leaving him fearing he was
about to be executed.

Mr. al-'Owhali, in his court motion, says he asked about his right to a lawyer
before being put into a police lineup, from which, a record shows, he was picked
out by a witness. He says he was told by an American agent that "because I had
no money, I could not have a lawyer."

On Aug. 22, the American agents presented Mr. al-'Owhali with new evidence of
his involvement. Mr. al-'Owhali stopped claiming he was from Yemen, and said he
wanted to "start on a clean slate," according to testimony by Mike Feghali, an
F.B.I. translator.

As Mr. Feghali recalled it, Mr. al-'Owhali said, "I'm going to tell you the
truth and the whole truth."

The government says that it was not until Mr. al-'Owhali was on a plane to New
York that he asked for the first time to talk to a lawyer, and the questioning
stopped.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); EVIDENCE (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); LAWYERS (74%); ARRESTS (73%); TESTIMONY (71%);
RIGHT TO COUNSEL (67%); MOTOR VEHICLES (50%) TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;
UNITED STATES FOREIGN SERVICE

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (73%) WEISER, BENJAMIN; AL-'OWHALI, MOHAMED RASHED
DAOUD; BIN LADEN, OSAMA; ODEH, MOHAMMED SADDIQ; SALIM, MAMDOUH MAHMUD; SAND,
LEONARD B (JUDGE)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA
(78%); DAR ES SALAAM, TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (94%);
SOMALIA (92%); EASTERN AFRICA (91%); AFRICA (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); SOUTH
AFRICA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  DAR ES SALAAM (TANZANIA);  KENYA;  NAIROBI (KENYA);  NEW
YORK CITY;  TANZANIA

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             303 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sanctions' Ledger: Benefit or Harm?

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 161 words


To the Editor:

Re "Sanctions Are a Weapon We Need," by Aryeh Neier (Op-Ed, Jan. 28):

I agree that economic sanctions may be necessary to deal with egregious
violations of human rights.

The problem is that too often we impose them unilaterally, which does little
except disrupt the livelihoods of American businesses and workers.

For example, the United States has taken the lead in restricting trade and
investment with Myanmar over forced labor and other abuses, but no other nation
has followed our lead. The European Union has imposed very limited visa and
trade restrictions. Japan has merely trimmed back development assistance. The
Asean countries have done nothing.

Business has consistently argued against unilateral economic sanctions as a
general principle. They haven't worked in Cuba, another serious human rights
problem, and they won't work in Myanmar.

THOMAS M.T. NILES
President, United States Council
for International Business
New York, Jan. 29, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); RESTRAINT OF TRADE (88%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); FORCED LABOR (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (57%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%)

PERSON: NILES, THOMAS M T

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MYANMAR (93%); CUBA (79%); ASIA (79%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (68%)

REGION: MYANMAR;  EUROPE;  FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             305 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 919 words


EUROPE

RUSSIA: AMERICAN TELLS OF CAPTIVITY
An American relief worker freed from captivity in Chechnya on Saturday said his
captors treated him well, even giving him a freshly ironed shirt on his release.
But Kenneth Gluck of Doctors Without Borders said he still had no idea who had
taken him or why. The Kremlin has said Mr. Gluck was seized by guerrillas. But
some say he was abducted by pro-Moscow forces seeking to turn opinion further
against the rebels.  Michael Wines (NYT)


CROATIA: GENERAL'S ARREST ORDERED
A Croatian judge ordered the arrest of a retired general, Mirko Norac, left,
Croatia's most senior war crimes suspect to date, after he failed to turn
himself in. General Norac, 33, is wanted for the killings of Serbian civilians
in 1991 in one of Croatia's first investigations of war crimes committed by the
Croatian Army. General Norac, a hugely popular figure, is considered a hero of
Croatia's 1991-95 war of independence against Serbs.  Carlotta Gall (NYT)

BULGARIA: KING RULED OUT
The Constitutional Court ruled that King Simeon II, who lives in exile, was not
eligible to run in a presidential election expected this year because a
candidate must have lived in Bulgaria for five years before the poll. The highly
popular king lives largely in Spain. He is seen as the man who could bring a
coalition of smaller parties into Parliament in legislative elections in June,
allowing them to decide which of the main parties would form the government. He
has hinted he may enter politics.  (Reuters)

SPAIN: MAD COW PROTEST
Some 5,000 farmers, some with cows, halted traffic in Madrid by marching through
the city center demanding compensation for the mad cow disease crisis, which
they say has cost more than $1 billion. In Barcelona, butchers closed their
shops and demonstrated to demand that the government better inform consumers,
who are shying away from beef and veal for fear of the disease.  Emma Daly (NYT)


EUROPEAN UNION: ASYLUM POLICY
Justice ministers meeting in Stockholm agreed to speed up integration of asylum
policies in the 15-nation union in a bid to stem the tide of illegal immigrants
without affecting genuine political refugees. Alarmed at the rise of illegal
immigration, the ministers seek to close loopholes in differing legislation,
which have been exploited by human traffickers and smugglers.  (AP)

THE AMERICAS

CHILE: NEW PINOCHET EVIDENCE
A published account of Augusto Pinochet's suspected complicity in human rights
abuse could speed the case against him, prosecution lawyers said. Judge Juan
Guzman ordered entered into evidence a document published on Wednesday that is
said to show the former dictator justifying the execution without trial in 1973
of Eugenio Ruiz-Tagle Orrego.  (Agence France-Presse)

PERU: SPY AGENCY REBORN
The transition government reactivated the National Intelligence Service, the
agency once led by the former spy chief Vladimiro Montesinos, which was
disbanded by former President Alberto K. Fujimori. "In reality," said Prime
Minister Javier Perez de Cuellar, the agency "serves an essential mission."
Clifford Krauss (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

SYRIA: PARTY ACTIVITY
President Bashar al-Assad has raised the prospect of allowing new political
parties besides those in a coalition with the governing Baath Party. "All
possibilities are open, including that of having new parties," he told the
London-based daily Asharq al-Awsat.  (Agence France-Presse)

AFRICA

NIGERIA: NEW CABINET
President Olusegun Obasanjo announced a new 49-member cabinet and warned that he
would not hesitate to fire anyone involved in corruption. The cabinet included
10 new ministers.  (Reuters)

ASIA

TIBET: U.S. PROPOSES SEARCH OF 2 CRASH SITES
The United States said it would ask China to permit a search of the sites of two
aircraft crashes in Tibet, seeking the remains of American airmen lost in World
War II. The Pentagon said Beijing provided new information about the sites, both
in the Himalayas, last month. Officials said one site had been linked to a 1944
crash of a C-46 transport flying to Sookarating, India, from Kunming, China, but
said little was known about the other site. The C-46 crew of four is still
listed as missing.  (Reuters)

INDONESIA: PRO-WAHID PROTESTS
Tens of thousands of people staged violent protests in three cities to support
President Abdurrahman Wahid against attempts by Parliament to impeach him. Some
protesters attacked offices of Golkar, once the party of former President
Suharto. In two cities the police fired shots to contain the crowds. Today
President Wahid plans to visit East Java, his party's heartland and center of
the protests.  Seth Mydans (NYT)

INDONESIA: SECTARIAN VIOLENCE
A government human rights commission said 3,800 people had been killed in two
years of Muslim-Christian fighting in the Maluku islands. The commission said
4,024 people had been injured and 281,365 forced to flee their homes.  Seth
Mydans (NYT)

PHILIPPINES: GAMBLING ADVISER
Luis Singson, a confessed illegal gambling lord whose testimony about gambling
payoffs helped bring down his friend and drinking partner, former President
Joseph E. Estrada, was named a government consultant on gambling. He said
legalization would be best.  Seth Mydans (NYT)

SRI LANKA: TERRORISM RECORD
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the ethnic separatist group, lead the
world in suicide bombings, having conducted 168 of the 271 such bombings in the
past two decades, according to Rohan Gunaratne, a terrorism specialist reporting
in Jane's Intelligence Review.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); LITIGATION (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
POLITICAL ASYLUM (89%); EVIDENCE (88%); BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY (86%);
EUROPEAN UNION (79%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); REFUGEES (78%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); JUDGES (75%); ARREST WARRANTS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); SMUGGLING (72%); ARMIES (72%);
MEDICAL CHARITIES (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); LAWYERS (71%);
POLITICS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); LIVESTOCK DISEASE (68%); ALIEN
SMUGGLING (66%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (66%); TALKS & MEETINGS (64%);
ESPIONAGE (60%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (57%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (50%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (50%)

ORGANIZATION: DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (58%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (50%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%); BARCELONA, SPAIN
(74%)

STATE: CATALONIA, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); CROATIA (95%); SPAIN (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); EUROPE (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BULGARIA (89%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (79%); SWEDEN (79%); CHILE (79%); SERBIA (79%); NORTH & SOUTH
AMERICAS (57%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             307 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 933 words


EUROPE

SERBIA: BUFFER WITH KOSOVO
NATO told Serbian officials that it was prepared as part of an overall peace
plan to consider changes to the buffer zone on Kosovo's eastern boundary, which
ethnic Albanian separatists are using as a safe haven. But while welcoming a
plan by Belgrade to stabilize the region, NATO's secretary general, Lord
Robertson, above, said any ultimatum or use of force by Serbian forces to regain
control of the zone would be unacceptable.  Carlotta Gall (NYT)


CROATIA: PROTEST FIZZLES
In a lift for the reformist government, a right-wing anti-government protest in
support of a general wanted on war crime charges failed to draw more than a few
thousand people in Zagreb. Many more thousands had been expected. Gen. Mirko
Norac, suspected in the killings of Serbian civilians in 1992, remains in
hiding, but has reportedly entered into telephone negotiations with the
government.  Carlotta Gall (NYT)

CHECHNYA: LIFE SENTENCE FOR REBEL
A Russian court issued a life sentence against a Chechen rebel who was said to
have confessed to executing four Russian soldiers by pistol as a video camera
recorded it. The videotape helped generate public sentiment for Russia's 1999
invasion of Chechnya. Prosecutors are said to be investigating abuses by
Russians as well, but a Human Rights Watch report concluded that such inquiries
have gone almost nowhere despite compelling evidence of murder, torture and
looting.  Michael Wines (NYT)

UKRAINE: STUDENTS PROTEST
Students pressed on with protests against President Leonid Kuchma, staging two
rallies to demand the truth about a missing journalist. About 100 students
gathered outside the American Embassy and handed over a petition asking the
United States to use its influence to solve the mystery of the journalist,
Georgy Gongadze.  (Reuters)

SPAIN: PLEA ON GUSINSKY REJECTED
The highest criminal court has decreed that the Russian media magnate Vladimir
Gusinsky, who is wanted by Moscow on fraud charges, should remain under house
arrest rather than return to jail. Spanish prosecutors, representing the Russian
government, argued that Mr. Gusinsky should be held in prison pending
extradition hearings. Mr. Gusinsky, who says the charges against him are
politically motivated, is being held on $5.5 million bail.  Emma Daly (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: EXTRADITION VS. DEATH PENALTY
The Supreme Court ruled that two Canadians facing murder charges in the United
States can be extradited only if American prosecutors promise not to seek the
death penalty. The court said "in the Canadian view of fundamental justice,
capital punishment is unjust and should be stopped." Atif Rafay and Sebastian
Burns are accused of murdering Mr. Rafay's father, mother and sister in
Bellevue, Wash., in 1994.  Susan Catto (NYT)

EL SALVADOR: PLEA FOR QUAKE AID
With hospitals running out of beds, blood and medicine, officials appealed for
international help for thousands of victims of El Salvador's second earthquake
in a month. The National Emergency Committee put the death toll at 276, with
2,715 injured and 17,925 houses destroyed.  (AP)

AFRICA

LIBERIA: PLEDGE ON REFUGEES
President Charles Taylor pledged to help the United Nations move thousands of
refugees caught in a conflict in Guinea, while denying that Liberian soldiers
were involved in the fighting. Mr. Taylor offered the help to Ruud Lubbers, the
United Nations high commissioner for refugees. Mr. Taylor said Liberia was ready
to open a corridor to allow access to the refugees and said personnel in Sierra
Leone from the United Nations, which has a big peacekeeping operation, would be
welcome to assist.  (Reuters)

ASIA

MALAYSIA: POLICE DISPERSE PROTESTERS
The police fired tear gas and used high-powered hoses to disperse a large rally
in support of a democratic opposition party, Keadilan, in Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohamad's constituency in the north. Organizers, who were celebrating
the defection of members of Dr. Mahathir's party, estimated the crowd at 10,000;
the police said it was half that.  Seth Mydans (NYT)

VIETNAM: CALM RETURNS
A government spokeswoman said calm had returned to two remote mountain provinces
where troops had moved in to quell sometimes violent disturbances this month. An
exile group in the United States said the disturbances erupted after the arrest
of two Christian activists.  Seth Mydans (NYT)

BANGLADESH: NEW OPPOSITION STRIKE
Dhaka was paralyzed again when the opposition political alliance, led by Khaleda
Zia of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, called a strike. She said three members
of her party had been killed in an earlier strike. Since the Awami League won
election in 1996, opposition groups have routinely held strikes in a vain
attempt to force a change in government, a strategy that damages the economy.
Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: KHATAMI WARNING
President Mohammad Khatami said democracy was the only way for Iran to emerge
from its economic crisis, and warned his hard-line opponents that time was
running out. Mr. Khatami, nearing the end of his first term, has been
increasingly vocal in defending his liberal reforms and is widely expected to
seek a new term in a June election.  (Reuters)

INTERNATIONAL

HARMFUL FARMING
Intensive farming, blamed by many for spreading mad cow disease across Europe,
has damaged the environment and may cripple the world's ability to feed a
growing population, a food policy research group said. "Agricultural production
is being achieved at the expense of our ability to feed ourselves and future
generations," said Adlai Amor, spokesman for the World Resources Institute in
Washington.(Reuters)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
SENTENCING (88%); LITIGATION (88%); JOURNALISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (75%);
STUDENT ACTIVISM (75%); CAPITAL CRIMES (74%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (74%);
EVIDENCE (74%); CORRECTIONS (74%); TORTURE (74%); HOUSE ARREST (74%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); PETITIONS (70%); MURDER (69%);
ARRESTS (69%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (68%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (68%); SUPREME
COURTS (67%); APPEALS (64%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (63%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM
NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ZAGREB, CROATIA
(77%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CANADA (93%); ALBANIA (92%); EL SALVADOR
(92%); CROATIA (92%); EUROPE (92%); SPAIN (79%); UKRAINE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             312 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1022 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Powell Plan Would Shift Focus of Iraq Sanctions
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he had won agreement from Arab nations
to modify sanctions on Iraq by letting in more civilian supplies but sharpening
controls on strategic items sought by President Saddam Hussein. He acknowledged
that his plan might be challenged in some quarters in Washington as a weakening
of the sanctions.   A1


Labor Accepts Likud Invitation
Labor Party leaders agreed to join a unity government led by Ariel Sharon, who
has been trying to form a government since his election to prime minister three
weeks ago.   A1

U.S. Review of Human Rights
The State Department gave harsh assessments of human rights in China, Israel,
Colombia and Indonesia in its annual global review.   A10

Balkan War Crimes Conviction
The United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague found Dario Kordic, 40, a
former Bosnian Croat leader, guilty of having a major role in a campaign against
Muslim civilians in the early 1990's. He was given 25 years.   A3

Amnesty Granted in Yugoslavia
The Yugoslav Parliament passed an amnesty law that will free several hundred
Kosovo Albanians held in Serbian prisons since the war in Kosovo in 1999. It
will also clear thousands of people in Yugoslavia who avoided the draft or
deserted.   A3

Citibank Criticized
Interviews with government investigators and a new study by the Democratic staff
of a Senate subcommittee raise questions about Citibank's slow response to signs
that something was amiss at a Cayman Islands bank tied to a money-laundering
scheme.   A12

Kursk Officer Blamed Torpedo
A note scrawled by Lt. Cmdr. Rashid Aryapov, who died on the Russian submarine
in August, said an explosion caused by a torpedo that apparently misfired had
sunk the sub, a Russian newspaper reported.   A12

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A14-21

Senate Republicans Offer Overhaul of Energy Policy
Senate Republicans, saying the nation faces an energy crisis that threatens its
economy and security, proposed the first major bill in a decade to overhaul
energy policy and promote domestic oil exploration. One provision would allow
oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.   A1

Bush Plan for U.S. Debt
President Bush, who is to deliver a budget address to Congress tonight, is
expected to put the nation on a course to pay off $2 trillion of the national
debt over the next 10 years, but leave $1.2 trillion on the books.   A1

Rethinking Privacy Rules
Health Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said he would delay and reconsider rules that
President Bill Clinton issued in late December to protect medical record
privacy.   A18

Citizenship for Adopted Children
More than 75,000 children adopted from abroad and living in the United States
will automatically become United States citizens today because of changes to
immigration law.   A16

Logs Reportedly Show Visit
Secret Service records show that Denise Rich and her friend Beth Dozoretz, left,
a former top Democratic fund-raiser, visited the White House on the evening of
Jan. 19, a few hours before Bill Clinton issued a pardon to Marc Rich, lawyers
said. Associates of the women disputed the records and said neither was there.
Ms. Dozoretz told a Congressional panel she would not testify in its inquiry.
A20

Bush Holds Lead in New Count
A review of 10,644 uncounted Miami-Dade County ballots by an accounting firm
hired by three news organizations produced a net gain of 49 votes for Al Gore,
not enough to overcome George W. Bush's lead.   A21

Osprey Officer to Retire
Col. Nolan Schmidt, who has managed the troubled V-22 Osprey program since 1997,
a period when two Osprey crashes killed 23 marines, will retire in June.   A19

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Domino Sugar Strike Ends; Workers Fault Their Union
Strikers at the Domino Sugar refinery in Brooklyn agreed to return to work after
20 months out, in what even union leaders acknowledged was a stinging loss. Many
of the original strikers had already crossed the picket line and returned,
saying they felt abandoned by their parent union and the labor movement at
large.   B1

U.S. Says Inmate Ran Scheme
Federal prosecutors accused Ira Monas of running an $8.5 million investment
scheme from a state prison where he was serving time on a securities fraud
conviction.   B1

Scouts Seek Repeal of Gay Ban
The Greater New York Councils, Boy Scouts of America, called a ban on homosexual
scouts and troop leaders "repugnant" and said it was trying to persuade the
Texas-based national organization to repeal the policy.   B3

Neediest Cases   B4

ARTS   E1-8

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Early Dance
An Israeli archaeologist, using carved stones and painted scenes on pottery from
the Balkans and the Middle East, has established what he says is an illustrated
record of dancing from 9,000 to 5,000 years ago.   F1

Food Safety Rule Approved
The Bush administration approved a regulation, made in the waning days of the
Clinton administration, requiring testing for Listeria, bacteria that are
potentially lethal, in factories that process ready-to-eat meats.   A21

Health & Fitness   F5

OBITUARIES   B7-8

Claude Elwood Shannon
The American mathematician and computer scientist whose theories laid the
groundwork for the electronic communications networks that now lace the earth
was 84.   B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-15

Microsoft Antitrust Appeal
Judges on a federal appeals court, hearing oral arguments, questioned central
findings of the trial court that ordered Microsoft broken up.   A1

Automaker's Forecast
DaimlerChrysler's chairman and chief executive, Jurgen E. Schrempp, announced
his turnaround plans, but said Chrysler's American business would lose more than
$2 billion this year.   C1

A Wild Ride on the Nasdaq
Shares of Axcelis Technologies closed at $11.75, up $1.31, after trading as high
as $93 in a flurry of action that might have been prompted by an erroneous trade
order.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

FASHION   B9

SPORTS   D1-8

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Adjusting drug policy; Israel's unity government; political missteps
by organized labor.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
AMNESTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PUBLIC
POLICY (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (89%); ENERGY REGULATION (85%); PUBLIC
DEBT (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (75%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%);
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (71%); NATIONAL DEBT
(71%); BUDGETS (69%); MONEY LAUNDERING (68%); IMMIGRATION LAW (66%); OIL
EXPLORATION (65%); MINING & EXTRACTION SECTOR PERFORMANCE (65%); PRIVACY RIGHTS
(63%); MEDICAL RECORDS (63%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (62%); PATIENT PRIVACY (60%);
ADOPTION (60%); OIL EXTRACTION (60%); WILDLIFE (60%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION
(60%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); TOMMY THOMPSON (58%); GEORGE W
BUSH (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: ALASKA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); SERBIA (93%); KOSOVO (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); CHINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); CROATIA (79%); CAYMAN ISLANDS (79%); INDONESIA (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); ISRAEL (79%); ARCTIC (73%)

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             313 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1022 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Powell Plan Would Shift Focus of Iraq Sanctions
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he had won agreement from Arab nations
to modify sanctions on Iraq by letting in more civilian supplies but sharpening
controls on strategic items sought by President Saddam Hussein. He acknowledged
that his plan might be challenged in some quarters in Washington as a weakening
of the sanctions.   A1


Labor Accepts Likud Invitation
Labor Party leaders agreed to join a unity government led by Ariel Sharon, who
has been trying to form a government since his election to prime minister three
weeks ago.   A1

U.S. Review of Human Rights
The State Department gave harsh assessments of human rights in China, Israel,
Colombia and Indonesia in its annual global review.   A10

Balkan War Crimes Conviction
The United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague found Dario Kordic, 40, a
former Bosnian Croat leader, guilty of having a major role in a campaign against
Muslim civilians in the early 1990's. He was given 25 years.   A3

Amnesty Granted in Yugoslavia
The Yugoslav Parliament passed an amnesty law that will free several hundred
Kosovo Albanians held in Serbian prisons since the war in Kosovo in 1999. It
will also clear thousands of people in Yugoslavia who avoided the draft or
deserted.   A3

Citibank Criticized
Interviews with government investigators and a new study by the Democratic staff
of a Senate subcommittee raise questions about Citibank's slow response to signs
that something was amiss at a Cayman Islands bank tied to a money-laundering
scheme.   A12

Kursk Officer Blamed Torpedo
A note scrawled by Lt. Cmdr. Rashid Aryapov, who died on the Russian submarine
in August, said an explosion caused by a torpedo that apparently misfired had
sunk the sub, a Russian newspaper reported.   A12

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A14-21

Senate Republicans Offer Overhaul of Energy Policy
Senate Republicans, saying the nation faces an energy crisis that threatens its
economy and security, proposed the first major bill in a decade to overhaul
energy policy and promote domestic oil exploration. One provision would allow
oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.   A1

Bush Plan for U.S. Debt
President Bush, who is to deliver a budget address to Congress tonight, is
expected to put the nation on a course to pay off $2 trillion of the national
debt over the next 10 years, but leave $1.2 trillion on the books.   A1

Rethinking Privacy Rules
Health Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said he would delay and reconsider rules that
President Bill Clinton issued in late December to protect medical record
privacy.   A18

Citizenship for Adopted Children
More than 75,000 children adopted from abroad and living in the United States
will automatically become United States citizens today because of changes to
immigration law.   A16

Logs Reportedly Show Visit
Secret Service records show that Denise Rich and her friend Beth Dozoretz, left,
a former top Democratic fund-raiser, visited the White House on the evening of
Jan. 19, a few hours before Bill Clinton issued a pardon to Marc Rich, lawyers
said. Associates of the women disputed the records and said neither was there.
Ms. Dozoretz told a Congressional panel she would not testify in its inquiry.
A20

Bush Holds Lead in New Count
A review of 10,644 uncounted Miami-Dade County ballots by an accounting firm
hired by three news organizations produced a net gain of 49 votes for Al Gore,
not enough to overcome George W. Bush's lead.   A21

Osprey Officer to Retire
Col. Nolan Schmidt, who has managed the troubled V-22 Osprey program since 1997,
a period when two Osprey crashes killed 23 marines, will retire in June.   A19

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Domino Sugar Strike Ends; Workers Fault Their Union
Strikers at the Domino Sugar refinery in Brooklyn agreed to return to work after
20 months out, in what even union leaders acknowledged was a stinging loss. Many
of the original strikers had already crossed the picket line and returned,
saying they felt abandoned by their parent union and the labor movement at
large.   B1

U.S. Says Inmate Ran Scheme
Federal prosecutors accused Ira Monas of running an $8.5 million investment
scheme from a state prison where he was serving time on a securities fraud
conviction.   B1

Scouts Seek Repeal of Gay Ban
The Greater New York Councils, Boy Scouts of America, called a ban on homosexual
scouts and troop leaders "repugnant" and said it was trying to persuade the
Texas-based national organization to repeal the policy.   B3

Neediest Cases   B4

ARTS   E1-8

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Early Dance
An Israeli archaeologist, using carved stones and painted scenes on pottery from
the Balkans and the Middle East, has established what he says is an illustrated
record of dancing from 9,000 to 5,000 years ago.   F1

Food Safety Rule Approved
The Bush administration approved a regulation, made in the waning days of the
Clinton administration, requiring testing for Listeria, bacteria that are
potentially lethal, in factories that process ready-to-eat meats.   A21

Health & Fitness   F5

OBITUARIES   B7-8

Claude Elwood Shannon
The American mathematician and computer scientist whose theories laid the
groundwork for the electronic communications networks that now lace the earth
was 84.   B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-15

Microsoft Antitrust Appeal
Judges on a federal appeals court, hearing oral arguments, questioned central
findings of the trial court that ordered Microsoft broken up.   A1

Automaker's Forecast
DaimlerChrysler's chairman and chief executive, Jurgen E. Schrempp, announced
his turnaround plans, but said Chrysler's American business would lose more than
$2 billion this year.   C1

A Wild Ride on the Nasdaq
Shares of Axcelis Technologies closed at $11.75, up $1.31, after trading as high
as $93 in a flurry of action that might have been prompted by an erroneous trade
order.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

FASHION   B9

SPORTS   D1-8

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Adjusting drug policy; Israel's unity government; political missteps
by organized labor.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
AMNESTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PUBLIC
POLICY (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (89%); ENERGY REGULATION (85%); PUBLIC
DEBT (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (75%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%);
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (71%); NATIONAL DEBT
(71%); BUDGETS (69%); MONEY LAUNDERING (68%); IMMIGRATION LAW (66%); OIL
EXPLORATION (65%); MINING & EXTRACTION SECTOR PERFORMANCE (65%); PRIVACY RIGHTS
(63%); MEDICAL RECORDS (63%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (62%); PATIENT PRIVACY (60%);
ADOPTION (60%); OIL EXTRACTION (60%); WILDLIFE (60%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION
(60%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); TOMMY THOMPSON (58%); GEORGE W
BUSH (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: ALASKA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); SERBIA (93%); KOSOVO (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); CHINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); CROATIA (79%); CAYMAN ISLANDS (79%); INDONESIA (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); ISRAEL (79%); ARCTIC (73%)

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             314 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yugoslav Parliament Passes Amnesty for Jailed Kosovars

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Feb. 26


The Yugoslav Parliament passed a long-awaited amnesty law today that will free
several hundred Kosovo Albanians held in Serbian prisons since the war in Kosovo
in 1999 and will clear thousands of draft dodgers and deserters in Yugoslavia
from prosecution by the army.

It was the first major piece of legislation passed by the new Parliament and the
first real gesture by the new government to reverse injustices suffered by
Albanians from Kosovo under Slobodan Milosevic.

United Nations officials in Kosovo and human rights organizations have long
called for the release of the 650 Albanians still in Serbian prisons, most of
whom they regard as political prisoners. The prisoners were among about 2,000
transferred to Serbia at the end of the war in 1999, when NATO-led peacekeepers
took control of Kosovo.

The status of those in prison is one of the most explosive issues in Kosovo
today, and United Nations officials have repeatedly said their continued
imprisonment is a major obstacle to peace and reconciliation.

Despite protests from Mr. Milosevic's Socialist Party, and his wife's Yugoslav
Left Party, the law was passed easily in both the upper and lower houses. It
will give amnesty to all those charged with and convicted of conspiring against
the state, but not to those convicted of terrorism.

In addition to the prisoners, the main beneficiaries of the law will be an
estimated 28,000 young Serbs and Montenegrins, many of whom fled abroad to avoid
serving in the army during the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and finally Kosovo,
according to Justice Minister Momcilo Grubac. The amnesty, he noted today, was
one of the election promises of the government that replaced Mr. Milosevic's.

About 200 of the imprisoned Kosovo Albanians have been charged with terrorism,
and their cases will be reviewed separately, he said. But he added that after
reviewing the status of the prisoners, he had asked President Vojislav Kostunica
to pardon some who had been convicted of terrorism on insufficient evidence.
"Those convicted without any evidence will be pardoned," he said, adding that
Mr. Kostunica was the one to make the final decision.

In particular, he said, 143 men from the town of Djakovica were convicted as a
group, apparently without evidence, after several police officers were killed.
"The real terrorists escaped, and the citizens were tried without any evidence
or proof that they committed this criminal offense," he told Parliament.

Shortly after taking office as president in October, Mr. Kostunica pardoned the
best known Albanian political prisoner, Flora Brovina, a pediatrician, along
with a Serbian journalist convicted of spying. Since then, Mr. Kostunica has
come under criticism for stalling on the release of the remaining 650 Kosovo
Albanians.

In a recent interview, Mr, Grubac said that there was no political agenda in the
delay, but that it had been necessary to review all the cases. Case officers at
the independent Humanitarian Law Center, who monitored virtually every trial at
the time, suggested that Mr. Kostunica had sought to use the prisoners as
leverage in negotiations with the West over Kosovo and over cooperation with the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Nevertheless, passing the law, without amendments, was clearly a success for Mr.
Kostunica's ministers, who applauded when it was voted through. The Socialists
and Yugoslav Left deputies staged a walkout for the vote, raising banners that
read, "You are freeing the butchers and are arresting Serbian generals," and
"Free Rade Markovic," a reference to Mr. Milosevic's former secret police chief,
who was arrested by the new Serbian authorities over the weekend.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yugoslav government opponents and supporters, including new
ministers, tussled in Parliament yesterday during debate on an amnesty law.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AMNESTY (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS
(90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); EVIDENCE (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); PARDONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (73%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); CONSPIRACY (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ESPIONAGE (63%) LAW AND LEGISLATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLITICAL PRISONERS;  AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES;  DRAFT AND RECRUITMENT (MILITARY);  DESERTION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); ALBANIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
CROATIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             316 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Modest Beginnings for East Timor's Justice System

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1272 words

DATELINE: DILI, East Timor, Feb. 26


Judge Maria Natercia Perreira set her face in a judicial frown and studied the
nine scruffy men lined up below her in the dock, she herself once a victim but
now ready to hear evidence in East Timor's first case of crimes against
humanity.

Standing shoulder to shoulder in their sandals and T-shirts, the men shifted
uneasily in the hot and nearly empty courtroom. Members of a group called the
Alpha Militia, they are accused of a series of killings, abductions, forced
deportations and instances of torture committed in 1999, the year East Timor
voted for independence from Indonesia.

In the most serious incident, they are charged with shooting and hacking to
death two nuns, three seminarians and four civilians who were traveling by car
near the eastern city of Los Palos.

According to the indictment and to independent investigators of the events of
1999, their actions were part of a campaign of violence organized by the
Indonesian military that was intended, first, to derail the independence vote
and then, when that failed, to lay waste to East Timor.

Now, as the new nation struggles to its feet under a United Nations
administration, it is simultaneously creating a new court system with novice
judges and lawyers and using that fledgeling system to try to address its recent
trauma.

Mrs. Perreira, 31, a former civil servant, knows the story first-hand. Like
hundreds of thousands of East Timorese, she lost her home to arson, was
threatened with death by armed men and was deported, with her five children,
into a militia-controlled camp in the Indonesian territory of West Timor.

One of the few East Timorese with a law degree, she has now joined two more
experienced judges, from Italy and Burundi, on the three-judge panel that will
hear the most serious cases from that period.

Like other Timorese being trained here, she has dedicated herself to the
country's new system of justice, with its rights and protections and rules of
fairness. But like others -- both prosecutors and defense lawyers -- she speaks
passionately about the inherent unfairness of these trials.

"As a judge, it's my duty to enforce the law," she said. "Every individual must
be responsible for his crimes. But speaking as a Timorese and not as a judge, I
think this system is not fair. Is it fair to prosecute the small Timorese and
not the big ones who gave them orders? Personally, I'm worried about this."

The big Timorese -- the militia leaders -- remain beyond the reach of the law,
in hiding in West Timor. And at a still higher level, the Indonesian officers
who recruited, trained and commanded the militias are safe at home, some of them
already rewarded and promoted to higher ranks.

"The problem is, we've got the judicial process but not the perpetrators," said
Patrick Burgess, director of the human rights unit in the United Nations
administration here. "In Indonesia, they've got the perpetrators but not the
process."

Despite an agreement signed last year to exchange defendants and witnesses
between their separate court systems, analysts here are all but unanimous in
saying that no Indonesian is likely ever to be sent to court in East Timor.

Indeed, in the Alpha Militia case, the man accused of giving the orders, Lt.
Syaful Anwar, is an Indonesian army officer -- the only defendant who is not
present. "The Indonesians tell us they can't find him, they don't know his
whereabouts, they don't know his address," Mrs. Perrera said.

Prospects for justice seem even more dim within Indonesia itself. The government
has promised to carry out its own trials in an effort to avert formation by the
United Nations of an international tribunal.

But after issuing a damning report one year ago that implicated a score of
senior officers and officials, Indonesia has done little to move toward trials.
Analysts say it is now highly unlikely that any high ranking figures will face
justice there.

"The United Nations line is that we'll wait and see, give Indonesia an
opportunity to prove that they can undertake a credible prosecution," Mr.
Burgess said. "So we are still waiting. It's certainly an issue of how long we
wait until we decide whether that process is credible or not."

Most experts are already convinced that justice in Indonesia is a lost cause.
"We are a long way from real justice, either in Jakarta or in Dili," said Sidney
Jones, the Asia director for Human Rights Watch in New York. "Certainly in
Jakarta the process is totally and utterly stalled. We think people should start
thinking again about an international tribunal, simply because the Jakarta
process is at such a dead end."

But time is probably on Indonesia's side as world attention moves elsewhere. And
analysts say the United Nations Security Council is in any case unlikely to
create a tribunal, given strong objections by Russia and China, which may fear
similar probes into their actions in Chechnya and Tibet.

And so the tiny courthouse in Dili -- with its ill-prepared staff, its shortage
of translators, its missing records, its lack of a court reporter or copy
machine, its confused schedule and its inadequate budget -- is for the moment
the sole venue for justice for this ravaged country.

Prosecutors misplace their indictments, the police misplace defendants who are
free on bail and cases recess in midstream when foreign judges break for
vacations. No money has been allocated to house and support witnesses from
outside Dili.

But the process has begun. The first two convictions for murder -- cases that
were not treated as crimes against humanity -- have been handed down in the last
two weeks. In what seemed a pointed demonstration of evenhandedness, one 12-year
sentence was given to a member of the militias and one 7-year sentence was given
to a member of the pro-independence forces who had killed a militia member.

The seeming lightness of the sentence against the militia member caused an
outcry among some spectators and there is concern here that the judicial process
may not satisfy the need of many East Timorse for an accounting.

The United Nations is preparing a parallel "truth and reconciliation" program in
the hope of defusing this discontent and of handling the hundreds of cases that
would overwhelm the tiny Dili courthouse.

Desite its inadequacies, the court here has begun to create both a mechanism and
a culture of due process. And for both Lisete Quintao, 28, a public defender,
and for her clients, each step is a revelation.

Mrs. Quintao, who studied law in Jakarta, said she struggles between her
personal feelings and her dedication to the system she is helping put in place.

Asked how she felt about defending the people who ravaged her country, she said:
"Oh, gosh, that's a difficult situation for me. Sometimes I am angry at all the
militia for doing these things to me and my family and my friends and everyone.
But then, you see, they may be bad men but they have the right to a good trial
and a fair trial. We cannot just say, 'You did wrong.' We have to prove it
first."

Two of the Alpha Militia defendants are her clients, including one, Joao da
Costa, who is accused of gratuitous brutality in the course of the murders. He
is not a very nice person, she said.

She said she has spent hours with him reviewing the case and explaining his
rights.

"When I met him, he said to me, 'You have come to judge me, to convict me,"'
Mrs. Quintao recalled. "And I said, 'No, I have come to tell you that you have
rights, to this and this and this. You have the right to a fair trial. You can
defend yourself in court and I will help you."'

He was surprised, she said. "He asked me, 'We can do this?' And I told him,
'Yes!' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Judge Maria Natercia Perreira, at right, is hearing East
Timor's first case of crimes against humanity. At left are some of the nine
defendants, who are accused of killings, abductions, torture and forced
deportations before and after East Timor voted for independence from Indonesia
in 1999. (Photographs by Anastasia T. Vrachnos for The New York Times) Map of
East Timor highlighting Dili: Many leaders of the violence in East Timor have
left the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EVIDENCE (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); JUDGES (89%); LAWYERS (79%); INDICTMENTS (79%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); DEPORTATION (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); SHOOTINGS (72%);
ARSON (72%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: PERREIRA, MARIA NATERCIA (JUDGE); MYDANS, SETH

CITY: DILI, TIMOR-LESTE (92%)

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (98%); INDONESIA (94%); BURUNDI (92%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  ITALY;  BURUNDI

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             318 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 10, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Makes Arrest of Milosevic A Condition of Aid to Belgrade

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 9


The United States has told the new democratic government in Belgrade that if it
expects American aid to continue, it should arrest and imprison former President
Slobodan Milosevic by the end of March, and at the same time should assist in
transferring to The Hague at least one person indicted on war crimes charges,
senior Western officials said today.

Washington is not insisting that Mr. Milosevic be transferred immediately to The
Hague, where he is under indictment for war crimes for Serbian actions before
and during the 1999 Kosovo war. But its official policy remains that Mr.
Milosevic face charges in The Hague.

The Americans want the Yugoslav government to state publicly that it will
"ultimately cooperate" with the Hague tribunal on war crimes in the former
Yugoslavia "on international charges against Milosevic"; that it will also
cooperate with the tribunal on any investigation of Mr. Milosevic's assets; and
that it will provide the tribunal access "to documents of real importance."

Belgrade is also being asked to pass a law that would allow transfer of indicted
people to The Hague without making any prior determination of guilt or
innocence.

However pragmatic Washington is trying to be, the American list has touched off
resentment among Serbia's new democrats, who see themselves as no fans of Mr.
Milosevic. But the same politicians are optimistic that a resolution will be
reached.

For American aid to continue, President Bush must certify to Congress by March
31 that the Belgrade government is cooperating with the Dayton agreement,
furthering human rights and cooperating with the Hague tribunal. Otherwise,
nonrelief American aid of $100 million this fiscal year will be cut off; about
half of it is not yet disbursed.

And perhaps most important, the United States will not support aid to Belgrade
from lending institutions like the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund.

After consultations in Washington last week, the American ambassador here,
William D. Montgomery, delivered the demands in a three-page list to President
Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia, Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic of Serbia and
other senior officials.

The list is titled "Specific actions that would contribute to a positive March
31 certification." It includes taking "steps to expel Bosnian Serb indictees"
from Yugoslavia and making all military cooperation with the Bosnian Serb
republic transparent.

It also cites efforts "to help educate the Serbian people" about "the crimes
against humanity committed by Milosevic and others" and the "release of Albanian
detainees" from Serbian prisons.

The list is shaped as guidance, not a dictate. Mr. Bush could decide to certify
Belgrade without every item being addressed. And American officials say the
president is looking for reasons to continue to provide aid to the
post-Milosevic leaders in Belgrade.

But they add that the Bush administration is under pressure to deny
certification for Belgrade from numerous human-rights and nongovernmental
organizations, which see Mr. Kostunica as trying to block Mr. Milosevic's
immediate arrest and extradition to The Hague. Senators Mitch McConnell,
Republican of Kentucky, and Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, have written
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell urging a cutoff of aid.

But the American list and its delivery have bred complaints among senior
Yugoslav officials. Some see it as a form of blackmail of their newly democratic
state and its still fragile judicial and police institutions, which say it has
been challenging so far to gather hard evidence against Mr. Milosevic on crimes
that go beyond the shady purchase of a house.

Washington is not specifying the charges on which it would like Mr. Milosevic
arrested, but just wants him in prison, a senior official noted astringently.
Its list proposes very detailed elements of a draft law on cooperation with The
Hague.

Mr. Kostunica, for his part, indirectly complained about the demands in a long
letter published this week in the magazine NIN. In it he details the problems of
the state, from poverty and the efforts of Montenegro to secede to attacks in
southern Serbia by ethnic Albanian militants in a protected zone where NATO does
not allow Yugoslav troops to enter.

"On top of all these problems, with which, truth to tell, the world has been
doing us more harm than good, comes the story of The Hague and that we must
hurry to give the world concrete proof that we are the good guys," Mr. Kostunica
wrote.

Referring to the American deadline of March 31, he says. "We are required to
honor agreements we never entered into," adding, "We are required to develop
democratic institutions, an independent judiciary, but then immediately,
distrust is voiced in the judiciary, and its jurisdiction in some areas
completely denied."

Mr. Kostunica has regularly criticized the Hague tribunal as biased and legally
suspect, and in his campaign against Mr. Milosevic in September, he promised
that he would not extradite Mr. Milosevic to The Hague.

Last week, however, he conceded that his powers as Yugoslav president could not
stop such an extradition, and he said on Thursday, "I see enough good will on
the part of the European Union and the United States, and I am convinced that
necessary steps toward this cooperation would be made on our part by March 31,
and that this will be sufficient." He said a law on cooperation with The Hague
would soon be passed.

At a minimum, it is expected here that before the end of the month, Mr.
Milosevic will be arrested, that at least one indicted person will be
transferred to The Hague or will be persuaded to surrender, and that a
delegation of Kostunica advisers will travel to The Hague to discuss concrete
steps toward further cooperation with the tribunal.

Most Serbs, the polls say, want Mr. Milosevic punished, but for his domestic
actions first, rather than for charges related to Bosnia. Still, in a change in
opinion, more than half of Serbs now say they would not object if Mr. Milosevic
was extradited to The Hague.

Many officials in the new government, struggling with economic difficulties,
lack of electrical power and the need for foreign investment, do not want
niceties about Mr. Milosevic and legal procedure to block needed aid.

The local press has been full of excited stories based on leaks about Mr.
Milosevic's imminent arrest and charges that he personally benefited from the
sale of gold from the Bor mine in Serbia, for instance. When those charges about
the sale of gold were finally refuted, the newspapers gave little prominence to
that report.

A Western diplomat here called the process of leaks "the shaping of public
opinion," and then said, "Everyone knows Milosevic was guilty of something."

A senior American official said the list was an effort to balance Belgrade's
difficulties with Congress's requirements. "It's a tough but doable list," he
said.

Another official said that even if Mr. Bush did not certify by March 31, he
could do it later, which would mean a resumption of aid.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);
PUBLIC POLICY (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (73%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (61%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;
LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: ERLANGER, STEVEN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); ALBANIA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             319 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Way We Live Now: 3-11-01: The Old Economy;
Pain and Gain

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 414 words


A new study from Amnesty International, titled "Stopping the Torture Trade,"
reports that over the last 10 years the United States has been the world's
biggest exporter of high-tech restraint devices. The market is now dominated by
electronic devices like stun guns, stun batons, stun shields and stun belts --
nonlethal devices that are used by law-enforcement officials all across this
country. Amnesty International has provided the following sample of recent
products and manufacturers or exporters. The human rights group is careful to
note that none of these companies are involved in the production or export of
torture equipment -- merely that this type of equipment has been used for
torture, and that its trade should be more closely regulated.

Arianne International, Palm Beach, Fla.
Produces Myotron "Checkmate" pulse weapon.


Armas No Mortales, Miami
Has sold Sabre tear-gas key rings, Paralyzer shock weapons.

D&D Security Products, Rochester, Minn.
Sells 200-, 300-, and 500,000-volt stun batons, pocket-guard stun guns, Muscle
Man stun guns, Security Plus stun guns, Z-Force stun guns.

Defenders Network, Mobile, Ala.
Has sold Tactical High Voltage Stun Batons and Electrified High-Voltage
Anti-Riot Shields (up to 150,000 volts) "to maintain peace and order without
drawing blood or endangering lives." Exports to Saudi Arabia, Singapore and
Malaysia.

Hiatt Thompson, Bedford Park, Ill.
Has sold Heavy Duty Legcuffs, Hardened Belly Chain. Exports to Australia, the
Caribbean and Western Europe.

Nova Products, Cookeville, Tenn.
Sells Electronic Capture Shields and Telescopic Electronic Restraints.

Premier Crown Corporation, Raleigh, N.C.
Exported 26-inch shock batons with "hot centers" to Saudi Arabia.

Electronic Defense Technology (formerly Stun Tech), Cleveland
Produced and marketed a remote-control electronic stun belt, which delivered a
50,000-volt shock to the kidneys for eight seconds. Now offers a similar device
for the leg or arm, said to be more convenient and to provide a more direct fit
over muscles.

Tamiami International Equipment, Miami
Introduced the Stunbrella, an electronic defense weapon in the shape of a folded
umbrella. (No longer available.)

Taser International Inc, Scottsdale, Ariz.
Produces and exports the Air Taser, which fires two darts -- attached to metal
wires -- that lodge in flesh or clothing and deliver a powerful electric shock
that "jams" the central nervous system.

Valor Corporation, Miami
Has exported tear gas and stun guns to Argentina.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Robin Ballantyne/Omega Foundation)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EXPORT TRADE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
RIOTS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(76%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (75%); MISCONDUCT (74%) POLICE;  TORTURE;  POLICE
BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET

COMPANY: TASER INTERNATIONAL INC (81%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

TICKER: TASR (NASDAQ) (81%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS332994 SMALL ARMS, ORDNANCE & ORDNANCE ACCESSORIES MANUFACTURING
(81%); SIC3484 SMALL ARMS (81%)

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (92%); RALEIGH, NC, USA (78%); ROCHESTER, MN, USA (55%);
MOBILE, AL, USA (54%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); TENNESSEE, USA (79%); ALABAMA,
USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); MALAYSIA
(79%); SINGAPORE (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             321 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Second Trial of New Yorker Jailed in Peru Is Set to Open

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1425 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, March 18


Five years ago a military court here condemned Lori Berenson, a former M.I.T.
student and the daughter of two New York City college professors, to a life
sentence on charges she was involved in a terrorist plan to seize the Peruvian
Congress and take its members hostage.

At that time, with Peru still struggling to quell two Marxist terrorist
insurgencies, Ms. Berenson was not given a chance to rebut the evidence at her
trial. Her lawyer was denied the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses. And the
judges wore masks to hide their identities.

Since then, she has spent much of her time in a frigid prison high in the Andes
reserved for Peru's most notorious terrorists.

On Tuesday, a new trial of Ms. Berenson is scheduled to begin, this time before
a civilian court that the government hopes will show how much the Peruvian
justice system has changed for the better in the four months since Alberto K.
Fujimori resigned as president and fled the country to escape corruption
charges.

Mark and Rhoda Berenson, who have campaigned vigorously to win their daughter's
release, want the case thrown out. They say that a fair trial is still
impossible in Peru and that their daughter faces double jeopardy with a second
trial, which a top military court granted last August after years of pressure
from Washington.

But if government prosecutors have their way, the future for Ms. Berenson, now
31, will not look not much different from the immediate past and she will be
sentenced to a 20-year term on the reduced charge of "terrorist collaboration."

Prosecutors will present much of the same evidence from the first trial. It
reportedly showed that Ms. Berenson, who had long been drawn to leftist causes
in Latin American, posed as a journalist to study the Congress and its security
systems in preparation for an attack by the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement,
a Marxist terrorist group. The group was known for bombings, kidnappings and
taking protection money from drug traffickers.

The attack was intended to take hostages to trade for hundreds of imprisoned
terrorists, the government says, but the security forces foiled the raid in the
planning stages.

The prosecutors will show a forged Peruvian voting identification card bearing
her photo that was found in a 1995 raid on a safe house, and offer testimony by
a convicted terrorist that she served a variety of functions for the Tupac Amaru
group, including renting the safe house and serving the rebels food.

The convicted terrorist, a Panamanian named Pacifico Castrellon, said in a
transcribed interview with the police that he traveled with Ms. Berenson from
Panama to Ecuador, where Ms. Berenson introduced him to Nestor Cerpa, Tupac
Amaru's military leader. Prosecutors will note that while supposedly working as
a reporter in and around Congress she used Mr. Cerpa's wife as her photographer.

Ms. Berenson will proclaim her innocence, say her lawyers, who argue that she
was duped by the terrorists to help their cause. They say the photo
identification could have been planted, noting that the card does not bear her
signature. They argue that several imprisoned terrorists have changed or
amplified previous testimony to say that Ms. Berenson was never a collaborator.
They say that she never knew the true identity of her photographer or others
involved in the planning.

A verdict is several weeks away, if not months. Three judges will hear oral
arguments, and then decide the case by a majority vote. A special court is being
set up for the trial at the San Juan de Lurigancho Prison, outfitted with
television monitors and extra seats. Whatever decision the judges reach may be
appealed to the Supreme Court.

"Lori is a vegetarian," Mark Berenson, her father, told reporters on Thursday.
"She has never even gone hunting or fishing. She could never hurt another human
being. She's been a political football kicked around. It's a sham."

Her mother, Rhoda, said after seeing her daughter this week that Ms. Berenson
continued to suffer the effects of years spent at high altitude and in cold. But
she added, "She is mentally strong and she knows she is innocent and feels that
eventually the truth will be heard."

But Peruvian human rights groups that have long crusaded to free hundreds of
people wrongfully imprisoned by antiterrorist military courts have shunned the
Berenson case.

"Our evaluation is that she deserves a correct, fair trial, but that in a free
court she would be condemned," said Ronald Gamara, a leading human rights
lawyer, in an interview late last year before he joined the transition
government. Mr. Gamara has written a book about innocent people imprisoned under
the Fujimori administration.

Ms. Berenson's political engagement with Latin America began when she was a
student of anthropology at M.I.T. in the 1980's. She protested United States
involvement in El Salvador, and eventually became a private aide to the leader
of the most radical faction of the Salvadoran guerrilla movement, according to
former guerrillas.

She was arrested in Peru on a public bus in November 1995 around the time the
security forces raided the terrorist safe house, where 8,000 rounds of
ammunition and 3,000 sticks of dynamite were found.

Ms. Berenson is roundly unpopular in Peru primarily because of a statement she
made that was televised at the time of her initial judicial proceedings.

"If it is a crime to worry about the subhuman conditions in which the majority
of this population lives, then I will accept my punishment," Ms. Berenson said,
her face showing rage. "Here nobody can deny that in Peru there is much
injustice. There is an institutionalized violence that has killed the people's
finest sons and condemned children to die of hunger."

Ms. Berenson's family and lawyers said she was under great stress when she made
those remarks after spending more than a week in a cell with a guerrilla, a
woman, who was bleeding from gunshot wounds. But in several interviews since she
was imprisoned, Ms. Berenson has refused to criticize the Tupac Amaru group and
she has chosen to remain in the same prison ward with Tupac Amaru prisoners
rather than transfer to wards with prisoners who have repented.

When Tupac Amaru terrorists took hundreds of hostages at the Japanese
ambassador's residence in December 1996, they included Ms. Berenson on a list of
434 imprisoned people whose freedom they demanded in return for the hostages.
After months of negotiations, the terrorists reduced the list to 20, including
Ms. Berenson, according to a former senior Clinton administration official.

President Fujimori ultimately refused to negotiate and all 14 terrorists were
gunned down during the rescue of the 71 hostages they still held.

More than 500 prisoners have been released in recent years after an
investigation by a Peruvian commission found that they had been wrongfully
imprisoned. The panel did not call for Ms. Berenson's release.

For years the Clinton administration urged President Fujimori to grant Ms.
Berenson a new, civilian trial, and in his final days in office President
Clinton called President Valentin Paniagua, who took office late last year, to
ask that she be released.

President Paniagua refused, but promised she would receive a fair trial without
political interference.

In ruling for a second trial, themilitary court said new evidence showed that
Ms. Berenson was not a leader of the terrorist group as originally charged. The
Berenson family and other critics viewed the decision as an attempt by President
Fujimori to improve relations with the United States after his much criticized
re-election in a vote marred by fraud.

Those who say the Berenson case has been political all along point to a
videotaped meeting between Vladimiro Montesinos, Peru's fugitive former spy
chief, and Eduardo Ferrer, then foreign minister, in January 1998, in which they
discussed how to handle a possible new trial for Ms. Berenson. To avert more
criticism of the military courts, the recently released videotape shows, Mr.
Montesinos suggested her case could be transferred to a civilian court where she
could receive a lighter, 10- to 15-year sentence.

Ms. Berenson's family and lawyers say the court system and law enforcement
apparatus remain full of officials appointed during the Fujimori regime despite
its replacement by a new government promising reforms.

"How much influence does Montesinos and former President Fujimori still have?"
asked Ramsey Clark, the former attorney general who is helping in Ms. Berenson's
defense. "Lori is a political prisoner."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Berenson, the father of Lori Berenson, at a news conference
in Lima last week. She was sentenced to life in prison on charges of treason by
a military court in 1996. A civilian retrial is scheduled to begin tomorrow.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); DOUBLE JEOPARDY (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); PRISONS (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); BOMBINGS (73%);
LIBERALISM (73%); EXTORTION (72%); CORRUPTION (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(69%); POLITICS (67%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (67%); WRITERS (62%); VISUAL ARTISTS
(60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  HOSTAGES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  SENTENCES
(CRIMINAL);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  PERU-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT (PERU)

PERSON: BERENSON, LORI; BERENSON, MARK; BERENSON, RHODA; KRAUSS, CLIFFORD;
FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LIMA, PERU (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); ANDES (79%)

COUNTRY: PERU (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); ECUADOR (79%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             329 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 902 words


EUROPE

BELGIUM: NUNS IN GENOCIDE TRIAL -- Four Rwandans, including two Roman Catholic
nuns, went on trial in Brussels charged with taking part in the killing of 5,000
people in Rwanda in 1994. The nuns are accused of helping Hutu soldiers track
down people who had sought refuge in their convent during the massacres that
left an estimated 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu dead in the central African
state.  (Reuters)

GERMANY: RELIC OF WAR -- Chancellor Gerhard Schroder said he would soon visit
the newly discovered grave of his father, a soldier who was killed in Romania
during World War II. Mr. Schroder's elder sister recently traced the site in the
village of Ceanu Mare near the northwestern Romanian city of Cluj, where their
father, Fritz, was killed in action at the age of 32 on Oct. 4, 1944. Mr.
Schroder was born on April 7, 1944, and never met his father.

Victor Homola (NYT)


GREECE: DIPLOMATS ATTACKED -- A car carrying an Israeli diplomat in Athens was
doused with gasoline and set on fire, but no one was injured. Responsibility for
the attack, followed by a similar strike against a Thai embassy vehicle, was
claimed by the Revolutionary Violence Group, the newest addition to a list of
cells raiding foreign missions and businesses.

Anthee Carassava (NYT)

KOSOVO: TAX PROTEST -- Hundreds of Serbs blocked roads to protest a new United
Nations-imposed tax on goods from the rest of Serbia, calling the measure a step
toward secession. Yugoslavia's Interior Minister also complained, saying
Belgrade had not approved the taxes in Kosovo, which is technically still part
of the Yugoslav federation. The United Nations administration has been trying to
rebuild the province's economy, in part by levying duties.  (Agence
France-Presse)

THE AMERICAS

CUBA: BAY OF PIGS REMEMBERED -- President Fidel Castro reaffirmed his commitment
to Communism as Cubans began celebrating the 40th anniversary of victory over
United States-backed forces at the Bay of Pigs. Without American air support,
more than 1,000 invaders were captured in the invasion. Another 100 invaders and
151 defenders died.  (AP)

ASIA --

SRI LANKA: TRUCE VIOLATION -- The government and separatist rebels of the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam blamed each other for a violent clash on Monday
between navy and Tiger boats. The Tigers declared a cease-fire four months ago
and the government had announced one that was to last through the weekend until
yesterday for the Sinhalese and Tamil New Year.

Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

SRI LANKA: AMERICAN WOUNDED -- Marie Colvin, an American journalist working for
The Sunday Times, the British newspaper, was caught in a firefight and hit by
shrapnel as she tried to cross from territory held by Tamil rebels into a
government-controlled area. The government criticized Ms. Colvin for venturing
into rebel territory without authorization.

Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

UZBEKISTAN: OPPONENT FORCED INTO HOSPITAL -- Government-affiliated human rights
representatives said they agreed with the authorities' decision to force a
leading political activist to enter a psychiatric hospital. The New York-based
Human Rights Watch condemned the action against Yelena Urlayev, who had
organized protests against the government, as Soviet-style repression. But the
country's parliamentary human rights ombudsman and the head of the
government-backed national rights center said the diagnosis of paranoid
schizophrenia supported hospitalization.  Douglas Frantz (NYT)

INDIA: STALEMATE OVER BRIBERY INQUIRY -- Parliament reconvened after a
three-week recess only to be paralyzed by opposition demands for a parliamentary
investigation of a journalistic expose of corruption in military procurement
deals. The opposition Congress Party is unwilling to settle for the ruling
coalition's decision to seek an independent inquiry into the charges by a
retired judge.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

PHILIPPINES: ESTRADA CHARGES TRIMMED -- State prosecutors said they were
dropping five of eight criminal charges filed against former President Joseph
Estrada in the hope of winning a swift verdict against him for economic plunder,
a crime punishable by death. Mr. Estrada, toppled in a popular revolt three
months ago, is accused of abusing his position to amass more than $80 million.
(Agence France-Presse)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN, SAUDI ARABIA: SECURITY PACT -- Iran and Saudi Arabia signed an accord to
combat terrorism and drug trafficking, calling it a "big step" in improving
regional security and relations between the two nations. Relations soured after
the 1979 Islamic Revolution brought a radical clerical government to power in
Iran.  (AP)

AFRICA

ERITREA: WITHDRAWAL ANNOUNCED -- Eritrea said it had completed a long-awaited
withdrawal from a buffer zone as part of a peace deal to end its two-year war
with Ethiopia. If confirmed, the move would represent progress in the effort to
settle a border dispute between the Horn of Africa neighbors under United
Nations supervision.  (Reuters)

NIGERIA: SHARIAH VIGILANTES -- Islamic vigilantes burned down bars and
restaurants in the capital of the northern state of Kano in a drive to enforce
strict Muslim Shariah law. Residents said Shariah enforcers had been on the
rampage since last week, attacking mainly at night. Kano, which adopted Shariah
last November, is among half a dozen Nigerian states to have introduced it, but
Islamic fundamentalists say enforcement has been lax.  (Reuters)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Map of Nigeria highlighting Kano.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (86%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%);
ARSON (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WORLD WAR II (77%); ANNIVERSARIES
(75%); RELIGION (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); TAXES &
TAXATION (67%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (66%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (65%);
APPROVALS (64%); WRITERS (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (53%)

PERSON: GERHARD SCHRODER (75%); FIDEL CASTRO (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (74%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA (93%); ROMANIA (92%); CENTRAL
AFRICA (92%); SRI LANKA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); EUROPE (92%); BELGIUM (91%); CUBA
(90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); NIGERIA (79%); GREECE (79%); ASIA (79%);
GERMANY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             332 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Labor Standards Clash With Global Reality

BYLINE:  By LESLIE KAUFMAN and DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2729 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


Six years ago, Abigail Martinez earned 55 cents an hour sewing cotton tops and
khaki pants. Back then, she says, workers were made to spend 18-hour days in an
unventilated factory with undrinkable water. Employees who displeased the bosses
were denied bathroom breaks or occasionally made to sweep outside all morning in
the broiling sun.

Today, she and other workers have coffee breaks and lunch on an outdoor terrace
cafeteria. Bathrooms are unlocked, the factory is breezy and clean, and
employees can complain to a board of independent monitors if they feel abused.

The changes are the result of efforts by Gap, the big clothing chain, to improve
working conditions at this independent factory, one of many that supply its
clothes.

Yet Ms. Martinez today earns 60 cents an hour, only 5 cents more an hour than
six years ago.

In some ways, the factory, called Charter, shows what Western companies can do
to discourage abuse by suppliers. But Gap's experience also demonstrates the
limits to good intentions when first-world appetites collide with third-world
realities.

Ms. Martinez's hours are still long, production quotas are high, and her
earnings are still not enough to live on. She shares a two-room concrete home
with a sister, two brothers, her parents and a grandmother.

Yet the real alternative in this impoverished nation is no work. And government
officials won't raise the minimum wage or even enforce labor laws too rigorously
for fear that employers would simply move many jobs to another poor country.

The lesson from Gap's experience in El Salvador is that competing interests
among factory owners, government officials, American managers and middle-class
consumers -- all with their eyes on the lowest possible cost -- make it
difficult to achieve even basic standards, and even harder to maintain them.

"Some have suggested that there are simple or magic solutions to ensure that
labor standards are applied globally," said Aron Cramer, director of human
rights at Business for Social Responsibility, a nonprofit advocacy group that
receives support from business. "In fact, it takes a great deal of work."

Fed up with abusive conditions, Ms. Martinez and a small group of other workers
organized and began to hold strikes at the factory, then called Mandarin
International, in 1995. As tension rose, workers took over the factory and shut
down power to the plant. Security guards forcibly ejected strikers; union
members said the guards dragged women out by their hair and clubbed them with
guns. The factory's owners fired hundreds, including Ms. Martinez.

It might have ended that way, except that it occurred just as concern about
sweatshops was rising in the United States. Groups like the National Labor
Committee, a union-backed, workers advocacy group based in New York, had formed
to oppose sweatshops. Mandarin offered a media-ready case of abuse, and the
revolt was widely publicized.

Still, two of the four retailers using Mandarin left after the protests -- J. C.
Penney and Dayton Hudson (now Target). Eddie Bauer, a unit of Spiegel Inc.,
suspended its contract. Gap Inc., which is based in San Francisco, intended to
quit, too, but a group of Mandarin workers pleaded with the company to save
their jobs. Some blamed union organizers for the trouble. "Problems were made to
look worse by the union," said one employee, Lucia Alvarado, who has worked at
the factory for eight years.

Gap executives chose to stay after deciding that all the groups involved --
workers, labor activists and factory owners -- were willing to make changes. The
workers were expected to stop disrupting the plant, and managers had to agree to
more humane practices and to accept outside monitors.

To make sure the changes stuck and to arbitrate disputes, Gap decided to try the
then innovative idea of hiring local union, religious and academic leaders as
independent monitors who would meet regularly with workers to hear complaints,
investigate problems and look over the books.

"It's not a paradise," said Carolina Quinteros, co-director of the Independent
Monitoring Group of El Salvador, as the monitors call themselves. "But at least
it works better than others down here. They don't have labor or human rights
violations."

The push for change ranges far beyond the Charter factory, or El Salvador.
Today, activists on college campuses are calling for an end to sweatshops
everywhere.  As recently as this past weekend in Quebec, world trade officials
debated how to clean up those operations, and the United States has pushed
developing countries to raise pay and working conditions in thousands of plants
from Bangladesh to Brazil.

Results, however, have been negligible. The basic problem is that jobs and
capital can move fast these days, as the president of El Salvador, Francisco
Flores, is keenly aware. "The difficulty in this region is that there is labor
that is more competitively priced than El Salvador," he said.

Here, as in many other countries, labor advocates say the problem is made worse
by the government's cozy ties with factory owners. When a Labor Ministry
committee issued a report critical of forced overtime, poor safety and threats
against labor organizers, factory owners complained. The government swiftly
withdrew and disowned it.

Salvadoran officials and business leaders have also objected to monitors Gap has
hired to police working conditions. They contend that the group is a tool of
unions that want to keep jobs from leaving the United States -- or a leftist
anti-government front, a suspicion left over from El Salvador's long civil war,
which ended in 1992.

Then there is practicality. Gap spends $10,000 a year for the independent
monitors at Charter, which is owned by Taiwanese investors, and thousands more
for management time to arbitrate disputes and for its own company monitors to
recheck the facts on the ground. For the company to duplicate these intensive
efforts at each of the 4,000 independent factories it contracts with would have
taken about 4.5 percent of its annual profit of $877 million last year.

In a world where costs are measured in pennies, that percentage would be a
significant burden. Wal-Mart and Kmart are praised by investors for relentlessly
driving down costs, but they have much less comprehensive monitoring programs.

Gap says that expense and staff time are not even its main concerns. The
experiment in El Salvador has only reinforced the company's conviction that
companies cannot substitute for governments indifferent to enforcing laws. Also,
it said, retailers have limited power over their independent contractors. Either
they pull out, which would punish innocent workers, or they must accede to a
slow process where they must cajole and bully for every bit of progress.

"We are not the all-powerful Oz that rules over what happens in every factory,"
said Elliot Schrage, Gap's senior vice president for global affairs. "Do we have
leverage? Yes. Is it as great as our critics believe? Not by a long shot."

Sitting Down
Monitoring Effort Enlists Outsiders

Still, monitoring is the sweatshop opponents' great hope. Watchdog groups say
that only people outside of the company can win the trust of workers and
evaluate complaints. "That is where you get problems that won't show up in paper
records and interviews with management," said Sam Brown, executive director of
the Fair Labor Association, a labor advocacy group in Washington.

At the time, however, no one had ever done it, said Mr. Brown, who is a former
Ambassador to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and past
director of Action, federal domestic volunteer agency.

Gap's efforts are still in many ways a blueprint for the international labor
advocacy movement -- since 1995 other companies like Liz Claiborne and Reebok
have attempted to start similar programs. But what has actually happened in El
Salvador is a process that lasted longer, cost more and achieved less than what
many people had hoped for. "We knew it would be hard," Mr. Schrage said. "But
it's been harder than we ever imagined."

The company has found that no aspect of its efforts escapes local politics. On
the recommendation of Charles Kernaghan, the director of the National Labor
Council, Gap turned to the legal aid office of the Archdiocese of San Salvador
and to the Jesuit University here. Earlier, both institutions had helped uncover
abuses in the plant, which to Gap demonstrated their experience and independence
from management. But both also had a history of sympathy for the Farabundo Marti
National Liberation Front, a coalition of rebel groups and political parties
during the civil war. The coalition is known as the F.M.L.N., its initials in
Spanish.

"When companies see me, they see someone to the left of the F.M.L.N.," said
Benjamin Cuellar, the director of the Institute for Human Rights at the
University of Central America here who is also on the board of independent
monitors. That view manifests itself in mistrust and resistance by managers, he
said.

Beyond politics, Gap says it is not easy to impose its will on contractors
simply because it is a major customer. Pedro Mancia, the factory's manager,
indicated that he looks on the monitors as an annoyance, not a threat. In his
view, the only meaningful role they played was in easing tensions among the
workers themselves after the 1995 strike.

That event "was not between management and workers," Mr. Mancia argued. "We had
two warring factions of unions and they could not sit down together."

Factory managers agreed to accept monitors mostly to avoid losing Gap and going
out of business. Still, trust is tenuous and the managers have found ways --
subtle and not so subtle -- to resist, monitors say.

It took about a year to rehire all of the workers fired during the 1995 strike,
for example. And 30 of those rehired in 1997 were fired again recently, not
because they were strikers but because the company said they were not productive
enough. "They are playing by the rules of the game," said one member of the
monitoring group. "But I'm not much in agreement with the rules of the game."

Gap says that this project has taught it the limit of its own influence. "We
can't be the whole solution," Mr. Schrage said. "The solution has to be labor
laws that are adequate, respected and enforced. One of the problems in El
Salvador is that that was not happening and is not happening."

Moving On
Economic Obstacles Impede Reforms

Before dawn each day, Flor de Maria Hernandez leaves her three children in the
tent where they have lived since an earthquake leveled her home earlier this
year and begins her two-hour commute to the Charter clothing factory.

She and the others, like Ms. Martinez, must be at work before 7 a.m. Managers
close the gate precisely on the hour and dock the pay of anyone who is late.

Inside, rows of sewing machines face blackboards on which supervisors have
written the daily quotas for shirts and trousers, roughly 2,000 a day for each
line of 36 machines. The pace is relentless, but by local standards it is a
pleasant place to work. There are lockers, tiled bathrooms, a medical clinic and
an outdoor cafeteria. Large fans and high ceilings keep temperatures down.

But Ms. Martinez remembers just what it took to get this far. She was among the
workers who protested the abusive conditions in 1995. "Workers would bring in
permission slips from their doctors to go to the hospital," she recalled, "and
supervisors would rip it up in their faces."

Of the 70,000 garment workers in El Salvador, 80 percent are women. Few earn
enough to take care of their families. Ms. Hernandez, for example, earns about
$30 a week inspecting clothes. It is not enough to feed her children; to make
ends meet, she relies on help from her ex-husband.

She keeps her job because the most common alternative is to work as a live-in
maid or a street vendor. Jobs cutting sugar cane in the searing sun, once
plentiful, are difficult to find now, and wages have fallen in recent years
along with commodity prices.

El Salvador, never a wealthy country, is struggling every bit as hard as its
people. Roughly 75,000 people were killed and thousands wounded in the civil
war. The war also drove away foreign investment, shuttered relatively
high-paying electronics factories and left roads, power lines and other basic
services in tatters.

Earlier this year, two powerful earthquakes compounded the difficulties by
wrecking hundreds of thousands of buildings. Economists estimate that 180,000
Salvadorans are jobless. Almost half of the population lives in poverty.

The government has gone out of its way to attract investment and jobs.
Government leaders pin the country's future on the optimistic hope of doubling
the number of factories making clothes for the United States, to more than 400,
in three years.  "Maquilas have been a source of significant economic growth in
recent years," President Flores said using the Spanish term for the plants that
enjoy tax and trade benefits. "They are the most dynamic economic sector in the
country."

That growth, however, has not been matched by the budget of the Labor Ministry,
which is among the worst-financed agencies. It employs only 37 labor inspectors
to enforce regulations -- 1 for every 10 factories, not including coffee
plantations, construction sites or other places of business in this country,
which has 6.1 million people.

The limits of the government's willingness to be an advocate for labor was
illustrated last summer when it suppressed the report critical of factory
working conditions. The labor minister, Jorge Nieto, said that the report was
technically flawed, and insists that the government intends to modernize his
agency and improve inspector training. "We want investment, but only with
respect and fairness," he said. "Only when workers' rights are respected can we
generate more contracts with American companies."

But to get those contracts, El Salvador must compete with neighbors like
Honduras and Nicaragua, where wages are lower and the population even poorer and
more eager for work. Government officials and factory managers concede that El
Salvador's current minimum wage is not enough to live on -- by some estimates it
covers less than half of the basic needs of a family of four -- but they are
wary of increasing it.

"We cannot be satisfied with the wage, but we have to acknowledge the economic
realities," Mr. Nieto said.

Since Gap pioneered the independent monitoring effort, few other American
companies have followed. They cite costs, politics and questionable
effectiveness. Gap executives echo those worries when they assess the experience
at Charter.

"We are in a very competitive marketplace," said Mr. Schrage of Gap. "Consumers
make decisions on lots of factors, including price. There is no clear benefit in
having invested in independent monitoring to a consumer and it is not clear if
we were to make it more broad policy that consumers would get a benefit or care
at all."

As she shopped at the Gap flagship store at Herald Square in Manhattan, Claire
Cosslett fingered an aqua cotton T-shirt made in El Salvador to check for
quality. Ms. Cosslett, a legal recruiter, said she reads labels and sometimes
worries that her garments are "made by some child chained to a sewing machine."

American companies dread comments like that. Yet for all their fears, they
ultimately have to balance their concern over image, and any feelings they have
about third-world workers, with customers' attitudes. Then there are the
competitive pressures to keep costs low. Would the cost of raising working
standards in El Salvador raise the price of a T-shirt enough to drive off
customers?

Among several shoppers who were interviewed at the Manhattan store, Ms. Cosslett
was the only one to say that reports of sweatshop conditions had stopped her
from buying a particular brand. She said she would be willing to pay more for a
garment made under better working conditions.

But then she paused and hedged. "It would depend how much," she said.

About These Articles

Articles in this series are examining third-world production for first-world
markets. Previous articles described dangerous working conditions at a garment
factory in Bangladesh, and life in factories along the border between the United
States and Mexico. Later articles will include reports on child labor and union
organizing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

SERIES: MADE IN SQUALOR: Reform Has Limits

GRAPHIC: Photos: Garment workers sew T-shirts at Charter, a factory in El
Salvador that manufactures clothing for Gap. (Cindy Karp for The New York
Times)(pg. A1); AT HOME -- Abigail Martinez, a Charter worker, watches her
mother cook in their two-room house, shared by seven family members.; UNDER
GUARD -- Employees enter the industrial park that is home to Mandarin, site of a
1995 strike that led to a new approach of hiring outsiders to monitor
conditions.; RUSH HOUR -- Workers run to catch buses home from jobs at the
Charter factory in San Salvador. Some commute for two hours. (Photographs by
Cindy Karp for The New York Times)(pg. A10) Graph: "A Trade Shift"The shift in
El Salvador's exports. Graphs track Food Exports (includes coffee, shrimp and
sugar) and Maquilla Sector (Factories producing exports) since 1994.(Source:
Central Bank of El Salvador)(pg. A10) Map of El Salvador highlights San
Salvador: El Salvador must compete with poor neighbors to attract investments.
(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); APPAREL MFG
(90%); EMPLOYMENT (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (89%); SWEATSHOPS (89%); LABOR UNIONS
(78%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); MINIMUM WAGE (78%); COMPANY EARNINGS (78%);
LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (77%); ENTERPRISE GLOBALIZATION (74%); CLOTHING &
ACCESSORIES STORES (74%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (72%); RETAILERS (69%); CORPORATE
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (68%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (67%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS
(66%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (64%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (61%) LABOR;
FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANTS;  SWEATSHOPS;  WAGES AND SALARIES;
MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES;  RETAIL STORES AND TRADE;  APPAREL;  THIRD WORLD AND
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES;  SURVEYS AND SERIES;  WORKING HOURS

ORGANIZATION: GAP INC

PERSON: KAUFMAN, LESLIE; GONZALEZ, DAVID

CITY: SAN SALVADOR, EL SALVADOR (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); BRAZIL (79%)

REGION: EL SALVADOR;  BRAZIL;  BANGLADESH

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             333 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rwandans on Trial

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 527 words


Seven years after a state-orchestrated genocide claimed the lives of more than
half a million ethnic Tutsi in Rwanda, the world is still struggling to
establish a measure of accountability for the mass killings. In a courtroom in
Brussels this month, four Rwandan Hutu are being tried on charges of complicity
in the 1994 slaughter. The trial marks the first time that a jury of civilians
from one country is being asked to judge people accused of war crimes committed
in another. By expanding the doctrine of universal jurisdiction for crimes
against humanity, the case opens a promising new frontier in the evolution of
international criminal law.

The four defendants -- two nuns, a physics professor and a businessman -- have
been charged under Belgian laws adopted to comply with international human
rights conventions. The four defendants are accused of collaborating with ethnic
Hutu militias in several instances of killing.

The trial in Brussels supplements criminal proceedings in Africa that are
seeking with mixed results to achieve justice for the genocide. The
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, established by the United Nations in
Arusha, Tanzania, has so far convicted eight people of war crimes. Nine more are
currently on trial, including several high-ranking former government officials
alleged to be ringleaders in the genocide. In Rwanda itself several thousand
mostly low-level people have been tried in proceedings that fall far short of
international due process standards.

Ideally, trials should be conducted in the country where the crimes occurred,
but Rwanda lacks the resources and judicial expertise to provide adequate
trials. The accused in Brussels were wealthy and well connected enough to be
able to flee their own country. The two nuns are accused of betraying as many as
5,000 Tutsi who had sought sanctuary in their convent. The charges against the
professor and the businessman could shed light on the importance of
intellectuals and commerce in rationalizing and financing the massacres.

Belgium bears a measure of responsibility for the massacres in Rwanda. As
Rwanda's former colonial master, Belgium helped lay the historical groundwork
for the genocide with a system of indirect rule that for half a century favored
Rwanda's small minority Tutsi population at the expense of the majority Hutu.
When Hutu militias began killing Tutsi in the spring of 1994, Belgium pulled out
of a United Nations peacekeeping force after 10 Belgian soldiers were killed.
That abrupt departure prompted the withdrawal of most of the rest of the U.N.
force. The United States also blocked effective U.N. action in Rwanda, leaving
Rwanda's Tutsi to their fate.

The principle of universal jurisdiction is based on a recognition that certain
crimes are so serious that all of humanity has reason to bring the perpetrators
to justice. This case builds on the momentum generated by the indictment by a
Spanish court of the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in 1998 on human
rights charges. Crimes against humanity are an affront to people everywhere, and
there should be no sanctuary for those responsible for the violence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMINAL
LAW (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
JURISDICTION (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (76%); DUE PROCESS (75%); PEACEKEEPING (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (66%) EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (55%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (90%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); BELGIUM (94%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); CHILE
(79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: RWANDA;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             340 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru Ex-President, Trailing, Links Election Foe to Cocaine Use

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 20


Facing an uphill battle to regain the presidency, former President Alan Garcia
has tied his opponent, Alejandro Toledo, to the use of cocaine.

In a televised debate on Saturday night, Mr. Garcia said: "Nobody has ever
charged me with consuming cocaine. A consumer of cocaine cannot be the leader of
a country."

He a was referring to published reports that Mr. Toledo, a former business
professor and World Bank official, had tested positive for cocaine during a
hospital visit in 1998 on the same day he was reportedly consorting with three
women.

In the past, Mr. Toledo said he had been kidnapped by intelligence agents
working for Alberto K. Fujimori, who was president then, in an effort to
embarrass him. But during the debate, Mr. Toledo did not respond to Mr. Garcia's
attack.

For most of the debate, the two candidates agreed on many issues. They both said
they would raise teacher salaries, promote tourism, give more financing to local
governments and encourage foreign investment. Both said their primary goal was
to create jobs in a country where unemployment and underemployment approach half
the work force.

But during the hour-and-a-half debate, some sparks flew.

Mr. Toledo, who led the opposition against Mr. Fujimori and dropped out of an
election campaign roundly considered fraudulent last year, attacked Mr. Garcia
for the record of his 1985-90 term in office, which is widely remembered for
corruption, hyperinflation, terrorism, army massacres and food rationing.

"Let me remind you," Mr. Toledo said, addressing Mr. Garcia, "that during your
1985-1990 government you left one million workers in the street. How can you say
jobs are now your central objective?"

After Mr. Garcia attacked him on the cocaine matter, Mr. Toledo recalled that
2,600 people disappeared during Mr. Garcia's term as the government struggled
against two terrorist groups.

"Mr. Garcia, it is inconceivable that you speak of human rights, the struggle
against corruption and against narcotics trafficking when you have pending legal
charges," Mr. Toledo said.

Mr. Garcia went into exile in 1992 to escape charges that he said were the
product of President Fujimori's manipulation of the judicial system. The Supreme
Court has since dismissed the charges, although his opponents have sought to
bring new corruption complaints against him.

Mr. Fujimori fled to Japan and resigned late last year to escape charges arising
from a number of corruption scandals. The Congress appointed Valentin Paniagua,
one of its members, to serve as interim president until an elected president is
inaugurated on July 28.

Most political experts said the debate between Mr. Garcia and Mr. Toledo was a
stalemate and would not decide the outcome of the election. A poll published in
the newspaper El Comercio on Saturday showed Mr. Toledo with a sizable 61-to-39
percent lead over Mr. Garcia among voters ready to cast ballots.

But the poll, taken by Datum Internacional, said 31 percent of the 2,000 voters
surveyed said they intended to leave their ballots blank or spoil them to show
their displeasure with both candidates. The poll had a margin of error of 2.2
percent.

"If the polls are right, Garcia needed a knockout punch, and he didn't get it,"
Enrique Zileri, editor of the political magazine Caretas, said after the debate.
But he and other experts said the debate signaled that the final weeks of the
campaign would probably be very dirty.

The second-round runoff is expected on June 3, but may be delayed because of
technical complications arising from delays in the final vote count of the first
round in April.

Signaling that he would press the drug issue, Mr. Garcia said in a news
conference after the debate, "A president who takes cocaine is a bad example for
youth." Referring to Mr. Toledo, he added, "That's something he didn't address."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COCAINE (93%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (90%); CORRUPTION (89%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (89%);
APPOINTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%);
POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); DRUG TESTING (78%);
DEVELOPMENT BANKS (76%); ECONOMIC NEWS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%);
POLITICAL SCANDALS (74%); SCANDALS (74%); LABOR FORCE (73%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES
(73%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (73%); JOB CREATION (72%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (72%);
TEACHING & TEACHERS (71%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (71%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); TRENDS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); WAGES &
SALARIES (68%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (67%); HYPERINFLATION (64%); SUPREME COURTS
(60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); TOURISM (54%); TEACHER COMPENSATION (53%);
FOREIGN INVESTMENT (52%) ELECTIONS;  DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  COCAINE AND CRACK
COCAINE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  FOOD;  RATIONING AND ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES;
PUBLIC OPINION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ELECTION ISSUES

PERSON: GARCIA, ALAN; TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO; KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

CITY: LIMA, PERU (79%)

COUNTRY: PERU (94%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             342 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
The Erosion of Political Reform in Guatemala

BYLINE:  By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 683 words


In 1978, a series of earthquakes struck Guatemala, killing 40,000 people. Among
those who went to help was Sister Barbara Ann Ford, a 40-year-old American nun
from the Bronx-based Sisters of Charity. Sister Barbara, a registered nurse,
spent most of the next 22 years in Quiche Province, the crucible of suffering
during Guatemala's civil war and the site of 344 massacres of Mayan Indians.
Sister Barbara braved death threats to help the villagers get clean water,
midwife training and mental health treatment. When the peace accords ending the
36-year war were signed in 1996, she helped the Catholic Archdiocese collect
testimonies about wartime killings and organized the exhumation of graves and
counseling to help the survivors.

Last month, Sister Barbara was shot to death in Guatemala City by two men who
stole her pickup truck, which was then abandoned a few blocks away. The crime
may have been a carjacking, which is common in Guatemala. But even some
government officials have said they suspect otherwise. Human rights workers
believe her murder is part of a wave of intimidation and attacks on activists in
Guatemala.

The intimidation is one disturbing sign that former and active-duty military
officers and their allies are increasing their influence inside the government.
President Alfonso Portillo has appointed several democrats committed to carrying
out the changes outlined in Guatemala's peace accords. But these aides are a
minority, and they are increasingly dominated by other appointees who belong to
factions of the Guatemalan Republican Front. The party is led by former Gen.
Efrain Rios Montt, who ruled the country during the war's worst atrocities --
Guatemala's truth commission called them genocide -- and now is president of the
Congress. President Portillo may have good intentions, but he seems unable to
stand up to the hard-liners.

The Portillo administration achieved a milestone in bringing two army officers
to trial for the 1998 murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi. Bishop Gerardi was the
principal author of the church's extensive report on wartime abuses, which
blamed the government and military for the vast majority of the war's 200,000
dead. He was murdered just two days after the report's release.

The two officers are not accused of ordering the killing -- those who did still
escape justice. Recently, the house of the judge in the case was assaulted with
hand grenades -- one of a series of attacks on judges, prosecutors and witnesses
in the case. This trial, moreover, is a lonely exception. Since just after Mr.
Portillo's inauguration last year, the country's activists on behalf of Mayans
and war victims have been attacked, their headquarters have been raided and some
have been raped or murdered. No one has been arrested for these crimes.

When he came into office, President Portillo reduced the size of the army and
fired some of the worst officers. But further changes have dragged out or been
reversed. In part, this is because the wealthy are unwilling to pay taxes to
finance needed reforms. While 45 percent of primary-school-age children have no
access to school, Guatemala's tax burden is an absurdly low 8.7 percent of gross
national product -- in the United States the figure is 20 percent.  Guatemala's
intelligence services, the most sinister organizations of the war, are supposed
to pass to civilian control but are still in the hands of military men with
shadowy pasts and still operate without civilian oversight.

In 1993, then-President Jorge Serrano tried to seize dictatorial powers with the
help of Guatemala's army. A week later he was deposed by a broad coalition
backed by the United States and including business leaders who feared that the
coup would endanger Guatemala's foreign trade. Undemocratic forces in Guatemala
today are more subtle than Mr. Serrano, but they still pose a threat. The United
States has backed the peace accords, but should now make clear to Guatemalans
that only a government committed to abandoning the terror and discrimination of
the past will be fully accepted into the community of nations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); MURDER (89%); ARMIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EARTHQUAKES (78%);
HOMICIDE (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); ASSAULT &
BATTERY (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); WITNESSES (74%); TESTIMONY
(74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CARJACKING (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
APPOINTMENTS (73%); MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); MENTAL HEALTH
PRACTICE (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); NURSES & NURSING (72%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); MENTAL HEALTH (70%); POLITICS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (70%); ARRESTS (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS (66%); JUDGES (66%); ARMED
FORCES (66%); MIDWIVES (55%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED
MURDERS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: FORD, BARBARA ANN (SISTER); ROSENBERG, TINA; PORTILLO, ALFONSO (PRES)

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             345 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Tenacious Hold Of Repression in Iran

BYLINE:  By Geneive Abdo;  Geneive Abdo, former Tehran correspondent for The
Guardian of London, is the author of "No God But God: Egypt and the Triumph of
Islam."

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As Mohammad Khatami campaigned across Iran before his re-election last Friday,
claiming his government never compromised on its pledge to establish democracy,
one of his closest aides was attacked in his car by hard-line vigilantes, a man
accused of spying for the United States was executed and a woman was stoned to
death for staring in lewd films.

Iranians handed Mr. Khatami his landslide victory -- 77.8 percent of the vote --
with the hope that his second term in office might end such violations of
justice and human rights, which have continued virtually unabated since he took
office in 1997. Their determination to try to reverse decades of repression was
clear in the relatively high voter turnout.

But such fundamental change is not in Mr. Khatami's power, despite his solid
mandate. The "other" government -- made up of hard-line and conservative clerics
and their foot soldiers, the Islamic extremists -- is likely to continue to run
Iran while the state that Mr. Khatami purports to lead remains on the sidelines.

In fact, Mr. Khatami's presence may help the clerical establishment survive
challenges to its religious and ideological legitimacy. The conservatives in
power, some of whom are Mr. Khatami's rivals, have distorted the meaning of
Shiite Islam to such a degree that theologians who oppose the intervention of
clerics in politics have made the bold gesture of publicly criticizing them.
Iran's young people, who largely support an Islamic system in principle, are
growing pessimistic that this regime can fuse Islamic ideals with their modern
needs. And most of those with any promise of truly reforming Iran from outside
the system -- journalists, political activists and progressive clerics -- are
now in jail.

The greatest achievement of Mr. Khatami's first term was that he kept the lid on
extremes within an increasingly polarized society. He complained publicly when
hard-liners deployed Islamic vigilantes to attack perceived threats to the
regime. And he dissuaded the radical faction within his own reform movement from
taking to the streets to protest the escalating repression.

Generally unnoticed in the West is the degree to which these proponents of
reform have lost faith in the president they helped raise to power. Reclaiming
his lost credibility is Mr. Khatami's greatest challenge in his second term. By
handing him a strong mandate, his supporters have applied far more pressure on
him to deliver on his agenda. The difficulty of his position is compounded by
the clerical establishment's resolve never to relinquish power.

Even if Mr. Khatami decides in his new term to defend those who are imprisoned
and censored, he lacks power under the constitution to turn a presidential
protest into policy. When Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and his revolutionaries
established the Islamic republic, power was focused in the post of supreme
clerical leader. Today that leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, wields more direct
political power than Mr. Khomeini ever did.

Recently much has been made of a "centrist movement" or "third force" emerging
to bridge the gap between hard-liners and those who advocate a pluralistic
system. This idea, first floated about three years ago, has been resurrected by
moderate conservatives who are using the euphoria surrounding the election to
inspire hope in the West that reform can still come to Iran. Such optimism may
bring foreign investment, and some conservatives, including the well-established
merchants and those entrepreneurs close to former President Hashemi Rafsanjani,
have much to gain if Conoco begins pumping Iran's oil from antiquated fields and
Coca-Cola reappears in the kiosks.

Iran's journey toward democracy and religious tolerance began a century ago with
the Constitutional Revolution, which temporarily displaced the absolute monarchy
with a fractious attempt at republicanism. At different intervals since then,
windows of freedom have opened briefly and then closed. The achievement of
freedom in the long term depends on the will of the Iranian people and the
conservatives' willingness to make concessions -- not on Mr. Khatami's flowing
rhetoric.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Thomas Fuchs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (86%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); CENSORSHIP (76%); CORRECTIONS (75%);
ESPIONAGE (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (70%); ARMED FORCES (67%); CHURCH & STATE
(66%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ELECTIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  ISLAM;  CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (58%) KHATAMI, MOHAMMAD (PRES); ABDO, GENEIVE

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             346 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Peru: More Pressure On Fujimori

BYLINE:  By Clifford Krauss (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 72 words


A congressional committee investigating former President Alberto K. Fujimori,
who fled to Japan last fall, has called on him to answer charges that he was
involved in human rights violations. Congress will determine whether the charges
should be pursued. In another congressional report, the new armed forces chief,
Gen. Miguel Medina, was accused of illegal actions in an arms deal with Russia
in 1996.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); POLITICS (86%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K; KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             349 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Russia: Arrests In Chechnya Killings

BYLINE:  By Sabrina Tavernise (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 83 words


Nineteen Russian soldiers were arrested for the suspected murder of several
civilians in the separatist republic, the Interfax news agency reported, citing
a pro-Russian Chechen official. Russian officials said only that Russian
soldiers had killed several Chechens who the soldiers said were stealing oil,
and that the incident was being investigated. Chechens and human rights groups
have accused the Russian military of widespread abuses during their war with
rebels.
   Sabrina Tavernise (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOMICIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (83%); MURDER (58%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

PERSON: TAVERNISE, SABRINA

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             353 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World on Trial In American Courts

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 152 words


To the Editor:

"U.S. Courts Become Arbiters of Global Rights and Wrongs" (front page, June 21)
rightly points out that in an increasingly globalized world, domestic courts are
beginning to extend their jurisdiction to embrace a more international approach
toward human rights.

This is also exactly the direction in which the impending International Criminal
Court will take the international cause of human rights and justice.

However, fear of this new conception of international jurisdiction is also the
principle on which the Bush administration bases its opposition to the court.

The court will ensure that perpetrators of crimes against humanity, genocide and
war crimes will be brought to justice wherever they live, and under
internationally accepted definitions of crimes and judicial standards.

DANIEL SKINNER
Brooklyn, June 21, 2001

The writer is media director at the New York Law and Justice Project.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JURISDICTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GLOBALIZATION (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); WAR CRIMES (87%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); GENOCIDE
(71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%) COURTS

ORGANIZATION: GLOBAL RIGHTS (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)

PERSON: KOPPEL, JOHN S

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             356 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 5, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In China Labor Camp, Deaths Are Disputed

BYLINE:  By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI, July 4


Chinese officials today confirmed reports that followers of the banned spiritual
movement Falun Gong had died in a northeastern Chinese labor camp, but
information about the circumstances remained contradictory. The government said
the followers died in a mass suicide, while Falun Gong members in the United
States insisted they were tortured to death.

A judicial official in northeastern Heilongjiang Province, Lan Jingli, told The
Associated Press that 14 followers hanged themselves from bunk beds with strips
of sheeting at the province's Wanjia labor camp before dawn on June 20. The 14
women who died were among 25 followers who staged the mass suicide during a
five-minute interval between checks by camp guards, he said. He said the guards
discovered the suicides in time to save 11.

"One minute is enough to kill," Mr. Lan said, adding that Beijing had ordered
that jailed Falun Gong followers now be kept under constant watch.

He suggested that Falun Gong followers who continue to disseminate messages in
China from the group's United States-based founder, Li Hongzhi, may be partly
responsible for the deaths.

"Those organizations are using all possible channels to pass on the so-called
'instructions' to the practitioners in the reform camp in order to make them
believe that going to heaven after their death is the highest level of
practicing," Mr. Lan said.

Three days after the deaths and after reports of beatings had been posted on the
sect's Web site (www.clearwisdom.net), Mr. Li wrote that even if a follower
"casts off his human skin during the persecution, what awaits him is still
Consummation," the goal of all followers.

A spokesman for the central government's State Council Information Office,
meanwhile, told the news agency that three women died and eight were rescued,
and that the suicides took place on June 21, not June 20. Officials at the labor
camp could not be reached for comment.

The incident was first reported by the Hong Kong-based Information Center for
Human Rights and Democracy, which said at least 10 Falun Gong followers had died
among 16 who attempted suicide. The group cited a family member of one of the 16
who said the suicides were to protest an extension of the followers' sentences
by up to six months to punish them for a hunger strike.

Falun Gong followers in the United States said suicide violates Mr. Li's
teachings and continued to say that 15 women died at the camp from torture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Followers of Falun Gong conducting exercises yesterday outside
the office of Beijing's representative in Hong Kong. The sect says that
followers who died in a labor camp in China were tortured. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CULTS & SECTS (90%); SUICIDE (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (60%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  SUICIDES AND SUICIDE
ATTEMPTS

ORGANIZATION: FALUN GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

PERSON: SMITH, CRAIG S; LI HONGZHI

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); HEILONGJIANG, CHINA
(92%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); HONG KONG (92%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             358 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Elliott Abrams's Return

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 164 words


To the Editor:

The appointment of Elliott Abrams as human rights adviser to the National
Security Council (news article, June 30) is a cynical attempt to rewrite
history. As an assistant secretary of state under President Ronald Reagan, Mr.

Abrams lied so blatantly to Congress in 1986 about the Iran-contra scandal that
when indicted in 1991 he had no choice but to plead guilty. (President George
Bush pardoned him the following year.)

Mr. Abrams also misled Congress about human rights in El Salvador. He dismissed
reports of the El Mozote massacre as left-wing propaganda. He overstated the
Salvadoran Army's efforts to crack down on human rights abusers. He even
deflected criticism of the death squad leader Roberto d'Aubuisson.

Truth commission witnesses in Guatemala, El Salvador and Argentina risked their
lives to provide an honest account of their countries' recent civil wars. Mr.
Abrams's appointment now makes a mockery of their efforts.

SUZANNE RUTA
New York, July 3, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ARMIES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); LIBERALISM (73%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (71%); GUILTY PLEAS (55%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (84%)

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (71%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); GUATEMALA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             361 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 15, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nay on Lantos

SECTION: Section 8; Column 3; Sports Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 79 words


To the Sports Editor:

Rep. Tom Lantos is the last person who should be co-authoring a resolution with
Rep. Christopher Cox that speaks for the United States Congress about China's
human rights abuses ("The Yea and Nay of Beijing's Bid," July 8). While he
laments China's human rights abuses, Lantos supports the death penalty in the
United States and continues to take campaign contributions from American
companies doing business with China.

BARBARA COMMINS
San Francisco

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (84%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (52%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (91%) COMMINS, BARBARA; LANTOS, TOM (REPR); COX, CHRISTOPHER
(REPR)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (70%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (70%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             365 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Workers in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 154 words


To the Editor:

A July 12 Business Day article describes a trade agreement between the United
States and Cambodia that attempts to fight the scourge of sweatshop labor by
linking quota increases with improvements in labor conditions. The Bush
administration has the power -- by extending and enforcing this agreement beyond
December -- to ensure that increases in trade operate to benefit all involved,
including workers.

Real changes and real benefits for Cambodia's workers require input from and
cooperation among all stakeholders in the global marketplace -- the United
States and Cambodian governments, international agencies, multinational
companies, American consumers, factory owners, local and international
nongovernmental organizations, unions and, most important, the Cambodian
workers.

JUSTINE NOLAN
New York, July 12, 2001

The writer is director of the Labor Rights Program, Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LABOR UNIONS
(88%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (88%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (88%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (88%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); WRITERS (73%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%)
APPAREL;  ORGANIZED LABOR;  INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (56%)

PERSON: NOLAN, JUSTINE

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CAMBODIA (94%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             371 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Finds Where Bodies Are Buried, and Investigates

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, July 25


Capt. Dragan Karleusa, deputy head of the police organized crime unit in
Belgrade, is amazed to find that he now leads an ever-expanding investigation
into war crimes.

He is stunned by the number of bodies he and his men are now discovering, and
the unexpected role now played in his life by freezer trucks in which the bodies
-- thought to be those of victims of Serbian security forces in Kosovo -- were
hidden.

"We started investigating a single incident, but we ended with a very big case,"
the burly Serbian policeman said. "We ended up chasing a wolf."

Since he began investigating the first freezer truck of dead people found in the
Danube in May, Captain Karleusa has discovered nine more truckloads, the most
recent with 40 to 50 bodies in Lake Perucac, an artificial reservoir 90 miles
southwest of the capital.

As many as 1,000 bodies have been found so far, including those of three
Albanian-American brothers from New York. Serbia has astonished foreign
countries with its sudden and open investigation of mass graves found around the
republic in recent months and with its transfer on June 28 of Slobodan
Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, to the United Nations war crimes
tribunal in The Hague.

Far from lessening the pace of war crimes investigations after Mr. Milosevic was
handed over, the authorities have pressed on with the investigation of killings
of Kosovo Albanians by the Serbs during the war over the province in 1999.
Serbia's government is exhuming more bodies and opening its first war crimes
case at home against two men alleged to have killed 19 people in Kosovo.

The government ran a deliberate campaign in the news media to reveal the details
of the mass killings in Kosovo to sway public opinion in advance of the transfer
of Mr. Milosevic to The Hague.

Even if some politicians try to use it for their own reasons, once an
investigation like this is under way, it takes on a momentum of its own, said
Natasa Kandic, leader of the Humanitarian Law Center, an independent human
rights group that has carried out considerable research on the mass killings in
the Balkans.

The authorities say they now have solid evidence that Mr. Milosevic, at a
meeting with senior officials in late March 1999, after the war began, ordered
his security forces to cover up any evidence of crimes that would be of interest
to the Hague tribunal.

At least 10, but maybe dozens, of truckloads of bodies were shipped from Kosovo
to Serbia proper and dumped underwater or in mass graves. "This whole operation
was a crazy thing to do, a crime and for us incomprehensible," Captain Karleusa
said. "The goal was to hide something."

Dusan Mihajlovic, Serbia's interior minister since voters elected an
anti-Milosevic coalition late last year, has said he is determined to get to the
bottom of the original killings and continue the investigation beyond the
cover-up operation.

"The police have three aims," he said, "to find all the mass graves in
Yugoslavia, to find who gave the orders to bury them there and to establish if
these bodies were victims of war crimes, or of war, or of the NATO bombing
against Yugoslavia.

"Because if there were war crimes, we have to find who gave the orders and who
were the executors. And we will publish it when we find out, because we want to
find the men who did those crimes and also to remove the collective guilt that
is weighing on the police and army and on the Serbian people.

"We are going to reconstruct all crimes and will shed light on them all."

The reaction of ordinary people in Serbia to the disclosures has been shock, and
there have been many calls for full investigations and for finding the people
responsible.

An account in the Belgrade newspaper Danas by an army reservist who saw a truck
being dumped into a lake said the bodies had floated to the surface and then had
been pulled out by the police and buried nearby.

"This is a shame," he said. "They buried 50 people, and I am supposed to take my
children to this lake and swim. We are all living here with the fact that they
buried human bodies and are still silent."

But the investigations are advancing slowly, not least because senior officials
of the Milosevic years and of the army and the police forces are refusing to
cooperate.

What is known is that bodies were dumped in mass graves, either in the Danube or
on land. The exhumations of the 800 to 1,000 bodies known about so far will take
months. Captain Karleusa says he will need much longer to establish who gave the
orders for the carnage and who carried it out.

He has not been able to interview Vlajko Stojilkovic, Mr. Milosevic's former
interior minister and the man whom police officials say was ordered by Mr.
Milosevic to clean Kosovo of bodies and other evidence that might interest the
Hague tribunal.

Mr. Stojilkovic, who is one of the four ministers indicted along with Mr.
Milosevic by the tribunal for war crimes in Kosovo, is still living openly in
Serbia, where as a member of the Yugoslav Parliament for Mr. Milosevic's
Socialist Party, he can still claim parliamentary immunity.

Until that is revoked -- and so far no motion has been brought before Parliament
to strip him of the immunity -- investigators cannot question him, Captain
Karleusa said.

Information gathered so far about the mass killings has come mostly from
witnesses and the truck drivers, many of whom were police reservists called up
during Yugoslavia's war with NATO and were unsettled by what they saw.

Some police officers have come forward only when prodded after the press started
writing stories. Police officers led Captain Karleusa to the second freezer
truck in Lake Perucac.

"It had been declared a secret," the captain said, "and they were ordered not to
talk. But people are now talking openly, and that is the way we find things out.
We get information from the bottom, not from the top."

One predicament is that Captain Karleusa's boss is Sreten Lukic, the police
director of public security, who served as the commander of police forces in
Kosovo during the war. Mr. Lukic, if anyone, knows at least some of what went on
in Kosovo and who was giving the orders. Although he helped set up the original
unit to investigate the first freezer truck, he is not contributing to the
investigation.

Captain Karleusa is adamant that his boss will not be spared if he is
responsible for any crimes.

"If he was responsible for anything, we are going to determine it," the captain
said. "Although he is my boss, he cannot influence the investigation or me,
because it was decided to go with this all the way to the end. Those are the
words of Minister Mihajlovic: 'no matter what the price.' "

Mr. Lukic has appeared to shunt some of the blame toward the army, reminding
journalists at a news conference in June that the army had overall command
during the state of war declared for the 78 days of NATO's bombing campaign
against Yugoslavia.

The army has admitted to exhuming bodies, saying it was necessary to clear them
to prevent disease. According to documents published in the well-informed
Belgrade weekly Nedeljni Telegraf, exhumations by the army included the 145
victims of killings in Izbica, who were buried by villagers and whose bodies
disappeared in May 1999, shortly before the end of the war.

But military officials have denied any involvement in the cover-up or in mass
killings. The army says it is conducting a number of investigations and trials
against its own members, but the cases are thought to be minor and remain
largely closed.

"The army has their own very closed judicial system and is not our
jurisdiction," said Mr. Mihajlovic, the interior minister.

Captain Karleusa noted that the investigation was complex. "You have to have in
mind," he said, "at the battlefield there were several different kinds of units
-- army, police, paramilitaries, different volunteer forces and different local
groups -- and everybody could have done it.

"It was war, and you could have two units crossing the same area on the same
day."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A freezer truck, above, found in the Danube in eastern Serbia,
was used to transport the bodies of Albanians killed in Kosovo. Capt. Dragan
Karleusa, below, is the police official investigating mass graves found lately.
(Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (92%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LAW OF WAR
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (71%); POLITICS (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (67%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  TRUCKS AND TRUCKING;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; GALL, CARLOTTA; KARLEUSA, DRAGAN (POLICE CAPT)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (93%);
NETHERLANDS (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             374 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 16, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Islam in Central Asia

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 440 words


The people of Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan
have always lived under despots. Their history is so dismal that Communism for
them was a time of relative prosperity. Now, 10 years after they became
independent nations, they have once again become sultanates, ruled by tyrants
who maintain tight control of political and economic activity.

While the governments claim they are a steadying force, their repression is
creating instability.  Uzbekistan is leading a regionwide crackdown on all forms
of Islam that are not state-controlled -- repression that is driving entire
villages into opposition and forcing religion underground. An Islamic guerrilla
movement seeks to establish an Islamic state in Uzbekistan, but its 1,000 or so
fighters are mainly active when the snows blocking the mountain passes between
Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan melt each August. Far more dangerous is the crushing
response of Islam Karimov, Uzbekistan's authoritarian president. If a
Taliban-style threat arises in Central Asia, it will be because the
dictatorships inadvertently helped to create it.

When the Soviet empire broke up, millions of people in Central Asia began to
practice Islam. Unfortunately, local governments saw religion that was
independent of the state as a threat. In Uzbekistan, the most populous of the
Central Asian nations, with 25 million people, the government has arrested
thousands of religious Muslims and sentenced hundreds of them to long jail
terms, even though they were not accused of violent acts. Thousands of villagers
in Islamic areas have been forcibly resettled.

The current guerrilla movement arose in part because of government actions. When
the mass arrest of Muslims began in 1997, young religious men went underground
or fled to safety in Afghanistan or Tajikistan, where they made contact with
more militant movements. Mr. Karimov has used an unsolved February 1999 bombing,
which some believe was carried out by the security forces, as a justification
for an even wider crackdown.

While American officials talk about human rights when they meet with their
Central Asian counterparts, Washington's interest in the region's oil and gas
reserves and fear of another Afghanistan limit American criticism. Washington
has never counted Uzbekistan among the nations that violate religious freedom.
It richly deserves to make the list in September. The military and economic
cooperation given in the name of assuring stability may in fact be helping to
brew dangerous instability. The real parallel for Central Asia could be Iran
under the Shah, who suffocated his nation into revolution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); POLITICS (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); TALIBAN (76%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); ECONOMIC
POLICY (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); ARRESTS (70%); BOMBINGS (68%); SENTENCING
(65%) EDITORIALS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM OF RELIGION;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  ISLAM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID

PERSON: KARIMOV, ISLAM (PRES)

COUNTRY: ASIA (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%);
TAJIKISTAN (93%); KYRGYZSTAN (93%); KAZAKHSTAN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
TURKMENISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: UZBEKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             375 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 17, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Faces New Dispute Over Payment Of U.N. Dues

BYLINE:  By LIZETTE ALVAREZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


With President Bush's first visit to the United Nations just one month away,
administration officials and House Republican leaders are working to resolve a
new dispute over the United States' payment of millions of dollars in back dues
to the organization.

The dispute, first reported by The Washington Post, is no longer over whether
the United States should pay money it owes the United Nations; that was worked
out by the House and Senate earlier this year, after years of contentious
debate. Instead, it centers on legislation that seeks to exempt Americans from
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court, the first permanent
tribunal now being created at The Hague to prosecute war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

The exemption passed the House in May with broad bipartisan support as an
amendment to a bill to operate State Department programs, which included
repayment of $826 million in back dues to the United Nations. At the time, many
lawmakers expressed suspicion of a permanent tribunal, fearing its power could
be easily misused to make capricious arrests of American officials or military
personnel abroad.  Just before this, the United States had been voted off the
United National Human Rights Commission, a move that infuriated House members.

The White House has stressed the need to resolve the thorny issue of back dues
before Mr. Bush goes to the United Nations in late September. Mr. Bush has
already angered several allies with his plan to create a national missile
defense system and his stance on global warming, and is not eager to exacerbate
tensions with other United Nations members.

"The administration does not support the attachment of any additional conditions
to the payment of these arrears," Philip Reeker, a State Department spokesman,
said today.

Republican leaders are working on a compromise to help release the money, House
Republican leadership aides said today.

"No one wants to embarrass the president," said one aide. "We are just looking
at all options and working with the administration."

Another aide added, "There is no question this will be resolved before the
president goes to the United Nations."

While the Bush administration opposes the creation of a permanent court at The
Hague, it is reluctant to relinquish control over foreign policy matters to
Congress, an administration official said.

Still, the official added, "we understand that the servicemen and women need
some protection."

Earlier this year, the Senate passed a stand-alone bill, called Helms-Biden,
that frees up $582 million in back dues, with no conditions regarding the
tribunal. This sum, unlike the House figure, excludes peacekeeping costs. Now
the House and the Senate must reconcile their differences.

In doing this, however, Republican leaders face their own quandary, aides say.
If they ignore the House vote for the amendment, which was written by
Representative Tom DeLay, the powerful majority whip from Texas, they risk
losing support from conservatives for the entire bill, including for the
repayment of dues.

Mr. DeLay's provision would cut off military aid to any non-NATO countries that
ratify the International Criminal Court treaty. In addition, it would bar
American soldiers from participating in United Nations peacekeeping efforts
unless the soldiers first received immunity from the court's jurisdiction.

The United States has long supported individual tribunals, like the ones created
to deal with crimes in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, but the idea of a
permanent court is problematic to many House members.

"The problem with the International Criminal Court is that it is so subject to
being hijacked," said one Republican leadership aide. "It is a court without a
mandate, without a specific mission. It's like an independent counsel for the
world."

President Bill Clinton signed the treaty to create the court on Dec. 31, even
while acknowledging that he found aspects of it problematic. The Bush
administration has said it will not submit the treaty to the Senate for
ratification.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); WAR CRIMES (75%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%); CONSERVATISM (73%); GENOCIDE
(73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (69%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%); ARMED FORCES (52%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (50%); MISSILE
DEFENSE SYSTEMS (50%); GLOBAL WARMING (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (58%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%) UNITED
NATIONS

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (58%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (58%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) ALVAREZ, LIZETTE; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             377 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 21, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Interest in an International Court

BYLINE:  By Bill Richardson;  Bill Richardson, chairman of Freedom House, was
ambassador to the United Nations under Bill Clinton.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 850 words


The prospects for American involvement in an International Criminal Court do
not, at present, look at all good. The Clinton administration signed the
necessary treaty, at the end of last year, only with reluctance. No one believes
the Senate will ratify the treaty Mr. Clinton signed.

Republican leaders in the House have sponsored a bill -- attached to legislation
freeing up money committed to paying United Nations back dues -- that would
seriously undermine the international court, whether or not the United States
eventually ratifies. The Bush administration has expressed no enthusiasm for the
court and reportedly is discussing "unsigning" the treaty. The administration
has already rejected, or expressed serious reservations about, some half-dozen
international agreements; the court appears to be next in line. But to pack up
and leave now would send the wrong signal to the world and be a serious mistake.

American interests would be well served by an international criminal court that
could help prevent the carnage that we have seen so recently in Bosnia and
Rwanda. If the United States were to walk away, it would be removing itself from
a process that could make the court consistent with our interests and our legacy
as a champion of international justice. We have a chance to fix the remaining
problems with the court -- and we should take that chance.

As ambassador to the United Nations, I made American concerns quite clear at the
beginning of the Rome negotiations on the International Criminal Court treaty in
1998. American involvement resulted in changes that addressed many of those
concerns. For example, the treaty says the court must defer to national systems
in prosecuting and judging crimes. The United States also won agreement that the
court would cover only the worst international crimes -- genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

We helped lead successful talks on the rules of procedure and evidence and on
how to describe the elements of crimes that would come under the court's
jurisdiction.

Nonetheless, the treaty establishing the court has some troubling ambiguities
and questions that should be resolved through amendments by ratifying countries
and through periodic reviews. The opportunity to address those ambiguities is a
strong reason for continuing American engagement. At present, a vaguely defined
crime ("aggression") may be added to the court's jurisdiction. But the United
States and its allies will at times need to use force to protect national
interests and defend freedom, as was done most recently in Kosovo. The United
Nations Security Council's traditional authority in this area must be accepted
over that of the court.

The possibility also still exists that a prosecutor, fired by political
convictions or ambitions, might try to advance a particular agenda through the
court. If we stay engaged, we can participate in negotiating guidelines for
prosecutors. And we can help decide how the court will determine when a national
court is, in the treaty language, "unwilling or unable genuinely to carry out
the investigation or prosecution."

As part of ongoing negotiations and reviews, we need to ensure that the court
will respect democratically determined solutions to past crimes, like the South
Africa truth commission or the terms of peace settlements that help to end civil
wars. Such commissions and settlements never fully satisfy every party; the
international criminal court must not be allowed to second-guess them. Finally,
if it is still involved, the United States will have a crucial say in the
selection of judges and prosecutors.

In the end, there will be some kind of international criminal court. It could be
a good court, or a mediocre one, or genuinely dangerous. But the United States
will not be able to affect the outcome if it is not involved in the process of
establishing it. President Bush should delineate America's serious concerns and
assert the right to press for essential changes -- while he still can.

Members of Congress, led by Senator Christopher Dodd, have proposed compromise
legislation recommending just that. Their bill encourages the United States to
remain engaged while protecting American citizens and military people from
politicized prosecution by the International Criminal Court or other foreign
tribunals.

If American concerns are met and the court establishes a good track record, the
president should press for Senate ratification of the treaty. If progress is not
forthcoming and the court's performance is unacceptable, the United States will
have plenty of opportunities to take retaliatory measures, including financial
and other sanctions.

The International Criminal Court is not a panacea. The only lasting solution for
genocide and other egregious crimes is the global expansion of democracy. But a
permanent court, operating wisely within a treaty structure that the United
States can embrace, holds the promise of adding to the world's arsenal against
human rights violations. As a leader for international justice, America needs to
help make that promise a reality.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (67%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: BILL RICHARDSON (71%) RICHARDSON, BILL

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             381 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rancor and Powell's Absence Cloud Racism Parley

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1260 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Aug. 30


The presidents flew into this port city from across the continent today, joining
6,000 delegates from around the world to deplore prejudice, ethnic hatreds and
intolerance. But they were all overshadowed by the one man who was not here.

On the eve of a weeklong United Nations conference on racism and discrimination,
much of the attention was on Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who is skipping
the conference because American officials believe that Israel is being unfairly
smeared here as a racist state.

The State Department announced this week that only mid-level diplomats would
take part in the conference, which opens on Friday, because of American
objections to proposed language in conference texts. Some documents describe the
Israeli presence in the West Bank and Gaza as "a new kind of apartheid."

The day quickly degenerated into rancor as Palestinians and Jews staged
competing protests and Arab participants were accused of harassing Jewish
delegates.

A group of singing and shouting Palestinian supporters disrupted a news
conference this morning held by members of Jewish civic organizations who had
gathered to complain that some Arab groups were distributing offensive
literature, including posters of Jews with big noses and bloody fangs.

American civil rights leaders arriving here criticized the Bush administration
for deciding not to send Secretary Powell to the conference, and for trying to
block serious discussion of reparations for the descendants of African slaves.

Questions about whether Israel should be condemned for its treatment of
Palestinians and whether the West should pay reparations for slavery and
colonialism have roiled conference preparations for months.

In an interview this week, Mary Robinson, the United Nations high commissioner
for human rights, emphasized that the language about Israel and compensation for
slavery and colonialism was preliminary and would be eliminated if consensus
could not be reached.

Today, Mrs. Robinson condemned the harassment of members of Jewish groups, who
have been meeting along with thousands of other delegates from nongovernmental
organizations in the days leading up to the conference.

"I have been concerned to learn that there have been unpleasant exchanges, in
particular, personal, unpleasant exchanges to Jewish groups that have come to
participate," said Mrs. Robinson, who is the secretary general of the
conference. "This is a conference about victims of racism and discrimination.
It's a conference to move us forward to tolerance, dignity and respect."

The Rev. Jesse Jackson, who arrived this morning, warned that the debate over
the Middle East threatened to eclipse the conference, which is intended to
highlight discrimination in all forms -- from concerns about racism in the
criminal justice system in the United States, to the plight of women in
Afghanistan, to modern-day slavery in Sudan.

Mr. Jackson and other civil rights leaders here including Representative John
Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, and Wade J. Henderson, director of the
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, said it was a mistake not to send
Secretary Powell. The delegation will be led instead by E. Michael Southwick,
the deputy assistant secretary of state for international organizations.

But Mr. Jackson said he and others agreed that the language of the proposed
declaration against racism seemed to target Israel unnecessarily, particularly
given the dismal human rights records of many countries participating in the
conference.

"The issue of racism is too big to reduce it to the controversy about the Middle
East," Mr. Jackson said in an interview. "One can be against the settlements,
against the assassination of leaders and not have to label Israel as a racist
state. If one goes into labeling, there are a lot of labels to go around."

The conference is expected to draw 15 heads of state and government, most from
Africa, with some notable exceptions, including Fidel Castro of Cuba. The
Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, arrived today along with the leaders of
Rwanda, Togo, the Congo Republic and Bosnia and Herzegovina, South African
officials said. Israel, like the United States, is sending a mid-level
delegation.

The delegates from different countries will work mostly behind closed doors,
trying to hammer out a declaration against racism, discrimination, xenophobia
and other forms of intolerance. Another group will work on the language of an
action plan to remedy discrimination. But if the disagreements that erupted
among the civic groups today are any indication, the going will not be easy.

The members of the Jewish civic groups who gathered under a white tent were
interrupted in the middle of their news conference by Palestinian supporters,
who shook their fists and waved banners that said, "End Israeli Apartheid."

The debate spilled outside the tent where Jewish groups started singing, "All we
are saying, is give peace a chance." The Palestinians countered with, "We Shall
Overcome" and "Free, free Palestine!"

"We all came here to fight racism, but what we've experienced starts raising
questions to me about the validity of this whole conference," said Karen
Pollock, who came to the conference as a representative of Jews from Britain.
"I've ended up spending the last two days explaining why I have the right to
exist, why my identity is important. It has been an unfair and corrupt process.
What's the point of trying to reconcile anything?"

Khader Shirkat, the director of the Palestinian Law Society, who marched with
his fellow Palestinians, acknowledged that many Arab countries practice
discrimination within their own borders. But he said Israel deserved to be
singled out.

"We're here to express our solidarity with other groups still living under other
occupations and to get rid of the last vestige of colonialism, the Israeli
apartheid state," said Mr. Shirkat, who came to the conference from Jerusalem.
"There is racism in many Arab countries. But Israel is the one that is
threatening international security and peace. We are talking about a racist
state, institutional racism. That is why Israel has to be singled out."

Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, said such language appeared
in several of the proposed conference texts and it was that language that
persuaded the American government not to send Secretary Powell.

"I was hoping it could be a serious conference, looking at the past in a general
sense and not singling out a single country," said Mr. Lantos, a Holocaust
survivor and a member of the American team that tried to eliminate the charged
language during talks in Geneva last month. "To single out the state of Israel
as the only guilty party with respect to discrimination is an outrage."

Mrs. Robinson said she did not believe that the divisions, enormous as they
might seem, would prevent the conference from succeeding.

Indeed, many delegates from civic organizations including Africans, Latin
Americans, women's groups, Gypsies and Asians have described the networking
between the groups as incredibly empowering.

"It's that rich texture that influences me, not the discordant voices," Mrs.
Robinson said earlier this week. "Of course, there are discordant voices when
you've got such very big issues to deal with.

"The huge opportunity of Durban is to set down the values for a new century in a
divided world," she said. "It's not the end of the road. It's the beginning.
It's the beginning of really being energized to address racism. I'm told I'm far
too optimistic. I don't know. Let's see."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A pro-Palestinian demonstrator shouted anti-Israeli slogans
yesterday in Durban, South Africa, as delegates gathered for the opening of the
United Nations conference on racism and discrimination. (Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); RACE & RACISM (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); SLAVERY (89%); DISCRIMINATION
(89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL HARASSMENT (77%);
INTERVIEWS (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (67%); RIOTS (66%) UNITED
NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PALESTINIANS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JESSE JACKSON (52%); JOHN CONYERS (50%) SWARNS, RACHEL L; POWELL, COLIN
L (SEC)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); ISRAEL
(94%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); SUDAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); AFGHANISTAN (50%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             382 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 1, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Netherlands: Milosevic Loses Appeal

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 73 words


A Dutch district court rejected a claim by the ex-Serbian leader, Slobodan
Milosevic, who demanded to be freed from United Nations detention on the ground
that the tribunal holding him on charges of genocide and other war crimes was
illegal.

The judge ruled that he had no jurisdiction. Dutch lawyers for Mr. Milosevic
said they would appeal to a higher Dutch court and go to the European Court of
Human Rights.

Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LAWYERS (87%); GENOCIDE (87%); JURISDICTION (86%); JUDGES
(86%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (83%) UNITED
NATIONS; EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); SERBIA (93%); NETHERLANDS
(90%)

REGION: SERBIA;  NETHERLANDS

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             384 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking On the Taliban, From Here

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 177 words


To the Editor:

Karl F. Inderfurth ("Teaching the Taliban About Human Rights," Op-Ed, Aug. 29)
is right that Muslims and Islamic governments should condemn the Taliban's
perversion of Islam in Afghanistan. But this should not let the rest of the
world off the hook.

Five years ago, the Taliban took over Kabul and prohibited women from attending
school, working or going outside without a close male relative. Women have been
beaten, imprisoned and killed for violating the draconian decrees.

The United States should do more to pressure Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates to withdraw their support and recognition of the brutal
militia's regime. America should provide more humanitarian assistance to
nongovernment organizations both inside Afghanistan and in the countries to
which millions of refugees have fled.

International outcry from Muslims and non-Muslims alike is necessary to restore
women's rights, human rights and religious freedom in Afghanistan.

ELEANOR SMEAL
President, Feminist
Majority Foundation
Arlington, Va., Aug. 30, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TALIBAN (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); REFUGEES
(88%); WOMEN (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%);
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CHURCH & STATE (65%); POLITICS (64%)
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WOMEN;  CHURCH-STATE
RELATIONS;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION (59%) FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION;
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: SMEAL, ELEANOR; INDERFURTH, KARL F

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             385 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking On the Taliban, From Here

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 179 words


To the Editor:

Karl F. Inderfurth ("Teaching the Taliban About Human Rights," Op-Ed, Aug. 29)
suggests that Taliban extremists might be best persuaded toward observing basic
human rights by their fellow Islamic governments.

This issue also gives American Muslim groups an opportunity to dispel what they
feel are unfair public perceptions of Muslims.

Yet these groups have failed to make an impression on the public with any
significant condemnations of the persecution of Christians, Jews and Hindus in
Pakistan, Sudan and other countries under Muslim law.

Nor have they been outspoken on the death sentence declared this summer by a
Muslim cleric in Jordan on the writer Khalid Duran, who lives in the United
States, for a book on Islam he wrote that was commissioned by the American
Jewish Committee.

As groups like the American Muslim Alliance become more involved in American
political life, they could enhance their political presence and American
interfaith amity by speaking up against oppression wherever it appears.

(Msgr.) HARRY J. BYRNE
New York, Aug. 30, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); TALIBAN (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (88%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (87%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (85%); POLITICS (85%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); CHURCH & STATE (66%) ISLAM;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE (56%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: BYRNE, HARRY J (MSGR); INDERFURTH, KARL F

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (79%); AFGHANISTAN (73%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             386 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE RACISM WALKOUT: THE MIDEAST VIEW;
Israeli Outrage at Arafat's Speech Makes Talks With Him Even Less Certain

BYLINE:  By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Sept. 3


More bombs and new fighting today reinforced what was already amply clear for
Israelis and Palestinians: if they manage to work out a truce in their
11-month-old conflict, they will first have to overcome mutual hostility that is
intensifying almost by the day.

For Israelis the mood was greatly darkened by the strong -- and as far as
Israeli officials are concerned, outrageous -- anti-Israel denunciations
dominating the United Nations conference on racism in Durban, South Africa. "We
regret very much the very bizarre show in Durban," Foreign Minister Shimon Peres
said. "An important convention that's supposed to defend human rights became a
source of hatred."

He spoke as Israel announced on Monday night that it would join the United
States in walking out of the conference, after being attacked by a coalition of
rights groups as "an apartheid regime" guilty of "ethnic cleansing and acts of
genocide" against the Palestinians.

The events in South Africa thickened the pall over already troubled attempts to
cobble together an Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire. So did new violence, which
included five bombs that went off in the last two days in various areas of
Jerusalem.

During the morning rush today, a suicide bomber blew himself up on the heavily
traveled Street of the Prophets in downtown Jerusalem, not far from the spot
where another bomber killed 15 people besides himself at a crowded pizzeria last
month.

Early reports said the attacker today had set off explosives as he approached a
group of Israeli border policemen. Ten people were said to have been wounded,
one critically, the others slightly.

On Monday morning, four bombs went off in Jewish neighborhoods of Jerusalem. No
one was gravely hurt. But after those explosions, in Jewish neighborhoods,
Israelis and Palestinians pounded each other all day, especially in and around
Hebron, where two Palestinian men were killed and about 30 others wounded by
Israeli Army fire on Monday night.

Hopes for a truce, to the extent that they exist, have been pinned on the
possibility of Mr. Peres working out arrangements with the head of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasir Arafat. With European Union diplomats working as
middlemen, a Peres-Arafat meeting has been bruited about for the last two weeks.

But the two sides keep parrying and thrusting, neither wanting to appear overly
eager to reach out to the other, and both warning that it will be difficult to
come to terms. For all the considerable talk about a meeting, nothing has been
set, although a business conference in northern Italy at the end of the week has
been mentioned as a possible setting.

Within the Israeli government, some cabinet ministers on the political right
said Mr. Peres should not bother sitting down now with Mr. Arafat after the
Palestinian leader went before the Durban gathering and attacked Israel as a
racist colonial power.

Israel, Mr. Arafat said on Friday, has displayed a "supremacist mentality, a
mentality of racial discrimination," and he repeated an old charge, long denied
by the Israelis, that they shot bullets tipped with depleted uranium at
Palestinians.

Uzi Landau, Israel's internal security minister, said it would "cause great
damage" if Mr. Peres were to meet with Mr. Arafat, "especially after Arafat has
called us war criminals in Durban."

Israeli anguish and rage at the course that the conference in South Africa has
taken was reflected in an article on Monday in the mass circulation newspaper
Yediot Ahronot. An editorial writer, Sever Plotzker, likened the Durban events
to Kristallnacht -- in German, the "night of the broken glass" -- the name given
to widespread attacks on German and Austrian Jews, their synagogues and property
in November 1938.

"The road -- ideologically, not practically, speaking -- from Durban to
Bergen-Belsen is shorter than many people think," Mr. Plotzker wrote, referring
to a Nazi concentration camp.

He added: "From this standpoint, there is no difference between Nazi ideology
and the ideology of Durban. In both the Jews are seen as undermining the
righteous order of humanity. They are the embodiment of evil, and they have no
place among the nations striving for peace."

Despite such views, and despite anger at Mr. Arafat for his remarks in South
Africa, Israeli officials said they would continue to pursue truce talks, even
if hopes for success did not run high on either side. "We have to take this
opportunity, because the alternatives are quite worse," said Yaffa Ben-Ari, a
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman.

The alternatives, obviously, are continued gun battles and more bombs like those
that went off Monday in three sections of Jerusalem.

Two exploded in French Hill and one in Gilo. Both are neighborhoods that Israel
considers integral parts of Jerusalem but that sit on land captured by the
Israelis in the 1967 Middle East war, making them settlements in Palestinian
eyes. The fourth explosion occurred in Maalot Dafna, an area inside Israel since
before 1967.

Altogether, five people were slightly injured, the police said.

A military arm of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed
responsibility. Its leader, Mustafa Zibri, was killed by the Israeli Army last
week.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); EUROPEAN UNION
(75%); RIOTS (66%); ARMIES (51%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;
PALESTINIANS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SHIMON PERES (89%) HABERMAN, CLYDE; ARAFAT, YASIR; PERES, SHIMON

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); SOUTH AFRICA
(93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (52%)

REGION: DURBAN (SOUTH AFRICA);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             389 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: THE TRAIL;
BUSH TELLS THE MILITARY TO 'GET READY'; BROADER SPY POWERS GAINING SUPPORT

BYLINE:  By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


The Congressional leaders who oversee the nation's intelligence system have
concluded that America's spy agencies should be allowed to combat terrorism with
more aggressive tactics, including the hiring of unsavory foreign agents.

The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon have also revived
discussion of reversing the United States' 25-year ban on using covert agents to
assassinate foreigners. A consensus has not been reached on that point.

But after the attacks, the chairman and vice chairman of the Senate intelligence
committee, the chairman of the House intelligence committee and two former
directors of central intelligence said the attacks justified easing some
restrictions on the behavior of spy agencies. Some of those leaders also said
the terrorist assault represented a colossal failure of American intelligence.

"We have got to be a hell of a lot more aggressive," said Senator Richard C.
Shelby, Republican of Alabama and vice chairman of the Senate intelligence
committee.

R. James Woolsey, the former director of central intelligence, said that
"Washington has absolutely undergone a sea change in thinking this week."

Those comments reflect a turning point in the attitude of political leaders
toward the need for sharp limits on the extent and nature of covert operations
and perhaps for allowing American agents to carry out the kinds of actions that
have long been prohibited as too ruthless or morally questionable.

They also reflect a strong public sentiment for a powerful, and prolonged,
American assault on the terrorist organizations responsible for the deaths of
thousands of people in New York and Washington, and others like them. A New York
Times/ CBS News poll conducted late last week showed that 65 percent of those
questioned say American agents should be allowed to seek out and assassinate
people in foreign countries who commit terrorist acts against Americans.

For the moment, the C.I.A. is not pressing Congress or the White House to change
its rules. Administration officials said they understood that for many Americans
the ban on assassinations was a significant symbol of the nation's role as a
standard-bearer of ethical conduct. Under current law, President Bush would have
to authorize personally any such change in the existing executive order
governing intelligence operations.

But the public discussion among influential members of Congress about freeing
the C.I.A. from restrictions on the recruitment of criminals and known abusers
of human rights as informants and about outlaw assassinations stems from a
growing debate over the causes of what many in Washington are now calling the
nation's biggest intelligence lapse since the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in
1941.

In the 25 years since Congressional hearings disclosed the agency's role in
assassinations and dirty tricks overseas, the government has imposed
increasingly tighter rules and Congressional oversight of the conduct of
America's spies. C.I.A. officers, for example, are not permitted to foster a
plot that has the explicit goal of killing a terrorist leader.

But Congressional leaders said the C.I.A. should be put on a war footing and
given the freedom not only to penetrate but also to destroy tightly knit
terrorist organizations.

"Not everybody is playing by Marquess of Queensberry rules," said Representative
J. Porter Goss, a Florida Republican who is chairman of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence when asked if he would support an end to the
ban on assassinations of foreign leaders, first imposed by President Gerald R.
Ford in 1976.

Senator Bob Graham, a Florida Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence, is now willing to end limits on the C.I.A.'s
recruitment of agents -- spies -- who have committed human rights violations,
his spokesman said on Friday.

But one influential lawmaker warned that proposals to unleash intelligence
agencies should be carefully considered.

Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the majority whip, said that while the C.I.A.
should beef up its human intelligence gathering ability, officials should not
move rashly to lift the ban on assassinations.

The nation is understandably "a little panicky," Mr. DeLay said. But he added,
"I think we need to be very clearheaded, very deliberative, about where we're
headed."

Tighter restrictions on whom the C.I.A. can recruit as spies were imposed in the
mid-1990's after disclosures about the agency having had ties to a Guatemalan
Army officer implicated in the killing of an American and the husband of another
American. Although it is unclear whether the guidelines have ever really
undercut the C.I.A.'s operations against terrorist organizations, the agency's
officers have complained in the past that the rules were symbolic of a broader
caution that took hold at the agency in the 1990's, when managers rejected
high-risk operations for fear they would fail or lead to political scandal.

Senator Graham's spokesman, Paul Anderson, said, "The senator said something
today that I hadn't heard him say before, and that is that we are not going to
find the kinds of spies we need in monasteries."

Senator Graham said immediately after Tuesday's attacks that he was also willing
to reassess the assassination ban. Mr. Anderson, the spokesman, said Mr. Graham
had since modified his stance, but only because he had been told by experts that
the United States could get around the ban if it chose to do so, even with the
current legal strictures.

It remains to be seen whether Congressional leaders will continue to recommend
that the C.I.A. be liberated from such restrictions once the heated passions in
the aftermath of Tuesday's attacks begin to cool. Previous terrorist attacks
like the 1998 bombings of two American Embassies in Africa have been followed by
calls to loosen the limits on the C.I.A.'s operations. Last year, an independent
commission on terrorism recommended that the C.I.A. lift its guidelines on the
use of agents who had committed human rights violations. The proposals were
ultimately not embraced by the government, and C.I.A officials argued at the
time that it was not necessary to lift these restrictions because they had not
hampered operations.

But the new willingness among lawmakers to allow the C.I.A. greater latitude
underscores the depth of feeling in Washington about the need to address the
intelligence failings exposed on Tuesday.

Former President George Bush, who served as C.I.A. director under President
Ford, spoke publicly this week about the need to "free up the intelligence
system from some of its constraints."

The militant attitude in Congress comes just weeks after some American leaders
were sharply critical of Israel's use of assassinations of Palestinian leaders
in response to a series of suicide bombings against Israeli targets. But after
Tuesday some current and former officials said that American security services
might need to adopt some elements of the Israeli approach.

"We've never had the political will and the resolve to treat terrorism as a real
foe," observed Ted Price, a former deputy director of operations at the C.I.A.
"But now we're at war."

One former C.I.A. officer argued that the agency was not organized to fight an
all-out war on terrorism and that other organizations might ultimately be
needed. "The C.I.A. wants to penetrate these groups, to find out about the next
attack," the former officer said. "But you can never stop all the attacks
because you can never hear about all of them. You can't just spy on these
groups. You have to destroy them. And that's not what the C.I.A. has been set up
to do."

Mr. Woolsey said in an interview on Friday that he had been steadfastly opposed
to lifting the ban on assassinations until this week's attacks.  "Before
Tuesday, I was opposed to anything like that," said Mr. Woolsey, who also
supports an end to the restrictions on the C.I.A.'s recruitment of spies with
troubling background. "But like a lot of people, I've been somewhat shaken in
that conviction by what happened."

The question of whether to change operating orders of the C.I.A., which operates
outside the United States, is up to President Bush. The restriction on
assassinations is part of a presidential executive order that could be revoked
or rewritten. The rules about recruiting spies are part of the agency's internal
procedures and could be revised by the director of central intelligence.

But until today, Congress, which has broad oversight powers over the
intelligence community, would almost certainly have weighed in on an effort by a
president to end the ban on assassinations.

For now, the C.I.A. is not pressing Congress or the White House to support any
change in its rules. Beyond quick fixes, the Congressional intelligence
committees are also considering more fundamental reforms, and have promised to
study closely why the C.I.A. and other agencies were caught by surprise by the
attacks -- the largest terrorist operation ever launched against the United
States.

"I'm certain that we are going to find some significant intelligence shortfalls
that contributed to this tragedy on Tuesday," Senator Graham said.

Intelligence officials defended the performance of the C.I.A. They emphasized
that while the agency had failed to provide a precise warning of the attack, it
had issued repeated warnings -- one as recently as August -- that the terrorism
suspect Osama bin Laden and his network were seeking to attack the domestic
United States.

"We have stated on a regular basis that bin Laden had declared that all U.S.
citizens were legitimate targets," noted one American intelligence official.
"Could we, should we, have given a tactical warning? Obviously we would have
loved to."

Others note that the problems exposed on Tuesday range far beyond the C.I.A. and
include the lack of coordination of the government's counterterrorism efforts,
which are spread throughout several agencies.

Critics say the government fails to quickly process and analyze information that
might help unravel terrorist plots. Often, crucial intelligence is found to have
been sitting in the files, but is recognized as significant only in hindsight,
after a terrorist incident.

For instance, United States officials noted that the C.I.A. had gathered
evidence in August that Khalid al-Midhar, identified on Friday by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation as one of the hijackers aboard the plane that smashed
into the Pentagon, had met with suspect associates of Mr. bin Laden in Malaysia
in January of last year. Subsequently the C.I.A. determined that some people at
that meeting may have been involved in the plot to attack the U.S.S. Cole in
October 2000.

The C.I.A. also determined that Nawaq Alhamzi, another hijacking suspect aboard
the same plane, had previously traveled to the United States with Mr. al-Midhar.

In late August, the C.I.A. notified the Immigration and Naturalization Service
that both men should be placed on the watch list intended to prevent their entry
into the United States. The I.N.S. responded that both men had already gotten
into the country, using their real names.

The F.B.I. was notified, and the bureau began to look for them. But too late.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (92%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); ASSASSINATION (91%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); ETHICS (74%); MISSING PERSONS (74%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
INVESTIGATIONS (69%) TERRORISM;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  PUBLIC OPINION

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(59%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (59%) CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY; NEW YORK TIMES/CBS NEWS POLL

PERSON: RICHARD SHELBY (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) RISEN, JAMES

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             390 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 26, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing The Americas: Guatemala: Unit Linked To Spying Seeks Funds

BYLINE:  By David Gonzalez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 110 words


The government has proposed a 40 percent budget increase for presidential
security, including a military unit that was supposed to have been disbanded
under the peace accords that ended the country's 36-year civil war.

The presidential chief of staff, a group that has been linked to domestic
spying, political assassinations and human rights abuses, is one of two agencies
requesting $15.2 million for next year. Rights groups have faulted the
government for its current levels of military spending as well as recent
suggestions that civilian agencies responsible for national security be
abolished, in violation of the peace accords.   David Gonzalez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BUDGETS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); DEFENSE SPENDING
(88%); NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); POLITICS (84%); ASSASSINATION (54%)
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             391 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 968 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Arafat and Peres Agree To Cooperate on Security
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and Shimon Peres, the Israeli foreign minister,
jointly pledged a renewed drive for peace and agreed to resume cooperation
between their security forces.   A8


Pact on Macedonia Force
As the initial NATO mission was ending, NATO and Macedonian officials agreed on
the scope of a new military force to take over. The new NATO forces will have
700 troops and a three-month mission to provide security for unarmed
international monitors in Macedonia.   A12

Pope Grieves in Armenia
John Paul II, at an emotional ceremony at a memorial to the victims of the 1915
massacre of Armenians by Turks, deplored the killings that Armenians consider
genocide without offending Turkey, a key Islamic American ally.   A6

Canada Freezes Assets
Canada said it had frozen the assets of groups identified by the United States
as linked to terrorism.   A12

Western Culture Praised
The Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, in a briefing for journalists in
Berlin, praised Western civilization as superior to that of the Islamic world
and urged Europe to "reconstitute itself on the basis of its Christian roots,"
comments likely to outrage Turkey and other Islamic allies of the West.   A8

Mad Cow Scare in Japan
A beef scare is sweeping Japan after British scientists confirmed a case of mad
cow disease in a Tokyo suburb, the first case of the disease outside of Europe.
A12

Haiti Criticized on Rights
In Haiti respect for human rights and the rule of law has fallen to its lowest
point since democratic rule was restored in 1994, according to a report by
Amnesty International to be released today.   A12

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A14-16

Political Landscape Shifts In Aftermath of Attacks
Top Democratic officials said the terrorist attacks had severely hampered their
recruitment efforts, particularly for candidates for Senate, and had upended
their entire political game plan for the midterm elections next year. The
political terrain has shifted so sharply that candidates are reluctant to take
on incumbents -- and some incumbents are deciding to stay put rather than retire
or seek higher office.   A14

Farm Subsidies Threatened
Agriculture Secretary Ann M. Veneman said the administration was uncertain
whether there was enough money to finance the $171 billion House farm bill,
raising the possibility that farm subsidies may be the first major program to
feel the pinch of the new wartime budget.   A14

Vieques Stance Changes
With the nation on a war footing, leading Democrats are backing away from their
demand that the Navy bring an immediate halt to its bombing exercises on the
Puerto Rican island of Vieques.   A16

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Inhalers and Bone Loss
Researchers reported that inhaled steroids used to treat asthma have led to bone
loss at the hip in premenopausal women.   A16

ARTS   E1-10

Art World in Turmoil
In the months leading up to the $500 million fall art season there is always
uncertainty, but not since the Persian Gulf war has there been anything like
this. Every corner of the art world is in turmoil because of its ties to the
economy.   E1

NEW YORK/REGION   D1-7

Giuliani Seeks an Extension To Ease Political Transition
Mayor Giuliani suggested that he was trying to get the three mayoral candidates
to agree to an extension of his term for two or three months to ease the
transition to a new administration as New York tries to recover from the
terrorist attack. The mayor appeared to be setting aside -- at least for now --
his and his staff's flirtation with a full third term, after receiving a
lukewarm reception from some top lawmakers who have expressed reluctance to
overturn the term limits law.   A1

Manhattan Car Crackdown
A day after the mayor announced that the city would try, for the first time in
21 years, to tame traffic by prohibiting single-occupant cars from crossing into
Midtown and Lower Manhattan on weekday mornings, many drivers said it was a
sacrifice they were prepared to make, and they thought it made sense. But many
others were in a state of shock, mingled at first with defiance and then
confusion.   D1

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

CIRCUITS   G1-8

Hearing Aid Advance
A Swedish research team has designed a hearing-aid system that enables the user
to determine the direction that any particular sound is coming from. The device
could be helpful to people with severe visual impairment as well as a hearing
problem. The system is a combination of microphones and vibrators fitted onto a
pair of eyeglasses.   G5

SPORTS   D9-16

OBITUARIES   A18-19

Fred V. Morrone
The superintendent of police and director of public safety for the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey was 63.   A18

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

OPEC Production Levels
Ministers from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ended
informal talks without announcing a decision on daily production levels, but
delegates at the meetings said the group planned to leave output unchanged.   C7


Coke Without Pringles
Coca-Cola machines will not be dispensing cans of Pringles around the world
after all. The Coca-Cola Company and Procter & Gamble called off plans for a
joint venture announced in February.   C12

Passed Over, and Out
Jeffrey M. Peek, who ran the asset management division at Merrill Lynch and who
in July was passed over for the firm's presidency, is leaving, the company said.
C7

Wall Street Profits Decline
The Goldman Sachs Group and the Bear Stearns Companies posted steep declines in
quarterly profits as investment banking fees and trading revenue fell.   C7

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: A sacrifice for commuters; nation-building in Afghanistan; the
return of Michael Jordan.
Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E8
Crossword   E8
Weather   D16

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BOVINE SPONGIFORM
ENCEPHALOPATHY (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (86%); AGRICULTURAL
SUBSIDIES (84%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); MUSLIM AMERICANS
(75%); TERRORISM (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (74%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); ISLANDS & REEFS (74%); ELECTIONS (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); JOURNALISM (72%); BOMBINGS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(71%); LIVESTOCK DISEASE (70%); AGRICULTURAL LAW (69%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(69%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (67%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (67%); MENOPAUSE (61%); ASTHMA
(60%); STEROIDS (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (92%)

PERSON: SHIMON PERES (90%); SILVIO BERLUSCONI (52%)

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); TOKYO, JAPAN (69%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (94%); ARMENIA (93%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); JAPAN (92%); HAITI (92%); CANADA (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (92%); EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (79%); PUERTO RICO
(79%); ITALY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             393 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Step Toward International Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 508 words


In signing the treaty establishing an international criminal court, President
Clinton served American interests and the cause of justice worldwide. The court
will enter into force when 60 countries ratify the treaty, which should happen
in a few years. The court will then be empowered to try people accused of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The Senate must still ratify
the treaty, which is not likely to happen soon. But by signing it, Mr. Clinton
has insured that Washington can have a voice in affecting the shape of the
court.

Washington's cooperation is under attack from conservatives in Congress and
members of the incoming Bush administration. The most common objection is that
American troops abroad might be subject to politically motivated prosecution.
But the court is designed to deal with the most serious international crimes,
and will try people only if they are not prosecuted at home. There are
safeguards to prevent frivolous prosecutions.

Nevertheless, Senator Jesse Helms's chief aide has said that fighting the court
will be a top priority.  The senator is likely to reintroduce a bill that would
cut off American military aid to non-NATO countries that ratify the treaty. The
bill would prohibit United States troops from participating in United Nations
peacekeeping missions unless the U.N. Security Council exempts them from the
court's jurisdiction. It would also authorize the president to use any means
"necessary and appropriate" -- including, presumably, military action -- to free
Americans who are indicted and detained by the court.

This mischievous bill is no favor to the Bush government, though some top Bush
appointees have opposed establishment of the court. The bill would severely
constrain the administration's ability to form a balanced foreign policy in the
critical opening months of the new administration and could also constrain its
operations abroad. The new administration might be unable to take part in
peacekeeping missions it finds important. It could also be forced to cut off aid
to nations like South Korea or Colombia that are likely to ratify the treaty.

President Bush would be wise to forgo outright denunciation of the court or any
attempt to discourage other countries from ratifying the treaty. This is an
issue that should be allowed to rest while the new president organizes his
overall foreign policy and consults with allies on a range of potentially
divisive issues. At any rate, the administration ought to send delegates to
international meetings still hammering out the details so that America retains
influence on matters such as the court's financing and jurisdiction.

Many members of Mr. Bush's cabinet, including the secretary of state-designate,
had intimate knowledge of the atrocities committed by Saddam Hussein. They also
calculated that his capture was not worth the loss of American lives. Colin
Powell and his colleagues should thus welcome a court that could indict a future
Saddam Hussein and create an international movement for his capture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); FOREIGN POLICY (87%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%);
JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); ARMED FORCES (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%);
CONSERVATISM (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EDITORIALS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (55%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) CLINTON, BILL (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             394 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Aide Says Pact on Global Tribunal Faces New Review

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


A treaty aimed at establishing an international war crimes tribunal is flawed
and will not go to the Senate for approval in its current form, President-elect
Bush's spokesman said today.

President Clinton signed the treaty on Sunday but recommended that Mr. Bush not
submit it to the Senate until certain misgivings had been addressed.

"We concur," said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. "We have no intent of
sending the treaty up in its current form. We will review it when we come into
office. But we are concerned with a flawed treaty."

At issue is the American role in the International Criminal Court, which is
intended to bring to justice people accused of crimes against humanity. The
world's nations have dealt with such allegations in tribunals established for
specific cases in specific countries. Tribunals were established in the 1990's
to work on crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

A spokesman for the State Department, Richard Boucher, said that by signing the
treaty "the United States is in a position to influence the further evolution of
the treaty."

In signing the pact, Mr. Clinton said, "A properly constituted and structured
International Criminal Court would make a profound contribution in deterring
egregious human rights abuses worldwide."

Sunday was the deadline for signing the treaty. After that, ratification is the
sole method for a government to express support for the treaty or associate with
it.

The treaty has encountered vigorous opposition from the chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina. He has
pledged to give priority in the new Congressional session to passage of a bill
that would bar United States cooperation with any such tribunal.

Mr. Helms said Mr. Clinton's action was a blatant attempt "to tie the hands of
his successor." He added that he feared that the court would subject American
service members to prosecution.

Farhan Haq, a spokesman for the United Nations, said the organization hoped that
the United States and the 138 other countries that had signed the treaty would
eventually ratify it.

"Certainly the signature by the U.S. government on Sunday was a tremendous step
forward in terms of showing U.S. support for this court, and we hope that that
continues," Mr. Haq said.

He noted, however, that "even if only half that number go on to ratify it, this
treaty will in fact enter into force."

The treaty will take effect after 60 countries have ratified it. Twenty-seven
have done so.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); FOREIGN POLICY (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%) CLINTON, BILL (PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); HELMS,
JESSE (SEN)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             396 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Put War Criminals on Notice

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 152 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Signs Treaty for World Court to Try Atrocities" (front page, Jan. 1):

As an American and a lawyer who believes in the rule of law, I am happy that
President Clinton signed the treaty to establish the International Criminal
Court.

Its jurisdiction would be worldwide and encompass crimes like genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

Instead of ad hoc tribunals established by the United Nations (for Bosnia and
Rwanda, for example), we would have a standing court with jurisdiction for those
crimes all over the world.

The simple existence of such a court would give serious pause to any tyrant who
tortured his country's citizens or who invaded the territory of another nation.
The court could act only if the accused's country was unwilling or unable to
investigate allegations of crimes. Opposition in the Senate to the treaty is
misplaced.

PETER J. RIGA
Houston, Jan. 1, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAWYERS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
RULE OF LAW (88%); TORTURE (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%); GENOCIDE (71%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (58%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); RIGA, PETER J

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             397 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Put War Criminals on Notice

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 167 words


To the Editor:

"A Step Toward International Justice" (editorial, Jan. 3) is on the mark. The
United States as a champion of justice and democracy, not only in its own
country but as an ideal for all countries around the world, has to support the
International Criminal Court.

But I doubt that the misgivings of Senator Jesse Helms and the Pentagon revolve
around protecting American troops from prosecution. What is unexpressed here are
the implications for United States policy makers and the military.

Just imagine if an International Criminal Court were to investigate military
leaders charged with the massacres of tens of thousands of people in Guatemala,
El Salvador and Nicaragua. Imagine what these leaders might reveal in the court
about American involvement, naming names of political figures who pushed and
financed their nefarious deeds. Here is the real reason for the difficulties the
International Criminal Court will face in Congress.

(Rev.) JOSEPH TOWLE
Maryknoll, N.Y., Jan. 3, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); PUBLIC POLICY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (79%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); ARMED FORCES (70%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  EDITORIALS;
TREATIES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); TOWLE, JOSEPH (REV)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EL SALVADOR (79%); GUATEMALA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             398 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BUSINESS BRIEFING: ASIA;
THAI GAS IMPORTS STEPPED UP

BYLINE:  By Wayne Arnold

SECTION: Section W; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 116 words


Thailand's state-controlled oil company, PTT Exploration and Production, said
yesterday that it expected to begin receiving additional gas from a project in
neighboring Myanmar that it co-owns with three foreign oil companies -- Petronas
of Malaysia, Premier Oil of Britain and Nippon Oil of Japan -- and with
interests in Myanmar, whose ruling junta has been accused by human rights
activists of using forced labor to build gas pipelines. Thailand is obliged to
buy gas from the project and another in Myanmar involving TotalFina Elf and
Unocal, even though the power plant it was meant to fuel is unfinished; a new
pipeline that opened last month carries the gas elsewhere.   Wayne Arnold (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS
EXTRACTION (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (88%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS
(88%); OIL & GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS (88%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (86%); FORCED
LABOR (86%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (86%); POWER PLANTS (85%); POLITICS (84%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (84%) GAS (FUEL);  LABOR;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
PIPELINES;  INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET

COMPANY: PTT EXPLORATION & PRODUCTION PCL (58%); TOTAL SA (58%)

ORGANIZATION: PTT EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION; PETRONAS (MALAYSIA); PREMIER OIL
(CO); NIPPON OIL CO; TOTALFINA ELF SA; UNOCAL CORP

TICKER: PTTEP (SET) (58%); TTA (LSE) (58%); TOT (NYSE) (58%); TOT (BIT) (58%);
FP (PAR) (58%); FP (BRU) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (58%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES
(58%); SIC1382 OIL & GAS FIELD EXPLORATION SERVICES (58%); NAICS325211 PLASTICS
MATERIAL & RESIN MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS
EXTRACTION (58%); SIC2821 PLASTICS MATERIALS, SYNTHETIC & RESINS, &
NONVULCANIZABLE ELASTOMERS (58%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (58%)

PERSON: ARNOLD, WAYNE

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (95%); MALAYSIA (94%); THAILAND (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);
JAPAN (92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: THAILAND;  MYANMAR;  MALAYSIA;  GREAT BRITAIN;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             402 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

IN BRIEF: LAW;
HUMAN RIGHTS LAW REVISIONS

BYLINE:  By Elsa Brenner

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 99 words


The county Board of Legislators will hold a public hearing on Jan. 22 to
consider changes to Westchester's one-year-old Human Rights Law.

One amendment would clarify that independent contractors, personal tutors and
home and child-care workers are not considered "employees" under the law. Thus,
someone who did not want to hire a homosexual as a child-care worker would not
be charged with discrimination. Another proposal would delete acts of "verbal
intimidation" from the list of causes for a discrimination claim, to prevent the
law from violating free-speech protections.   Elsa Brenner

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTY GOVERNMENT (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (88%); FREELANCE
EMPLOYMENT (87%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (87%); CHILD CARE (84%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             403 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Prosecution of Mr. Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 401 words


After a decade of invincibility, Slobodan Milosevic may soon face justice. The
newly elected authorities in Yugoslavia and Serbia have said they will try Mr.
Milosevic. While there is great public pressure to charge him with corruption,
election theft and other domestic crimes, officials also talk about war-crimes
charges. This is a heartening development that could help Serbs come to terms
with their past.

Serbs are understandably eager to see Mr. Milosevic pay for his criminal
misrule. The overwhelming feeling among ordinary citizens is anger at Mr.
Milosevic for bringing poverty and ruin to his own people. But it is disturbing
that journalists and human rights lawyers in Belgrade report that the vast
majority of Serbs do not care about Mr. Milosevic's mistreatment of other ethnic
groups. Many Serbs also feel that the tribunal in The Hague, which has indicted
him for crimes against humanity, was established solely to persecute them.

Yugoslavia's new president, Vojislav Kostunica, himself a nationalist, has
spoken of the need for a truth commission to examine crimes committed by Serbs.
But he has also said he would never send Mr. Milosevic to The Hague. Other
government officials, however, have proposed a useful compromise. Goran
Svilanovic, Yugoslavia's foreign minister, has suggested that Mr. Milosevic
could be tried in Belgrade for war crimes, with the participation of the Hague
tribunal. Serbia's justice minister-designate, Vladan Batic, has endorsed the
idea.

A Belgrade trial on war crimes charges poses several challenges, such as
encouraging witnesses to come forward, protecting them and finding an
open-minded judge in a court system not noted for independence. But these
obstacles can be overcome with the help of the Hague tribunal.

The trial could help calm the desire for revenge on the part of Mr. Milosevic's
victims, which would further the cause of Balkan reconciliation. If done fairly,
a trial in Belgrade has several advantages. The court would have credibility
among Serbs, and they would watch more closely than if Mr. Milosevic were tried
in The Hague. They would learn more about the crimes committed in their name,
which might help to dispel the myth of victimization that has been so corrosive
in Serbia. Serbs suffered terribly under the rule of Mr. Milosevic. But they
ought to recognize that the people of Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo suffered far
more.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CORRUPTION
(77%); LARCENY & THEFT (77%); LAWYERS (75%); WITNESSES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); ETHNICITY (54%); ETHNIC GROUPS (54%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); CROATIA
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             404 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Dictators, Only Punishment

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

In "A World Court That Could Backfire" (Op-Ed, Jan. 15), Stephen D. Krasner
argues that an international criminal court should be rejected since the threat
of punishment might inhibit genocidal dictators from settling conflicts
peacefully.

He overlooks the fact that the pending treaty for a world criminal court
confirms the right of the Security Council to halt criminal prosecutions when
deemed necessary to further peace negotiations.

However imperfect in practice, deterring aggression and crimes against humanity
must remain the primary goal. Permitting political considerations to immunize
perpetrators shows contempt for their victims and the judicial system.

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
Delray Beach, Fla., Jan. 15, 2001

The writer was a Nuremberg war crimes prosecutor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); WRITERS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); PEACE
PROCESS (53%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TREATIES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B; KRASNER, STEPHEN D

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (51%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (51%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             410 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 933 words


EUROPE

TURKEY: FRENCH DEAL DITCHED
Angered by the French Parliament's passage of a bill declaring that the Ottoman
Empire's killing of Armenians was genocide, the Turkish government canceled a
$149 million deal to buy a spy satellite from the French firm Alcatel and
excluded another French company from competing to sell Turkey tanks worth up to
$7 billion.  Douglas Frantz (NYT)


BRITAIN: TWINS' FUTURE
American-born twins adopted by a British couple who found them through the
Internet should temporarily remain in the care of the local social service
agency that removed them last week, a Birmingham judge ruled. Custody of the
6-month-old girls is being sought by the British couple, Judith and Alan
Kilshaw, their birth mother, Tranda Wecker of St. Louis, and Vickie and Richard
Allen of San Bernadino, Calif., who had begun their own adoption proceedings.
The judge said a decision on the twins' future would be made next month.  Warren
Hoge (NYT)

NORTHERN IRELAND: BARRACKS ATTACKED
Renegade republicans who fired a mortar into British Army barracks in
Londonderry left an abusive message on the launching pad for Gerry Adams,
president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army. The
shell, which did not explode, was the latest attempt by dissidents to protest
Sinn Fein's support for the Northern Ireland peace accord. It was defused as Mr.
Adams was meeting in London with Prime Minister Tony Blair.  Warren Hoge (NYT)

FRANCE: PAPON HEARINGS
The European Court of Human Rights has agreed to speed up its hearing of an
appeal by Maurice Papon, who was convicted of helping to deport thousands of
Jews from France to Nazi death camps in World War II. Mr. Papon, now 90 and
serving a 10-year sentence for crimes against humanity, is arguing that the
sentence was excessive and amounted to "inhuman and degrading treatment or
punishment" given his age and delicate health. The court agreed to hear the case
within six to nine months rather than the usual three years.  Suzanne Daley
(NYT)

SWITZERLAND: WARRANT STANDS
Geneva authorities have refused to cancel the warrant that led to the arrest in
New York of the Kremlin insider Pavel Borodin. Swiss investigators suspect Mr.
Borodin, the former chief of Kremlin properties, of accepting
multimillion-dollar bribes from two Swiss-based construction companies in return
for awarding them refurbishment contracts. Prosecutors want Mr. Borodin
extradited to Switzerland and say that without a warrant there is no reason for
him to cooperate.  Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

AFRICA

UGANDA: EPIDEMIC ENDING
The last known patient in Uganda stricken by the Ebola virus was given a clean
bill of health and discharged from the hospital. "We are really almost at the
end of the epidemic," said Dr. Sam Okware, head of the National Ebola Task
Force. Dr. Okware said that 173 of 426 patients died and that officials do not
know of any other cases.  (AP)

THE AMERICAS

CHILE: PINOCHET QUIZZED
A judge interrogated retired Gen. Augusto Pinochet for two hours in the former
dictator's home, opening the way to a possible arrest and trial on accusations
he was involved in the deaths and disappearances of leftists during his 17-year
rule. It was not clear if the general gave detailed responses to the roughly 15
questions put to him, but his lawyers have said he would declare his innocence.
Before any possible future trial, it is likely there will a series of legal
maneuvers dealing with interpretations of the 85-year-old general's fitness to
face charges in court.  Clifford Krauss (NYT)

PERU: MONTESINOS FIGURE QUITS
Congressman Ernesto Gamarra resigned from a committee investigating Vladimiro
Montesinos, the fugitive former spy chief and aide to ex-President Alberto
Fujimori, after the disclosure of a tape showing him accepting money from an
unidentified person. The video was one of 700 confiscated from Mr. Montesinos's
collection of tapes produced to give him incriminating evidence against
politicians and other luminaries. In another development, the wife of a close
aide to Mr. Montesinos and his secretary have been arrested on suspicion of
amassing an illicit fortune, the judicial police said.  Clifford Krauss (NYT)

BRAZIL: GOVERNOR STEPS DOWN
Mario Covas, governor of Sao Paulo, Brazil's most politically powerful and
populous state, has asked to be "temporarily relieved of his post" in order to
undergo treatment for cancer. Mr. Covas, 70, is halfway through his second
four-year term, and, until a malignant tumor was removed, had been regarded as a
possible candidate of the governing Brazilian Social Democratic Party in
elections next year to choose a successor to President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso.  Larry Rohter (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: SURPRISE TRIAL
A court conducted a closed-door trial of one of President Mohammad Khatami's top
aides, charging him with vote-rigging during last year's parliamentary polls in
Tehran. Mostafa Tajzadeh, reformist deputy interior minister for political
affairs, emerged to denounce his treatment by the conservative-led judiciary. He
said he had had no advance warning of the trial, but was given 10 days to submit
a final defense and then freed on $12,600 bail.  (Reuters)

ASIA

THAILAND: REVOTES ORDERED
The Election Commission ordered re-votes in 62 districts and barred the
victorious party from contesting four of them for cheating in the Jan. 6 general
elections. The commission also confirmed the victory of the Thai Rak Thai Party.
But the re-votes and disqualifications sharply reduced its victory margin,
meaning its government will have to work in a coalition of three or four
parties.  (AP)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
LEGISLATION (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); EXTRADITION (88%); EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE (86%);
ARREST WARRANTS (85%); HOLOCAUST (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); SATELLITE INDUSTRY (77%); FAMILY LAW (76%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (75%); DEPORTATION (75%); SENTENCING (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(74%); JUDGES (74%); LITIGATION (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS
(73%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); MILITARY
SATELLITES (72%); WORLD WAR II (71%); MILITARY BASES (71%); BRITISH PRIME
MINISTERS (71%); ARMIES (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (68%); ARRESTS (67%); VIRUSES
(64%); CONTRACT AWARDS (64%); CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING (63%); TROPICAL DISEASES
(62%); SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY (57%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: SINN FEIN (82%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (55%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%)

CITY: BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); GENEVA, SWITZERLAND
(78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (95%); TURKEY (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); EUROPE (93%); UNITED
STATES (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); UGANDA (92%); ARMENIA
(91%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); AFRICA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             412 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Adds Troops at Rebel Zone as Deadline Nears

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Jan. 24


The government has rushed hundreds of troops to an area just outside a huge
rebel-held territory, as prospects of resuming peace talks by a Jan. 31 deadline
border on collapse.

President Andres Pastrana, who is traveling in Europe this week, declared that
he still held out hope of resuming negotiations, which the rebels froze in
November.

His other option, however, is to try to take back the land, a territory in the
south as big as Switzerland, that his administration ceded in November 1998.

Mr. Pastrana is cutting short his trip and plans to return on Saturday to deal
with the crisis. Concerns about the crumbling peace prospects have hurt the
peso, which traded this week at a record low against the dollar.

The leader of the 17,000-member Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Manuel
Marulanda, has refused to budge despite the efforts by the top government
negotiator, Camilo Gomez, that are widely described as intense.

Both sides have held sputtering talks about how and when to conduct formal
talks.

For two months, the rebels have insisted that they will not resume the talks
unless the government first controls an outlaw army of paramilitary gunmen, the
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia. That group opposes the rebels.

Human rights groups accuse the paramilitary force of having ties to the
military. The Pastrana administration has said the army and the police have
indeed been focusing on paramilitary members, arresting and killing fighters in
death squads.

The troops are being dispatched a week before Mr. Pastrana has to decide whether
to take back the 16,000 square miles of jungles and ranches under rebel control.

The police and soldiers were pulled out of the zone, in the hope of creating a
dialogue. But the talks have repeatedly stalled, and Mr. Pastrana has extended
the time limit on the rebels' use of the zone six times, the latest on Dec. 6.

Many people here say the zone has merely served to let the rebels fortify
themselves. Indeed, the government has accused the rebel force, the FARC, of
using the land as a site to hold kidnap victims, to recruit child guerrillas, to
cultivate coca to buy arms and to organize attacks on other regions.

Today and on Tuesday, C-130 transport planes flew in more than 600
reinforcements to the region, troops that could be positioned in an arc from the
northeast to the southeast of the zone, said an American Congressional aide who
is familiar with the Colombian military.

The reinforcements, which add to the 2,500 troops already stationed outside the
zone, are seen by some in Colombia as a sign that the government has grown weary
with the rebels and may retake the territory when the expiration arrives.

But others knowledgeable about the conflict said wresting the zone from the
battle-hardened force would be difficult, at the least. The Congressional aide,
who has studied the military, said he believed that the army was not ready to
engage the rebels in a large-scale operation.

An expert on the government and the military said he did not see what choice Mr.
Pastrana had if the insurgents remained recalcitrant. The expert, Armando
Borrero, who was the national security adviser under Mr. Pastrana's predecessor,
Ernesto Samper, said he believed that the army might try a limited objective
like taking over the center of the five towns in the zone.

"How can you justify the clearance zone if there's nothing to show for it?" Mr.
Borrero asked. "I don't see any other way. His hands are tied. The political
costs would be enormous if he extends the zone."

Although under enormous pressure to act, Mr. Pastrana could still save the peace
effort, using military muscle to apply pressure on the rebels, said Michael
Shifter, an expert on Colombia at the Inter-American Dialogue in Washington. "I
don't think there's a contradiction between a stronger military force and
pursuing the peace process."

Mr. Pastrana knows all too well, experts said, that any military offensive aimed
at retaking the zone would carry a high cost for a leader who has staked his
presidency on bringing peace. Indeed, Mr. Marulanda, the rebel leader, has said
ending the demilitarized zone would obliterate the chance at holding talks.

"If the status ends, where are we going to hold talks?" Mr. Marulanda asked this
week. "In that case, everything ends."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Troops on a highway 180 miles south of Bogota yesterday. The
Colombian government is sending hundreds of troops to reinforce the 2,500
already stationed just outside the 16,000-square-mile area of jungles and
ranches controlled by a large rebel force. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); ARMED FORCES
(91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); CURRENCIES (90%);
ARMIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF
COLOMBIA (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL
WAR (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); ARMS TRADE (74%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT
(73%); POLITICS (72%); CHILD SOLDIERS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%) POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CURRENCY

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (55%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES); FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (71%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); EUROPE (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             415 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Offers to Meet Rebels and Extend Zone

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Jan. 31


Hoping to restart frozen peace talks, President Andres Pastrana today proposed
meeting the leader of the largest rebel army and offered a four-day extension on
the vast territory that he ceded to the group.

In a nationally televised speech, Mr. Pastrana said the jungle swath that the
government designated for the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia as a peace
gesture in 1998 would temporarily remain in rebel hands for "the sole purpose of
realizing a meeting" with Manuel Marulanda, 69, the guerrilla leader.

The FARC, as the group is known, did not offer an immediate response, and the
president did not specify what actions he would take if Mr. Marulanda rejected
the proposal.

In recent days, the military has dispatched thousands of troops to the outskirts
of the Switzerland-size demilitarized zone in Caqueta Province, raising
speculation that an attack might be imminent.

"Manuel Marulanda has said he's prepared to work 24 hours a day for peace," the
president said. "Today, I am proposing that we meet before the end of the week
to decide once and for all if we are going to continue the peace process that
you and I initiated."

Using dramatic language aimed directly at rebel leaders, the president said,
"You, the members of the FARC, also have a historical responsibility to not
close the doors to peace, as you did so recently."

Since taking control of the jungle zone, rebel leaders have participated in
numerous talks with government negotiators. But even Mr. Pastrana's government
has accused the rebels of using the zone to consolidate their activities.

Talking to reporters today, Alvaro Uribe, a presidential candidate whose
popularity has risen because of his hard-line position toward the rebels,
criticized the government decisions. "I don't agree with the new extension," Mr.
Uribe said, "because it will simply fortify the criminal power of the FARC in
their effort to take power."

The Revolutionary Army broke off official discussions on Nov. 14. The leaders
said the government had done little to control the paramilitary gunmen of the
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia. Human rights groups say that force has
ties to the military, an accusation that the government denies.

In his speech, Mr. Pastrana said his government was dedicated to combating the
death squads.

In a recent report, the Defense Ministry said the government had killed 150
paramilitary gunmen and captured 934 in the last four years. The report said the
paramilitary forces were responsible for 70 percent of the massacres here last
year, accounting for more than 500 deaths. The ministry also estimated that the
number of paramilitary members rose, to 8,150 last year from 850 in 1992.

"This has been the government that has fought hardest against the self-defense
groups," Mr. Pastrana said. "And we won't hold back in our efforts to continue
doing it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (95%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(91%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); DEFENSE
INDUSTRY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (58%) FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (77%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); SWITZERLAND (78%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             434 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC LIVES;
An American Cardinal Who Works to Help the World

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AT the Mass of thanksgiving in his honor, Cardinal Theodore Edgar McCarrick
began his sermon yesterday with a description of the sun-drenched Vatican
ceremony a few weeks ago when he became a cardinal. Then he dived into the
Gospel reading for the first Sunday of the dour season of Lent, the devil's
temptation of Jesus in the desert.

In the cardinal's hands, this familiar story about the stubborn attractions of
wealth, power and glory took on a pronounced flavor of Washington and the
temptations facing the last standing superpower.

"In a way the devil was saying, 'Don't try to make the world better, just take
it over,' " said Cardinal McCarrick, who rarely preaches from notes. "That's a
temptation we all have to fight, trying to take control of other countries or
people instead of cooperating and seeking counsel."

Trying to improve the world step by halting step is the vocation of this
much-traveled cleric who insists that his focus on human rights overseas and
against sweatshops and homelessness in the United States are as much a part of
his job as saying Mass.

"I don't want to come across as some high-class holy person," Cardinal McCarrick
said after the service at the Basilica of the National Shrine here. "I don't do
it as well as I'd like to do it, but this is all real to me."

Sweatshops, homelessness and displaced people have been real to him since his
childhood in Manhattan during the Depression. His sea-faring father died of
tuberculosis when he was 3 years old, forcing his mother, Margaret McLaughlin
McCarrick, to find work at a Bronx factory making automobile parts and to live
with various relatives in an extended Irish-American clan.

"It was a great family," the cardinal said. "They always made room for my mother
and me, whether it was my Uncle Tom when he was still a bachelor or my
Grandfather and Grandmother McLaughlin."

In this boyhood of threadbare Irish family life and priests and nuns, the
cardinal said his strongest identity was with his parish and school, not his New
York neighborhood, Washington Heights.

"When people asked me where I was from I'd say Incarnation; I'd give them the
name of my parish," he said.

When the priests walked into those schools and asked who was going to become a
priest, "80 percent of us raised our hands," the cardinal said. "We all wanted
to be like them."

THEN adolescence struck. The young Ted McCarrick started dating and lost any
sense of a holy vocation until his senior year at the Fordham Preparatory
School, when he started thinking, "maybe God will allow me to become a priest."

After graduation, a school friend invited him to spend a year in Switzerland --
an unheard-of luxury made possible by his friend's family. But instead of
pulling him away from his faith, Europe and the study of history and languages
gave him time to become convinced of his vocation.

After studying at Fordham University and at St. Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers, he
was ordained into the priesthood in 1958. By 1965 he was president of the
Catholic University of Puerto Rico. He returned to New York and rose to become
vicar of East Manhattan and the Harlems, eventually becoming archbishop of New
Jersey.

At the same time, he became a leading Catholic voice on international issues,
pursuing economic and social programs in countries like Haiti, Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and seeking debt relief for poor nations. He toured China on behalf of
the Clinton administration to discuss religious freedom and human rights.

"The suffering is the same," Cardinal McCarrick said. "The terrible needs of the
poor are the same here or there."

His arrival as archbishop of Washington at the beginning of the year seemed a
natural fit. Days after he took office, he dined with President Bush and his
wife, Laura, at the archbishop's home.

Oddly, at that dinner the president did not mention his plans to expand the role
of religious organizations in assisting the needy.

"I let the president lead the discussion and he didn't bring up his faith-based
initiative," the cardinal said yesterday.

If he had, Cardinal McCarrick said he would have told Mr. Bush of his fear that
the government would get out of needed social assistance and hand it over to the
religious groups. "It can't be what's happened in the past with the federal
government saying the churches can carry it for the poor," he said.

Instead, the dinner talk was all about foreign affairs, with the cardinal
speaking up for some of his pet causes. One of the most urgent at that moment
was the need for more assistance after the earthquake in El Salvador on Jan. 13.
With more than 100,000 Salvadoran parishioners in his archdiocese, the cardinal
said he felt as if the disaster had affected his own family.

A few days after that dinner, he made a quick trip to El Salvador, taking money
for those displaced by the earthquake. He also asked that the thousands of
Salvadorans living illegally in the United States be allowed to stay and work
for at least a year to send back money to help their families, and their
country, recover.

Last week Mr. Bush agreed and gave temporary protected status to those
Salvadorans.

"You can't separate your work by just helping on the inside of the church," the
cardinal said yesterday. "All of the teaching we have is to change the world for
the better on the inside and the outside."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Religion

PERSON: Cardinal Theodore Edgar McCarrick

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cardinal Theodore E. McCarrick, the new archbishop of
Washington. (Susana Raab for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); SWEATSHOPS (87%); EASTER SEASON (73%);
FAMILY (71%); HOMELESSNESS (71%); ADOLESCENTS (69%); DISPLACED PERSONS (67%);
SECONDARY SCHOOLS (61%); TUBERCULOSIS (50%) BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

MCCARRICK, THEODORE E (CARDINAL); BECKER, ELIZABETH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); HOLY SEE (88%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             438 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia in New Dispute With Venezuela Over a Missing Rebel

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 533 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, March 8


In a new dispute between uneasy neighbors, Colombian authorities said this week
that Venezuela had freed a Colombian rebel who hijacked a Colombian airliner in
1999. Venezuela had denied that it had arrested the guerrilla.

But Colombia displayed evidence today. It released a grainy videotape that the
authorities said showed the hijacker, Jose Maria Ballestas, a member of the
second-largest guerrilla force, being arrested on Feb. 13 by the police in
Caracas.

Colombia also said it had an arrest report sent on Feb. 14 by Interpol in
Caracas to Colombian officials with details of Mr. Ballestas's capture.

"It's been confirmed, once again, that the kidnapper, Jose Maria Ballestas, was
arrested by Venezuelan police, contrary to what some people have said about him
not being captured," Defense Minister Luis Fernando Ramirez said in an interview
today. "What we need is an explanation, if there was a political decision or
what, to liberate him."

The squabble is the latest to highlight the tensions between President Hugo
Chavez of Venezuela and the Colombians over Mr. Chavez's relationship with
Colombian rebels.

Mr. Chavez, a populist critical of United States influence in Latin America, has
antagonized Colombia by criticizing President Andres Pastrana's
American-supported plan to curtail coca production and by allowing two rebels to
speak in November in the Venezuelan legislature.

The Venezuelan international relations minister, Luis Davila, told reporters on
a trip to Colombia that his government was investigating the allegations.

Other top Venezuelan officials denied this week that Mr. Ballestas had been
captured.

The Venezuelan Embassy in Bogota and the Foreign, Interior and Justice
Ministries in Caracas declined to comment today.

The Colombians say Mr. Ballestas is a Colombian who led National Liberation Army
rebels in hijacking an Avianca liner with 42 people on board on April 12, 1999.

The hijackers forced the plane to land in a northern region under rebel control.

The passengers were released over 19 months, after the collection of ransoms.

Colombian authorities said they had been on Mr. Ballestas's trail for months and
had forwarded important information that helped the Venezuelan Technical
Judicial Police arrest him outside a shopping center in Caracas.

Two days later, on Feb. 15, Mr. Ballestas was to have been handed over at the
Caracas airport to two Colombian agents, who were to have transported him here.
But Mr. Ballestas was not turned over.

Colombian officials said Venezuelan police officials had privately said they had
been told to release Mr. Ballestas.

"What they've said so far is that the capture was false," Mr. Ramirez said of
Venezuelan officials. "Later, Mr. Davila said that they're investigating.

"So now they might say that 'yes, the capture was made, but we released him for
some reason that we don't know yet.' "

A human rights group in Venezuela announced today that it had lobbied Mr.
Chavez's administration to release Mr. Ballestas because they had been told that
he was a political prisoner and assumed that he would face persecution if was
returned to Colombia.

It was unclear, however, whether that lobbying led to the release.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HIJACKING (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (89%); AIRLINES (89%); POLICE
FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); AIRPORTS
(78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); LOBBYING (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (67%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (65%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-VENEZUELA;  RECORDINGS (VIDEO)

ORGANIZATION: EJERCITO DE LIBERACION NACIONAL (59%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL) (57%) NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (COLOMBIA)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (90%) FORERO, JUAN; BALLESTAS, JOSE MARIA; CHAVEZ, HUGO
(PRES)

CITY: CARACAS, VENEZUELA (91%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (73%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (99%); VENEZUELA
(91%); UNITED STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  VENEZUELA

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             448 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Set to Finesse Tribunal Issue and Allow Belgrade Aid

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


The Bush administration is prepared to certify that Yugoslavia is cooperating
with the war crimes tribunal at The Hague, thus meeting the requirements of an
American law and allowing American economic assistance to resume, administration
officials said today.

The certification, which Congress requires by March 31 in order for the money to
flow, is likely to be accompanied by a cautionary State Department note that
Yugoslavia has not made a completely good-faith effort.

But over all, administration officials said, the precarious economy in Serbia as
well as the unsettled situation in Kosovo warrant an American show of confidence
in the new Yugoslav government of President Vojislav Kostunica.

"To require a perfect performance is unrealistic," said one official involved in
the intense debate among Balkans experts in the State Department in the last
several weeks. "This is not the time to kick them in the teeth."

Congress appropriated $100 million for Yugoslavia last year and half of that was
given without conditions. Without certification, however, Yugoslavia would be
denied the remaining $50 million that has not yet been disbursed, Congressional
officials said.

The law that required the administration to certify Yugoslav compliance does not
specifically call for the arrest and extradition of the deposed leader, Slobodan
Milosevic, who was indicted on charges of crimes against humanity two years ago.

But it asks that Yugoslavia provide tribunal investigators with access and
documents, and cooperate with the "surrender and transfer of indictees or
assistance in their apprehension."

In this regard, one author of the law, Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, said today that Yugoslav efforts had not been good enough. He described
the administration's plans for certification as "premature."

"There have been gestures but no convincing steps toward these goals," Mr. Leahy
said. "President Kostunica continues to dispute the legitimacy of the tribunal,
and he has insisted that Milosevic, who lives comfortably in Serbia, will not be
brought to justice by the tribunal."

The Yugoslav government has given conflicting signals about its intentions
toward Mr. Milosevic.

The new ambassador to the United States, Milan Protic, said at a Congressional
hearing two weeks ago that his government would arrest the deposed president
before March 31.

But several days later Mr. Kostunica contradicted him, in line with his campaign
pledge of last September promising not to extradite Mr. Milosevic. The new
Yugoslav leader, a constitutional lawyer, has regularly criticized the tribunal
as a tool of the West that has no legal basis in Yugoslavia's Constitution,
which the government in Belgrade says bans the extradition of citizens.

Earlier this month, the American ambassador to Yugoslavia, William D.
Montgomery, delivered a list of "actions" that Belgrade should make in order to
expect a favorable decision by March 31.

The list did not specify that Mr. Milosevic should be extradited to The Hague
but suggested that Washington would like him arrested and in prison by the
cutoff date. Instead of going to The Hague, Mr. Kostunica has said, Mr.
Milosevic will stand trial in Belgrade -- perhaps for corruption or other
economic crimes, but not necessarily for war crimes.

Last week, apparently in an effort to comply more fully with the certification
law, the Kostunica government handed over to the tribunal a Bosnian Serb,
Milomir Stakic, the former mayor of Prijedor. Mr. Stakic was wanted under a
sealed indictment issued in March 1997 for atrocities allegedly committed in
1992 and 1993 at the Omarska, Keraterm and Trnopolje camps in Bosnia.

Without the extradition of Mr. Stakic, it would have been very hard for the Bush
administration to assert that Mr. Kostunica was making the required progress.

The tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla del Ponte, and the Yugoslav government
have been constantly at odds since Mr. Kostunica took office, although a visit
by Yugoslav officials to The Hague earlier month was supposed to have eased the
tensions.

Last week, justice officials in Belgrade urged war crimes suspects living in the
country to surrender to the tribunal. Among those still at large are the Bosnian
Serb wartime political leader Radovan Karadzic, and the military commander Ratko
Mladic. About 15 war crimes suspects are believed to be living in Yugoslavia.

The certification law demands that the government live up to the Dayton accords,
which in ending the Bosnia war called for Serbia to stop financial and political
support of the police and other institutions in the Serbian part of Bosnia. So
far, Congressional aides said, Belgrade has failed to fulfill this requirement.

The law also requires the Yugoslav government to carry out policies that
"reflect a respect for minority rights." Congress has requested the release of
about 400 ethnic Albanian political prisoners in Serbia, the larger of the two
republics in Yugoslavia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(77%); POLITICS (69%) FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (58%) PERLEZ, JANE; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); MILOSEVIC,
SLOBODAN (PRES); LEAHY, PATRICK J (SEN); KOSTUNICA, VOJISLAV (PRES)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);
NETHERLANDS (93%); KOSOVO (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             450 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Wider Trial For Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 95 words


To the Editor:

The indictment, arrest and eventual trial of Slobodan Milosevic (front page,
April 2) will be a victory not only for the persecuted minorities of the former
Yugoslavia, but also for all humanity against the scourge of war and oppression
initiated by hate-mongering leaders anywhere.

Unfettered national sovereignty permitted practices of war and genocide that led
to the death of tens of millions in the 20th century. At last the world is
coming to accept principles of justice and human rights that supersede it.

JAMES TYSON
Hamilton, N.J., April 2, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

PERSON: TYSON, JAMES; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

COUNTRY: SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             451 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Wider Trial For Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 129 words


To the Editor:

Re "Milosevic Arrest Came With Pledge for a Fair Trial" (front page, April 2):

If Slobodan Milosevic is tried in Serbia, it will be for the fraud and
corruption that angered Serbia's citizens, and they have a right to hold him
accountable for those crimes.

However, Mr. Milosevic's victims in Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo have a right to
see him answer for the atrocities he masterminded there -- crimes against
humanity that extend far beyond what is recognized in Serbia.

The international community must continue, relentlessly, to push for his
transfer to the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague.  Domestic
prosecution is not enough.

JOHANNA BJORKEN
Brooklyn, April 2, 2001

The writer is an investigator of human rights violations and war crimes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%);
CORRUPTION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (83%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: BJORKEN, JOHANNA; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (76%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); CROATIA (93%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); KOSOVO (93%); NETHERLANDS (76%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Admissions by Milosevic Should Speed His Trial, Bosnia Says

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, April 3


Bosnia's Foreign Ministry seized today on an admission by Slobodan Milosevic
that he had channeled state funds to Serbian forces fighting wars in Croatia and
Bosnia in the 1990's, saying discussions of Yugoslavia's role in the atrocities
of those wars "could now cease before international organizations and judicial
bodies."

"What Milosevic has confessed to now was clear a long time ago to all those who
survived the horrifying events in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to the
world public that carefully followed those events," a statement from the
ministry said.

Mr. Milosevic's statement, which should make it easier to prosecute him in
either Serbia or The Hague for war crimes, came on Monday in an appeal that he
has filed seeking to be released from custody. It was the first time he had ever
acknowledged such a direct link with Serbian forces fighting in Bosnia and
Croatia.

A Belgrade court today rejected his request, saying Mr. Milosevic, who was
arrested on Sunday, would continue to be held pending an investigation of
charges of corruption and abuse of power.

In the appeal, in which he argued that money missing from the state had never
gone into his own pockets but had been used to pay for the wars, Mr. Milosevic
also implied that there was classified documentary proof showing how the money
was used. Such matters are still state secrets, he said, but "judicial bodies
could, of course, check them."

Mr. Milosevic added, "I don't mind any investigation of any aspect of my life,
but it bothers me to be treated as a criminal for what I have done for my state
in the best way it could be done."

In 1993, Bosnia sued Yugoslavia in the International Court of Justice in The
Hague (a separate institution from the war crimes tribunal) for conducting a war
of aggression and genocide. Yugoslavia had previously denied any involvement in
the Bosnian war.

Vojin Dimitrijevic, director of the Belgrade Center for Human Rights and an
international lawyer, said the admission is more likely to damage Yugoslavia
than to damage Mr. Milosevic himself. "Milosevic can always argue that he was
defending the Serbian people and didn't know the money would be used for ethnic
cleansing," Mr. Dimitrijevic said. But he could also be tried in Serbia "for
violating the Constitution," he added, by exceeding his authority and "deciding
what is secret or not."

Mr. Dimitrijevic has been chosen as a member of a presidential truth and
reconciliation commission, officially established on Monday, to look into the
causes of the wars in Yugoslavia. The commission is "pretty representative," he
said, with writers, lawyers, historians and theologians.

But its powers must be clarified, he said. "If we cannot summon witnesses, like
a congressional committee, it will be very difficult," he said. His said his
expectations are not high, but "I believe it's worth a try."

President Vojislav Kostunica also wants the commission to cooperate with
similiar bodies in neighboring countries. The roots of the war in Yugoslavia are
contentious, but many here hope that any trial of Mr. Milosevic, which is likely
to be open and televised and go on for months, will lead to what President
Kostunica calls "a social catharsis."

A collective regional search for "truth and reconciliation" never happened after
World War II, in part because President Tito wanted to bury the fierce
nationalisms then under Communist "brotherhood and unity."

To this day, Serbs and Croats fiercely debate just how many Serbs, for example,
were killed in the Croatian fascist concentration camp at Jasenovac, and many
Serbs feel, like Mr. Kostunica, that the late Croatian president, Franjo
Tudjman, is as much to blame for the Yugoslav wars as Mr. Milosevic.

At a news conference today, Mr. Kostunica again said that the tribunal in The
Hague "practices selective justice, which is not justice at all," and that Mr.
Milosevic should stand trial here, on charges including war crimes.

Mr. Kostunica repeated his opposition to the transfer of Mr. Milosevic to The
Hague and said it was not on the agenda. He called cooperation with The Hague "a
process."

"We are ready to cooperate, but cooperating doesn't mean accepting everything,"
he said. "It doesn't mean putting state dignity" below "a handful of dollars,"
he said. "Some things have more lasting value than money."

That was a reference to the American congressional requirement that the Bush
administration certify Belgrade's cooperation with The Hague, which was done on
Monday, in order to get another $50 million in aid.

President Kostunica said that sum was paltry compared with the $30 billion in
damage done to Yugoslavia by the NATO bombing campaign in 1999.

Like the Serbian republic's prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, Mr. Kostunica
expressed confidence that the United States would not block an international
donors' conference this summer, at which Belgrade hopes to raise a billion
dollars in aid; Washington has threatened to block the meeting if Yugoslavia
does not cooperate with the tribunal.

Washington is also pressing for the release of 400 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo
who were arrested during the Kosovo war in 1999 and are still held in Serbian
jails. Almost 400 others have been released.

A group of 143 from Djakovica were convicted in one case, and Mr. Kostunica's
justice minister, Momcilo Grubac, has recommended that they be pardoned. But Mr.
Kostunica said today that since they were convicted on terrorist charges, "our
public would not understand their amnesty," especially when Albanians are
killing Serbian policemen in southern Serbia.

Still, he said, that case was "not regular" and would be examined. "In cases
with insufficient evidence -- and in most cases there is no evidence -- these
people will be amnestied," he said.

Javier Solana, the European Union's security chief, said today that Europe would
not pressure Belgrade to hand over Mr. Milosevic before it is ready.

"We have to trust the authorities in Belgrade," Mr. Solana said in Athens. "We
are not going to put any pressure on them. We have to give them all our support
and trust."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a news conference yesterday, President Vojislav Kostunica
insisted on a trial in Yugoslavia for his predecessor, Slobodan Milosevic.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAWYERS (74%);
CORRUPTION (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); HISTORY (73%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (70%);
ARRESTS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); ETHICS (66%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ETHICS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: ERLANGER, STEVEN; KOSTUNICA, VOJISLAV (PRES)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
CROATIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (71%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             473 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yugoslav Army Charges 183 in Crimes in Kosovo

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 284 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo, April 24


The Yugoslav Army has charged 183 soldiers with crimes alleged to have been
committed during the war in Kosovo and more are under investigation, the army
headquarters said today in a statement.

The investigations are part of a process, the statement said, without saying
what that process was.

The crimes include those "resulting in deaths and injuries of civilians as well
as deprivation of their basic human rights during combat activities in the
province of Kosovo in 1998 and 1999."

The statement, carried by the state news agency Tanjug, says the investigations
are "yet more proof of the serious efforts the army has taken not to hide, but
to punish possible crimes."

Some 245 officers and soldiers are being investigated, and 183 men have already
been charged, the statement said.

The Yugoslav Army, together with the Interior Ministry police, fought Albanian
rebels in Kosovo from 1998, when thousands of ethnic Albanian civilians died or
disappeared. The army has often denied any part in atrocities committed against
the Albanian population of Kosovo during that time, but has occasionally
reported the prosecution of members of its forces for robbery and for individual
killings.

The announcement may not indicate a new attitude toward war crimes committed by
its own men, so much as a new openness on the part of the army, said Natasa
Kandic, director of the Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade, a nongovernmental
organization that has investigated many crimes committed by the army and the
police in Kosovo. Publishing the information was in itself important, Ms. Kandic
said, adding that she did not believe there were any new cases, or that the army
was investigating serious crimes.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); ARMIES (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
VIOLENT CRIME (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (76%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); POLICE FORCES
(69%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); KOSOVO (95%); ALBANIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             476 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Toward a Better Life for Workers

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

An article about working conditions in El Salvador (front page, April 24) says
"monitoring is the sweatshop opponents' great hope." But this obscures the
larger goals of the corporate accountability movement.

Monitoring by independent investigators is essential for guaranteeing that
workers are not subjected to the most egregious abuses, but it is only a stopgap
solution.

For years the anti-sweatshop movement has said the best way to guard against
abuses is to ensure that workers have the right to form independent unions. That
is the most effective way of giving workers dignity. It can also help prevent
health and safety violations while giving workers the collective bargaining
power to raise wages.

JASON MARK
San Francisco, April 24, 2001

The writer is communications director of Global Exchange, a human rights group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Jelly Associates)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LABOR UNIONS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); EMPLOYMENT (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (73%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) LABOR;  SWEATSHOPS;  ORGANIZED LABOR

ORGANIZATION: GLOBAL EXCHANGE (ORGN)

PERSON: MARK, JASON

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             491 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Racism Talks Resume

BYLINE:  By Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 91 words


Delegates in Geneva began trying to hammer out a draft declaration to be adopted
at a United Nations conference on racism this summer.

Earlier negotiations stumbled, mainly over the issue of whether former colonial
powers should pay compensation to victims of slavery. Western countries have
said the issue of reparations is too complex and contentious to be put on the
agenda. The United Nation Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, who also
leads the racism conference, urged that consensus positions be found.
Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM
(90%); SLAVERY (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%) MINORITIES (US);  BLACKS;  SLAVERY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             492 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1098 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

U.S. Mideast Diplomat To Press for Peace Talks
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell urged the Israelis and Palestinians to
declare an immediate unconditional cease-fire and he dispatched a senior aide,
William J. Burns, to work with both sides on developing a "time line" intended
to culminate in the resumption of peace talks.   A1

Israeli helicopters attacked what the army said was a Palestinian mortar
factory, and tanks briefly entered a village in Palestinian territory, firing
sporadically. Two Palestinians were killed in a border clash.   A6


Egyptian Scholar Convicted
A prominent sociology professor, Saad Eddin Ibrahim, was given seven years in
prison on charges of defaming Egypt. Human rights groups said the case raised
doubts about Egypt's ability to provide a fair trial.   A8

Early Warning on Peru Flights
The State Department warned in 1994 that the antidrug program that led to the
downing of an American missionary plane in Peru last month could result in
civilian deaths.   A1

A Gathering at the Vatican
More than 150 cardinals assembled at the Vatican for closed-door meetings on the
future of the church.   A3

Call to Impeach French Leader
Thirty lawmakers signed a petition to impeach President Jacques Chirac, citing
accusations of his involvement in a party financing scandal when he was mayor of
Paris.   A8

China Forced-Labor Disclosure
Officials in Sichuan Province said 39 miners trapped in a flooded coal shaft
were convicts working in a prison-run mine. Chinese news reports have not
mentioned that the victims were convicts, and the government denies the
existence of forced labor.   A3

World Briefing   A9

OBITUARIES   C17-18

Tad Szulc
An author and former foreign correspondent for The New York Times whose reports
of an imminent assault on Cuba by anti-Castro Cubans in 1961 came to reality in
the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion, he was 74.   C17

NATIONAL   A12-17

Republicans Deflect Amendments to Tax Bill
Republicans maintained a united front as the Senate rejected efforts to change a
bill that would give President Bush his top legislative priority, the first big
tax cut in 20 years.   A1

Senate Passes Memorial Bill
The Senate unanimously passed a bill to establish a World War II memorial on the
National Mall, between the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument. The
House passed its version last week. Opponents have filed a lawsuit against the
plan, and a federal commission wants to reconsider the site and design.   A14

First Amendment Ruling
The Supreme Court held, 6 to 3, that the press may not be held liable for
publishing illegally intercepted information as long as it is of "public
importance" and the press itself did not participate in the interception.   A14

Cheney Fund-Raiser Criticized
Vice President Dick Cheney opened his official residence for a reception for
Republican donors. Democrats and campaign-overhaul advocates said it was
improper for Mr. Cheney to use government property for gatherings linked to
fund-raising.   A16

Once Assailed, Now Honored
Former President Gerald R. Ford, 87, who was widely criticized in 1974 for
pardoning his predecessor, Richard M. Nixon, was honored for that act by the
John F. Kennedy Library with its Profile in Courage award.   A14

EDUCATION

Parent-Teacher Teams Lagging
Only a fraction of school leadership teams, which consist of parents, teachers
and principals, are functioning as the Legislature intended when it ordered
their creation at New York City's 1,212 public schools.   B1

Bush at Yale
President Bush warmly reached out to an alma mater he had spent much of his
political life pushing away, but the embrace was not entirely mutual, with boos
from graduating students as loud as cheers.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Judge Puts Gracie Mansion Off Limits to Mayor's Friend
Acting Justice Judith J. Gische of State Supreme Court, who is hearing the
divorce case of Mayor Giuliani and Donna Hanover, barred the mayor's friend
Judith Nathan from Gracie Mansion -- which was ruled a private home -- for the
sake of his children and reprimanded the mayor and his lawyer, Raoul L. Felder,
for public criticism of Ms. Hanover during the Mother's Day weekend. The mayor
declined to comment.   A1

New Editor of The Times Named
Howell Raines, the editor of the editorial page of The New York Times, will
succeed Joseph Lelyveld as executive editor in September.   A1

Taiwan Leader in New York
President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan was welcomed by local and Congressional
politicians and by a Chinese community divided over his visit, which Beijing has
protested.   B1

Size of Households Swells
Census figures show more city residents doubling up in their housing, a drop in
the percentage of people living alone and the biggest increase in average
household size in 50 years, changes attributed to the immigrant influx and a
tight housing market.   B1

The city's traditional ethnic heavyweights -- among Hispanics, the Puerto
Ricans, and among Asians, the Chinese -- faced competition from other
fast-growing groups.   B8

Governor's Travel Questioned
The state spent more than $130,000 in the last two years on chartered aircraft
to ferry Governor Pataki to events, and the governor's political opponents are
raising questions about the propriety of that spending.   B5

FASHION   B11

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Before the Big Bang
Some theorists now suggest that the Big Bang was less a birth than a transition
from some formless era of imaginary time. Others are exploring models involving
a collision with a universe from another dimension.   F1

Health & Fitness   F5

BUSINESS DAY   C1-17

Ford and Tire Maker Part Ways
Bridgestone/Firestone, acting just ahead of an expected Ford effort to replace
as many as 13 million more Firestone tires on its Explorer sport utility
vehicles, said it would stop selling tires to Ford.   A1

Doubts on 2 Arthritis Drugs
Doctors are starting to worry that Celebrex and Vioxx, two popular arthritis
drugs, may not be as safe as they were initially believed to be, and at least
one industry analyst is warning that the problem could particularly affect
Merck, which makes Vioxx.   C1

A New Leader at Fidelity
Abigail P. Johnson, 39, whose grandfather founded the Fidelity Investments
mutual fund giant, was named president of the division that oversees all
Fidelity funds.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

ARTS   E1-8

SPORTS   D1-8

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: The American Mideast initiative; a victory for press freedoms; Vince
Carter got it right; welfare's next phase.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); RELIGION (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); NEWS
BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); FORCED LABOR (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%);
INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENTS (77%); MINE WORKERS (77%); MINING ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS
(77%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (76%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (76%); JAIL SENTENCING
(75%); MAYORS (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%); FUNDRAISING (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%);
HELICOPTERS (71%); TAX LAW (71%); WORLD WAR II (71%); IMPEACHMENT (71%);
PETITIONS (71%); SCANDALS (70%); SOCIOLOGY (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); SUPREME
COURTS (68%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (66%); TAXES & TAXATION (64%);
WRITERS (63%); ARMED FORCES (56%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DICK CHENEY (58%); JACQUES CHIRAC (50%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (55%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); SICHUAN, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (93%); CHINA
(92%); HOLY SEE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); FRANCE (70%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             497 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unsolved Murders in Ulster

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 447 words


A newly retired policeman of the Royal Ulster Constabulary recently asserted in
a Northern Ireland television interview that 10 years ago he taped a man
confessing to an infamous murder and that the R.U.C. then squashed the
investigation and claimed the tape never existed. The murder victim was Patrick
Finucane, a Belfast lawyer shot to death in 1989 by members of a Protestant
paramilitary organization.

The policeman's account and other disclosures about the Finucane case and the
1999 murder of Rosemary Nelson, a lawyer from near Belfast killed by a car bomb,
make clear that a more energetic and open investigation of these killings is
needed. Neither victim was suspected of Irish Republican Army activities, but
both made themselves unpopular with the R.U.C. and the British Army by
representing clients accused of I.R.A. terror. Investigations of the murders
have stalled.

To do justice in these cases and address serious questions of possible
government involvement, Britain should open an independent, judicial inquiry
along the lines of the current investigation into the 1972 Bloody Sunday
massacre.

Ms. Nelson had several clients accused of I.R.A. activities. She had reported
that they conveyed to her death threats from R.U.C. interrogators. Human rights
groups had repeatedly asked London to protect Ms. Nelson, but nothing was done.
The murder investigation, while led by a British police officer, has been run
from the R.U.C. station that employs the officers who allegedly threatened her.
That has discouraged witnesses from coming forward.

In the years since Mr. Finucane's murder, reporters have uncovered disturbing
information about possible official involvement. Agents of British Army and
R.U.C. intelligence have said they participated in targeting and arranging Mr.
Finucane's murder. Credible witnesses have also said that the agents' handlers
knew a murder was coming and did nothing. The veracity of these claims must be
tested by an independent public inquiry.

The British government argues that not every crime deserves a special inquiry,
and that holding one would interfere with the ongoing investigation of the
Finucane case, led by John Stevens, the chief of London's city police.

But Mr. Stevens has already led two probes of the case that went nowhere, and
many suspect were deliberately blocked. He also lacks the power to look into
potentially relevant government files and subpoena politicians, steps that could
help determine whether government policies contributed to the deaths. His
report, like his first two, will also likely be secret. In politically charged
cases like these, the best path to justice is an open, public inquiry.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); MURDER (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); WITNESSES (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); SUBPOENAS (77%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (77%); LAWYERS (77%); ARMIES (76%); JUDICIAL REVIEW
(76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (72%); SHOOTINGS (72%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); PUBLIC POLICY (67%);
INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS (58%) EDITORIALS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (83%) IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY

PERSON: FINUCANE, PATRICK; NELSON, ROSEMARY

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); NORTHERN IRELAND (93%)

REGION: NORTHERN IRELAND

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             498 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

I.L.O. Sees Rise In Forced Labor And Slavery

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 28


Forced labor, slavery and criminal trafficking in people are increasing
globally, with women and children most at risk, the International Labor
Organization says.

Increased efforts are needed to "stamp out the scourge of forced labor once and
for all," the labor agency said in a report that examined the issue, which is
set for debate by its 175 member nations at an annual meeting next month.

Although the report, "Stopping Forced Labor," did not quantify the problem, it
said compelled work -- slavery, debt bondage or bonded labor -- was found
worldwide. "The emerging picture is one where slavery, oppression and
exploitation of society's most vulnerable members, especially women and
children, have by no means been consigned to the past," said Juan Somavia, the
agency's director general.

By far the fastest growing form of forced labor is trafficking in people, which
is so pervasive that most nations are either sending, transit or receiving
countries, the report said. The workers are sent to richer countries, with the
United States believed to be the destination for 50,000 such women and children
every year. Most are destined for the sex trade or domestic work. Many from the
former Soviet Union end up in Western European sweatshops.

Yet traffickers, who are usually part of a criminal network, are rarely caught,
and penalties are lighter than for drug smuggling.

Traditional forms of forced labor, like slavery and bonded labor, also ensnare
vast numbers of people. In South and Central America, the Caribbean and South
Asia, millions of people "are tied to their work through a vicious circle of
debt," the report said.

Burma has been cited by the labor agency for compelling villagers to toil on
public works. The country has outlawed the practice, but human rights groups and
trade unions said this year that they had evidence that it was continuing.

The report also pointed to the use of prisoners by private companies. It said
about 30 American states had legalized the practice of contracting out prison
labor since 1990.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FORCED LABOR (94%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (90%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (90%);
LABOR DEPARTMENTS (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); OUTSOURCING
(78%); PRISON INDUSTRIES (78%); GARMENT WORKERS (78%); SWEATSHOPS (78%);
IMMIGRATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(77%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); SMUGGLING (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (71%); REFUGEES (69%); PRISONS (62%)
LABOR;  SLAVE LABOR;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  WOMEN;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION (91%) INTERNATIONAL LABOR
ORGANIZATION

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); MYANMAR (79%); ASIA (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS
(79%); SOUTHERN ASIA (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (73%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (51%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             510 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Vieques, 2 Years Is a Long Time

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

If Navy personnel have physically abused people detained for protesting the
military exercises on Vieques, as described in "Treated Like Trash," by Bob
Herbert (column, June 14), they have violated international human rights
agreements as embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as
the United Nations' standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners and
its declaration on the protection of all prisoners from torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment.

I am mystified at how a Navy spokesman can declare, without an investigation,
that there has been no abuse or excessive force. The secretary of the Navy
should open an investigation immediately, and if abuse is determined to have
taken place, those responsible should be disciplined accordingly.

LENORE BEAKY
New York, June 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); NAVIES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%); US NAVY (57%)

PERSON: HERBERT, BOB; BEAKY, LENORE

COUNTRY: PUERTO RICO (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: PUERTO RICO;  VIEQUES (PUERTO RICO)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             512 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Education Bill May Omit Its Provision on Boy Scouts

BYLINE:  By EDWARD WYATT

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 693 words


A provision in the education bill that would strip federal financing from school
districts that deny Boy Scout troops equal access to schools is likely to affect
few districts, if any, and may not make it into the final version of the bill,
legislative and education officials said on Friday.

Both the House and the Senate have approved measures that would withhold federal
money from schools or districts that deny a fair opportunity to meet or that
discriminate against the Boy Scouts or any youth group "that prohibit the
acceptance of homosexuals." The amendments were sponsored by Senator Jesse
Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and Representative Van Hilleary, Republican
of Tennessee.

But while school districts in at least a dozen cities, including New York, have
taken steps to limit their support or sponsorship of the Boy Scouts because of
the group's exclusion of gay members, only a handful have sought to bar meetings
by Scouts on school property.

The most notable instance was in Broward County, Fla., where the school board
voted unanimously in November to ban the Scouts from using public schools to
hold meetings and recruitment drives. In March, a federal district judge ruled
that the policy was discriminatory and issued an injunction which allowed the
Scout groups to continue to meet.

Roughly 2,000 boys in 59 Cub Scout packs and Boy Scout troops meet in schools in
Broward. The district is reviewing its agreements with all outside nonprofit and
private groups and intends to draft a meeting policy "that would equitably
charge everyone to use our facilities," said Joe Donzelli, a spokesman for the
Broward County Public Schools.

Such a blanket policy would probably keep Broward and other districts from
falling under the proposed law, said Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the
Human Rights Campaign, a gay and lesbian group that lobbied against the
amendments.

Ms. Birch said she believed that another amendment, sponsored by Senator Barbara
Boxer, Democrat of California, and passed by the Senate on Thursday, would
supersede the Helms amendment when the conference committee takes up the
differing House and Senate bills in the coming weeks. The Boxer amendment would
prohibit discrimination against any youth group, including the Boy Scouts, on
the basis of viewpoint on sexual orientation.

In addition, a Democratic staff assistant said on Friday that President Bush
told lawmakers from both parties last week that he did not support the
provision. It is also opposed by the Democrats who will dominate the Senate
conferees.

The Congressional Research Service, which prepared a memorandum on the issue for
Mr. Helms, found no other school districts that have explicitly barred Scouts
from meeting on school property. It named several, however, that had altered
their rules after the Supreme Court decision a year ago upholding the right of
the Scouts to exclude gay members.

In North Carolina, for example, at least two troops that had been sponsored by
schools in the Chapel Hill-Carrboro City Schools system were told they would
have to find new sponsors by the end of June. John McCormick, a lawyer for the
district, said that once the Scout groups were no longer sponsored by the school
system, they would have to pay a fee to meet at the schools, as do all nonprofit
or private groups.

Mr. McCormick said he believed that the Scout groups would find other meeting
sites rather than pay to use the school buildings.

Gregg Shields, a spokesman for the Boy Scouts of America, said the group wanted
"only to be treated like every other organization."

"Where we have a problem is if we're being charged and others are not," Mr.
Shields said.

School officials in Minneapolis, Iowa City and New York City also changed some
of their policies regarding Boy Scouts activities in schools. In New York in
December, the schools chancellor, Harold O. Levy, barred the public schools from
sponsoring most activities of Boy Scout groups and disallowed the Scouts from
recruiting members during school hours. They are still allowed to use schools
for meetings, under the same rules as other community groups, district officials
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SCHOOL DISTRICTS (92%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (91%); YOUTH
CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%);
EDUCATION LAW (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (89%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); LITIGATION (87%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SCHOOL BOARDS (78%);
LOBBYING (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); APPROVALS
(77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); EDUCATION
DEPARTMENTS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (72%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (72%);
INJUNCTIONS (71%); LGBT RIGHTS (70%); SUPREME COURTS (66%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (66%); JUDGES (66%); APPEALS (66%); EXECUTIVES (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(50%) LAW AND LEGISLATION;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: SCOUT ASSOCIATION (55%) BOY SCOUTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BARBARA BOXER (56%) HELMS, JESSE (SEN); HILLEARY,
VAN (REPR); WYATT, EDWARD

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             513 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

An International Court

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

It was disconcerting to learn from "Salute to a Rights Campaigner Who Gave
Genocide Its Name" (news article, June 13) that the Bush administration has
quietly sought to have our government's signature removed from the treaty
establishing the International Criminal Court, and also that the Pentagon wants
a "guarantee that no American will ever be tried" before it can accept the work
of the court.

As "Criminal Justice on a Global Scale," by Bruce Broomhall (Op-Ed, June 13),
makes clear, American qualms about the court's potential reach are irrational,
not to say profoundly xenophobic.

Small wonder that the administration's go-it-alone philosophy is straining
relations with our allies: on key questions of human rights, just as on global
warming and missile defense, our government acts not just as a bully, which
would be bad enough, but also as an ignorant bully, which is inexcusable.

(Rev.) PETER LAARMAN
New York, June 13, 2001

The writer is senior minister, Judson Memorial Church.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
GENOCIDE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%); WRITERS (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%);
GLOBAL WARMING (69%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: BROOMHALL, BRUCE; LAARMAN, PETER (REV)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Justice: Swift Passage To Execution

BYLINE:  By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1935 words

DATELINE: BEIBAISHA, China


Nothing in Hao Fengqin's abbreviated life suggested that she would end her days
on an execution ground.

The 45-year-old Ms. Hao lived a hard life in this village of low brick houses,
set in wheat fields 200 miles south of Beijing. She was born poor and married
poor, and she bore two daughters, considered a misfortune in rural China because
girls traditionally leave the family after they marry and offer little support
to their parents later on.

But Ms. Hao unwittingly sold explosives for a mass murder: a man named Jin
Ruchao was found guilty of killing 108 people with some of Ms. Hao's homemade
ammonium nitrate, which she sold to nearby quarries and which was the type of
explosive that brought down the federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995,
killing 168 people.

Like Timothy J. McVeigh, Mr. Jin was executed, though his death was swifter and
less gentle: he was shot in the back of the head, the usual method of capital
punishment here, just 37 days after his arrest and less than seven weeks after
the crime.

For her unintentional role in the bombing, Ms. Hao was shot in the head too, one
month after the police took her away from her home. Typically, someone found
guilty of making and selling unlicensed explosives would have been fined.

China has made great strides in enforcing the rule of law for commercial
transactions, particularly those involving foreigners. But without more uniform
enforcement of the law in other areas, and in the absence of institutions like a
free press and a strong judiciary, the country continues to rule most of its
people in the same brutal way it has for centuries: by occasionally singling out
a suspect for severe punishment as a warning -- "killing a chicken to scare the
monkeys," as an ancient Chinese saying goes.

There is a randomness to who dies, given that many technically criminal
activities flourish across China. Those practices are considered only moderately
risky because they are so widespread. But there is always the threat of death
for an unlucky few at the ever-shifting perimeter of tolerance.

Since 1983, Beijing has mounted periodic "Strike Hard" campaigns to eliminate a
changing list of crimes. The campaigns have resulted in tens of thousands of
executions, more each year than in the rest of the world combined. Amnesty
International said the Chinese press reported at least 4,367 executions in 1996
-- about a dozen a day -- during that year's Strike Hard campaign.

China is in the midst of another such campaign now, focused on corruption. The
number of executions, which rights groups say had begun to subside, is again on
the rise. One Western diplomat said his government counted 800 reported
executions in May alone. The real number may be much higher; many executions are
never reported.

It is impossible for the average lawbreaker to know when the government will
crack down on a particular activity. But when it does, Chinese justice is swift,
often unexpected and, in cases like Ms. Hao's, unmerciful.

A decade ago, for example, smuggling was largely ignored and smugglers' markets
operated openly in many port cities. The People's Liberation Army was one of the
worst offenders. Then the government cracked down to stem the loss of badly
needed tax revenue, and that caught many people in the smuggling chain by
surprise. Hundreds of people have since been put to death for the crime.

But there is little long-lasting deterrent from such campaigns; as the intensity
of the crackdown inevitably wanes, old practices return. Organizing prostitution
is also punishable by death, for example, but the sex trade is rampant.

Ms. Hao graduated from high school, making her one of the best educated people
in this village, where few people speak standard Mandarin, conversing instead in
a local patois. Her schooling helped her survive after her husband fell ill 11
years ago. She supported her family any way she could, baking cakes, raising
chickens, selling shoes, keeping the books for a friend's small factory.

After her husband died from a blood clot two years ago, she learned how to make
ammonium nitrate, a common fertilizer but also a powerful explosive that is in
high demand among the small quarries that pock the razor-back hills near her
home.

In March last year, she began mixing explosives with a neighbor, Wang Yushun, in
an empty building in the village, local residents said. Like thousands of other
explosive-makers on the fringe of quarries and mines across China, Ms. Hao and
Mr. Wang operated without a license.

Two months after she started up the business, the police say, a mute man
appeared at her home and indicated that he was looking for someone to supply
inexpensive explosives to a small quarry. He bought a sample of about four
pounds of ammonium nitrate from her. His name was Jin Ruchao.

Then on March 12 this year, Mr. Jin returned wearing a green padded-cotton
overcoat against the dry, frigid air. He wrote on a piece of paper that he
wanted to buy half a ton of ammonium nitrate, not an unusual order for a quarry.

Ms. Hao and Mr. Wang mixed the explosives the next day and packed 1,300 pounds
of it in 11 yellow chicken-feed sacks. Mr. Jin came back that afternoon and paid
40 yuan for 55 pounds, saying he wanted to test the batch first.

He paid for all 11 bags the next day, and Mr. Wang gave him a key to the
warehouse where the bags were stored so he could remove the explosives at his
convenience. Ms. Hao and her colleague pocketed a total of 980 yuan, about $118,
earning a modest profit.

Two days after he bought the gray, granular powder, Mr. Jin bombed four
apartment houses in Shijiazhuang, a nearby provincial capital, killing 108
people. The police said he acted in revenge against relatives who had angered
him.

Ms. Hao recognized Mr. Jin in the next day's newspaper. She fled to a nearby
orchard and spent two nights in a pump house.

The police knew where to look for the likely source of the ammonium nitrate. On
March 18, they swept through the villages below the quarry-flecked hills,
shutting down illegal explosives shops and detaining more than 100 people. In
Beibaisha, they seized Mr. Wang and put up posters calling for the arrest of Ms.
Hao. They finally caught her, on March 20 at 1:20 a.m., after she returned to
her home from the orchard.

Mr. Jin was found a few days later and confessed to the bombings. He named Ms.
Hao as the woman who had provided the explosives.

At her trial on April 17, which lasted less than an hour, Ms. Hao insisted that
she did not know she needed a license to make or sell explosives and had no idea
Mr. Jin was lying when he said he needed the explosives for a quarry.

In China, judgment is often based on the consequences of a crime, not just the
action or intention. And the criminal code gives the courts great leeway in
deciding the severity of punishments, so such decisions vary widely depending on
the political climate in which they are made.

People caught making unlicensed explosives near Ms. Hao's home in the past were
simply fined, local residents say. According to Section 125 of China's Criminal
Law, making, selling, storing or transporting illegal explosives is punishable
by 3 to 10 years in prison. But the law allows harsher penalties, including
death, in very serious cases.

On April 18, the court in Shijia zhuang sentenced Mr. Jin, Ms. Hao and Mr. Wang
to death, along with Hu Xiaohong, a man from a nearby quarry who had sold Mr.
Jin 50 detonators and 20 paper fuses for 33 yuan, or about $4.

The four filed appeals, but on April 29, the Hebei provincial court rejected
them all. It did suspend Mr. Hu's sentence for two years and returned him to
jail. If he behaves during that time, his sentence will be commuted to life in
prison. The Hebei court's ruling was final.

Mr. Jin, Ms. Hao and Mr. Wang, bound with rope, were taken from the court and
placed in the open beds of three trucks for a ritual parade through town before
heading to the execution ground. There, each was taken out, forced to kneel,
then shot.

Ms. Hao's case was exacerbated by the central government's growing frustration
with deaths caused by unlicensed explosives. Just a week before Mr. Jin's
bombing, the government was embarrassed by a blast that killed 42 people, almost
all children, who were reportedly assembling fireworks in a school.

It also reflects China's growing fear of domestic terrorism, for which readily
available explosives could be used. The country was rattled by a brief spate of
bombings in the mid-1990's that were blamed on Islamic separatists from China's
western provinces.

"It's a pity," said Zhang Tao, a young Shijiazhuang native. "They got such a
harsh sentence because so many people died, but if they knew what the explosives
were going to be used for, they wouldn't have sold the stuff, especially for so
little money."

While China's mainstream press showed no sympathy in reporting the executions of
Ms. Hao and Mr. Wang, publications and Web sites catering to China's small legal
community expressed a cautious ambivalence.

A Beijing University law professor, Xian Han, argued on one site that because
Ms. Hao and Mr. Wang had no inkling of Mr. Jin's murderous intentions, there was
no direct legal causality between the sale of explosives and the bombing. He
added that the two would have received far lighter sentences, if they had been
prosecuted at all, had Mr. Jin not used the explosives to murder.

"Our society can only be truly stable when everybody's basic constitutional
rights are guaranteed," Professor Xian wrote.

Hu Yunteng, a lawyer and death penalty expert in Beijing, said there is a
consensus forming in China's academic and legal communities that the country
should use the death penalty less, particularly for nonviolent crimes.

"Economic crimes can be controlled without the death penalty," he argued. "The
rise in these crimes shows that the country's legal and management systems are
flawed and that the legal system isn't playing its proper role."

Currently, 68 kinds of crimes are punishable by death, including 28 that are not
violent. Those include embezzlement, tax fraud, illegal financial schemes and
accepting bribes totaling more than $12,000.

As China's once centrally planned economy continues its fitful transition to a
market economy, the incidence of those crimes has soared. "From this point of
view, the scope of the death penalty is definitely expanding," Mr. Hu said.

Near Beibaisha, hardscrabble hills are gouged with quarries that blast out stone
and crush it into gravel or feed it to the cement mills nearby. At one small
quarry, paper strips recently glued across the doors of a storage shed warn that
people in charge of the explosives should register with the Public Security
Bureau.

Fresh white six-foot characters on Beibaisha's gray brick wall facing the road
read: "Crack Down Harshly on the Violent Crimes of Bombing, Arson and Murder."

The mention of Hao Fengqin's name brings an uneasy silence. Her neighbors all
express sorrow for her fate. A rusting padlock hangs on the bamboo gate to the
courtyard of her small house, which is markedly shabbier than most others. Her
younger daughter, in high school, has been sent to live with another family.

Her elder daughter, in her early 20's, works at a small chicken-feed mill a few
villages away. She emerged recently from the mill's yellow-walled compound to
meet a visitor. She wore a black T-shirt, her round, ruddy face strikingly
similar to her mother's. She had nothing to say, however, having been warned not
to talk about her mother's case.

"My mother just died," she said softly when pressed to speak. "It's impossible."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jin Ruchao, above, was convicted of blowing up four buildings
in March, killing 108 people, because he was angry at relatives there. He was
executed a half hour after this photo was taken in April. Hao Fengqin, below,
who unwittingly sold explosives to Mr. Jin, was convicted with equal dispatch.
Here, she is being led out of an appeals court in April directly to her
execution, less than a month after her arrest. (Photographs by Chinese state
media)(pg. A10) Map of China shows the location of Beibaisha: A crackdown
trapped a seemingly innocent woman in Beibaisha. (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (75%); BOMBINGS (75%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); HEAD INJURIES (73%); RULE OF LAW (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(72%); TERRORISM (70%); ETHICS (69%); CORRUPTION (67%); ARRESTS (67%); FREEDOM
OF PRESS (64%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ETHICS;  CRIME
AND CRIMINALS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: SMITH, CRAIG S; HAO FENGQIN; JIN RUCHAO

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (88%); OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  BEIBAISHA (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             521 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dictators in the Dock

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 446 words


Some once-powerful dictators and strongmen are finding the world an increasingly
inhospitable refuge. Vladimiro Montesinos, Peru's shadowy former intelligence
chief who was hiding in Venezuela, has now been led from a plane in handcuffs in
Lima to face charges of murder, torture, extortion and trafficking in arms and
drugs. Yugoslavia has initiated a legal process to send Slobodan Milosevic, its
former president, to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, where he will
probably land next month.  Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile may escape trial on
charges of covering up dozens of murders and forced disappearances on the
grounds that he is mentally unfit. But after his arrest in London in 1998 and
his indictment in Chile, he is a discredited, ridiculed, broken man.

Among the many things these three men shared was the belief that they were
immune to prosecution. This belief has now been shattered.

Their colleagues had better be taking note. A few years ago, dictators and
strongmen who wielded absolute power in their nations never had to think about
facing trial. Today leaders who commit the most serious crimes must worry that
someday, somewhere, they will be held accountable.

The reckoning could come abroad or at home.  Mr. Montesinos will be tried in
Peru, Mr. Milosevic by an international war crimes court. General Pinochet was
arrested in a foreign land under laws that allow any nation to prosecute crimes
against humanity, no matter where they occur -- an act that facilitated his
indictment and arrest at home. The same notion of accountability lay behind the
conviction of four Rwandans, two of them nuns, in a Belgian court earlier this
month for their role in abetting genocide in their home country.

Mr. Pinochet's arrest broke the spell the military held over Chile. It allowed a
fearful nation to begin a national debate over the crimes of the Pinochet era.
The details of Mr. Milosevic's trial are likely to be widely covered in Serbia,
forcing Serbs to confront the crimes committed against other ethnic groups in
their name.

In Peru, the government plans to repatriate the millions of dollars -- perhaps a
quarter-billion dollars -- that Mr. Montesinos has stashed abroad.  If Mr.
Montesinos is cooperative, the evidence he supplies during his interrogation may
help persuade Japan to send former President Alberto Fujimori back to Peru to
face appropriate charges.  Mr. Montesinos could also shed some light on his long
relationship with Washington, a subject of considerable interest in Peru and the
United States. His arrest could eventually prove cautionary not only for
powerful criminals, but for the nations that do business with them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); ARRESTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); TORTURE (77%); VIOLENT CRIME (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%);
ETHICS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); ESPIONAGE (73%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (72%); MONEY LAUNDERING (72%); POLITICS
(71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (68%); POLITICAL DEBATES (62%); MURDER (57%);
ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS (50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  EDITORIALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  ETHICS;  MONEY LAUNDERING;  EXTRADITION;  ESPIONAGE;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

PERSON: MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); MILOSEVIC,
SLOBODAN

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (76%); LIMA, PERU (73%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); CHILE (94%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%);
RWANDA (79%)

REGION: PERU;  SERBIA;  CHILE;  VENEZUELA

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             522 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 27, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Chile: Pinochet Hearing Delayed

BYLINE:  By Clifford Krauss (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 82 words


With one of three judges failing to show up without explanation, an appeals
court was forced to delay a hearing that was to decide whether to suspend the
human rights case against Gen.

Augusto Pinochet on the ground that he is not mentally fit to stand trial.
Whatever decision the court makes may eventually be appealed to the Supreme
Court. The former dictator has been accused of covering up the activities of a
death squad that kidnapped or executed 75 people.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); SUPREME COURTS (86%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (82%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

COUNTRY: CHILE (93%)

REGION: CHILE

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             523 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Ivory Coast: Charges Against Former Ruler

BYLINE:  By Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 103 words


A group of Ivoirians victimized during the presidential election last year has
filed suit in Belgium charging crimes against humanity by the government of
President Laurent Gbagbo and the former military ruler, Gen.

Robert Guei. Under an unusual law, Belgian courts have universal jurisdiction in
cases of crimes against humanity, and four Rwandans were recently convicted for
their roles in the 1994 genocide. Many Ivoirians from the Muslim north were the
targets of attacks during the October election by soldiers allied with General
Guei and paramilitary police close to President Gbagbo.   Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%);
GENOCIDE (88%); JURISDICTION (88%); POLITICS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); WAR
CRIMES (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); MILITARY RULE (87%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); ARMED FORCES
(85%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (51%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GBAGBO, LAURENT (PRES); GUEI, ROBERT (GEN); ONISHI, NORIMITSU

COUNTRY: COTE D'IVOIRE (97%); RWANDA (92%); AFRICA (90%); BELGIUM (90%)

REGION: IVORY COAST;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Milosevic in The Hague

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 460 words


In 1995 Slobodan Milosevic went to Dayton, Ohio, to sign a peace agreement for
Bosnia. The Dayton peace accords committed Yugoslavia to cooperate with the
International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague, including transferring those who
were indicted. Mr. Milosevic, it is fair to say, had little intention of meeting
this obligation. Yet yesterday Yugoslavia kept his promise and transferred him
to The Hague for trial.

Just nine months ago Mr. Milosevic was an omnipotent dictator. His transfer to a
jail cell at The Hague is a historic moment and an affirmation of the importance
of international justice. His indictment by the War Crimes Tribunal in 1999 on
charges of crimes against humanity hastened his fall from power. His arrest and
transfer have strengthened democracy in Yugoslavia and will open the way for the
international community to assist in the country's economic reconstruction.

Yugoslavia's president, Vojislav Kostunica, who defeated Mr. Milosevic in
elections last year, wanted to see him put on trial in Belgrade for election
fraud, corruption and other domestic crimes. But more Western-oriented
politicians, led by Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic of Serbia, orchestrated his
transfer to The Hague.

Mr. Djindjic's position was strengthened by consistent pressure from Washington.
The Bush administration made Mr. Milosevic's surrender a condition of American
economic aid and participation in a donors' conference that began today. The
administration, in turn, was prodded to hold firm by Congress, especially two
senators -- Patrick Leahy, a Democrat, and the Republican Mitch McConnell.

The internecine disagreements about Mr. Milosevic's transfer are likely to set
off a political crisis in Yugoslavia. But his extradition may help calm passions
in neighboring Macedonia, as it reminds government officials there that they,
too, may be called to account for war crimes. The transfer to The Hague may also
help Serbs come to terms with the crimes he committed. Polls show that most
Serbs wanted to see Mr. Milosevic tried in The Hague, and politicians have
uncovered evidence of his crimes to strengthen public support. State television
began to show exhumations of mass graves said to contain bodies of people from
Kosovo. The evidence has shocked many Serbs, and sparked the beginnings of a
debate on Serbian crimes in Kosovo.  Such a reckoning is crucial if Serbia is to
transform itself into a fully democratic nation.

Yugoslavia must still send to The Hague other men it is harboring who have been
indicted for war crimes. But Mr. Milosevic's transfer was a monumental step. A
man accused of planning and instigating some of the most heinous crimes in
recent years has fallen from near-absolute power to face justice for his acts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); EVIDENCE (77%);
CORRUPTION (77%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME
(77%); TRENDS (74%); ELECTIONS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); ELECTION
FRAUD (73%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (72%); ARRESTS (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(71%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (61%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%);
POLLS & SURVEYS (50%) EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FOREIGN AID;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (51%); MITCH MCCONNELL (51%) MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); DAYTON, OH, USA (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA
(79%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); MACEDONIA, THE
FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             527 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends: The Age of Revolution;
Founding Fathers Dreamed of Uprisings, Except in Haiti

BYLINE:  By THOMAS BENDER;  Thomas Bender is University Professor of the
Humanities at New York University, where he teaches American history.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1097 words


AMERICANS celebrate the Fourth of July Americana-style, much like the way the
nation thinks about the revolution it commemorates. The rituals of family
picnics, parades, fairs, fireworks, stories of midnight rides and tea parties
reinforce a sense of the Revolution's Americanness: singular, exceptional,
unrelated to any history beyond the territory that would become the United
States. Yet when Americans isolate the Revolution, they diminish it. It becomes
parochial.

For the American Revolution initiated an age of democratic revolutions in the
18th century. It shares the Atlantic stage with the French and Haitian
revolutions that followed. While each uprising has its own character and
results, the course and significance of each depends, in part, on the larger
history they shared.

There is a general awareness of the French Revolution and its relation to the
American uprising. By contrast, the Haitian Revolution of 1791 is rarely
mentioned in discussions of this age of revolution. Yet it was present in the
imaginations of the founding fathers and played a large role in the American
project of nation-making.

Consider one curiosity of the American Revolution: enthusiasm for revolution
waned rather quickly in the new nation. No doubt the establishment of stable
government with the Constitution and the successful transfer of power in 1800
were factors. In addition, historians cite the example of the French Revolution,
particularly its hostility to religion and disintegration into the Terror. That,
too, is plausible.

Yet Haiti is surely part of this story. Could it be that after 1791 the specter
of a revolution of slaves against white masters -- a revolution led by a former
slave, Toussaint Louverture, who claimed for the former slaves a universal human
right to freedom and citizenship -- made Americans cool to revolution?

Thomas Jefferson, who readily accepted violence as the price of freedom in
France, was not so relaxed about the black revolutionaries in Saint-Domingue --
as Haiti was called until its formal independence in 1804.

Timothy Pickering, the irascible Federalist who served in the cabinets of both
George Washington and John Adams, took note. How, Pickering demanded of
Jefferson, could he praise the French Revolution and refuse support for the
rebels on Saint-Domingue because they were "guilty" of having a "skin not
colored like our own"?

Jefferson's difficulty was not unique. This revolution of black slaves claiming
universal rights was, as Michel-Rolph Trouillot, a Haitian anthropologist, has
argued, unthinkable. Thus it was silenced.

The silence continues. But it is in the interest of Americans to break it. Doing
so will enrich the understanding of the epochal meanings of the American
Revolution. Just as Jefferson's noble words in the Declaration of Independence
crystallized a new way of thinking, so, too, do the actions of those Africans in
the Caribbean who produced the largest slave rebellion in history.

YET Jefferson, who had no sympathy for the Haitian revolution, owed to it the
most important achievement of his presidency. The purchase of Louisiana, which
set the United States on course to become a continent-wide nation, became a
possibility because the French defeat in Haiti encouraged Napoleon to sell
Louisiana at a bargain price.

The Haitian Revolution also played a part in heightening the divisions between
the Adams Federalists and the Jeffersonian Republicans. Though their positions
were complex and shifting -- driven by the ever-changing Atlantic diplomacy
caused by the contest between Britain and Napoleonic France -- it is fair to say
that Adams and the Federalists were generally sympathetic to Toussaint's hopes
for Saint-Domingue, while Jefferson was consistently less so. This division
contributed to the tensions that resulted in the invention of the American
system of political parties, something not anticipated in the Constitution.

The Adams administration was in fact quite friendly to Toussaint. Adams
appointed a consul general in 1799, instructing him to emphasize friendship as
well as trade. He even suggested that the consul informally assure Toussaint
that the United States was not opposed to independence and recognition.

Jefferson also welcomed trade, but close relations between the two societies
worried him. In a letter to James Monroe, he speculated that the insurrectionary
violence on Saint-Domingue probably forecast the future in the United States.
Too much contact, he feared, might advance that day. With trade, he wrote to
James Madison in 1799, "we may expect . . . black crews, & super cargoes &
missionaries thence into the Southern states." It was an unwelcome prospect and,
for Southern planters, disturbing. The contagion of freedom, they insisted, must
be quarantined on Saint-Domingue.

Jefferson's refusal to recognize the independence of Haiti in 1804 was emulated
by Madison and Monroe, the Virginians who succeeded him. When, in the 1820's,
the issue was again debated in the Senate, Southern senators refused to
acknowledge a nation formed by black slaves who rebelled against white
slaveholders. "Our policy with regard to Haiti is plain," insisted Senator
Robert V. Hayne of South Carolina. "We never can acknowledge her independence."
It was not until 1862, in the midst of the Civil War, that the Lincoln
administration finally recognized Haiti.

Black Americans have long recognized the relevance of the Haitian Revolution.
Gabriel Prosser, who led a slave conspiracy in 1800, and Denmark Vesey, who
organized another in 1822, both well knew what had happened in Haiti. Much
later, in 1893, soon after returning from his service as American minister to
Haiti, Frederick Douglass, the escaped slave who became a prominent writer and
reformer, celebrated the Haitian Revolution for advancing "the cause of liberty
and human equality throughout the world."

Even if, as he recognized, there was much to criticize in Haiti's history, he
was right in his call for all Americans to include Haiti in the revolutionary
heritage of the 18th century.

When we consider the American Revolution in this broader way, it becomes larger
and richer. American history is embedded in a complex and continuing history
that has redefined human rights, freedom and citizenship.

The founding fathers contributed much to that history, as did the other 18th
century Atlantic revolutions. Yet it is the message Haiti carried during the age
of democratic revolution, the aspiration for equality across the color line,
that remains the necessary hope of the unfinished American revolution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former slaves in Louverture's army attacked French soldiers
after they tried to re-establish slavery in 1802. (Hulton Archive)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US INDEPENDENCE DAY (90%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (90%); SLAVERY (89%);
TRENDS (88%); RELIGION (78%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HISTORY (72%); ANTHROPOLOGY &
ARCHAEOLOGY (65%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (61%) HISTORY;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: BENDER, THOMAS (PROF)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); HAITI (96%); FRANCE (91%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: HAITI

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             529 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Belgium: Case Against Sharon To Proceed

BYLINE:  By Paul Meller (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 85 words


A Belgian prosecutor said an investigation into Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of
Israel for possible crimes against humanity could proceed. The case was prompted
by a dozen complaints filed against Mr. Sharon charging that he was responsible
for the deaths of hundreds of Palestinians by Christian militiamen in Beirut in
1982 when Mr. Sharon was Israel's defense minister. A 1993 law allows Belgian
courts to prosecute foreign officials for human rights violations committed
outside Belgium.
   Paul Meller (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); PRIME MINISTERS (86%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (86%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN); MELLER, PAUL

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); BELGIUM (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
LEBANON (92%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  BELGIUM;  LEBANON

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             530 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 5, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A MOVEMENT IN HIDING: A special report.;
Sect Clings to the Web in the Face of Beijing's Ban

BYLINE:  By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2634 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Tapping away at one of his computers in a cramped two-room apartment in western
Beijing, Lloyd Zhao is engaged in an extraordinarily dangerous endeavor --
searching through the night for holes in the electronic wall that the government
has built to keep Chinese from seeing Web sites of Falun Gong, the outlawed
spiritual movement.

Periodically, firewall programs that Mr. Zhao has installed on his computer
detect a signal from another computer in China that is trying to identify him.
The string of numbers from the snooping computer that appear on Mr. Zhao's
screen can invariably be traced to a branch of the Public Security Bureau.

"They look for anyone who tries to reach Falun Gong Web sites overseas," says
the shaggy-haired Mr. Zhao, 33, a fervent Falun Gong follower and an advanced
computer technician. When the surveillance becomes too intense, he switches
Internet accounts, operating systems, even hard-disk drives and telephone lines
to mask his online identity.

He says the threat of detection will not dissuade him from his self-appointed
mission to keep open the lines of communication between the discipline's United
States-based founder, Li Hongzhi, and followers here, where a government
campaign to eradicate the movement has entered what Beijing hopes is the
endgame.

Since China set out to crush Falun Gong nearly two years ago, as many as 200
people have died, possibly thousands have been beaten or tortured, and millions
have been cowed into renouncing their faith in Mr. Li's apocalyptic cosmology.

On Wednesday, Chinese officials confirmed a human rights report of a mass
suicide by Falun Gong followers in a labor camp, but Falun Gong adherents
continued to insist that the inmates were tortured to death. Page A10.

But Mr. Zhao and hundreds like him continue to elude China's internal security
forces, using temporary cell phone numbers, encryption programs and obscure
Internet services based overseas to keep the remaining network of followers
connected.

That makes Mr. Zhao one of the "most dangerous" of Falun Gong's remaining
proponents, according to He Zuoxiu, a physicist and a Communist Party member who
has played an integral role in having the movement banned. Mr. He says Falun
Gong is an evil cult that, unchallenged, could threaten China's tenuous
stability, should it galvanize the millions of people disenfranchised by the
transition from a centrally planned to a market-driven economy.

Sitting in his apartment a few miles from Mr. Zhao's apartment, Mr. He said
people like Mr. Zhao should be hunted down and locked up until they have
recanted their beliefs.

The two men, separated not only by age but also by spiritual beliefs -- Mr. He,
74, is an avowed atheist, and Mr. Zhao believes in multiple gods -- are on
opposite sides of a confrontation that has drawn considerable attention in the
West, in part because it represents the most sustained challenge to Communist
Party authority in more than a decade.

On one side is a group that believes that it is engaged in a battle with evil
beings for control of the universe. On the other is a government that promotes
atheism and feels so threatened by a relative handful of people that it has
marshaled the full force of its police power to bend them to its will.

"The number of followers is getting smaller, and the crackdown is growing
fiercer, but it's going to end with our victory soon," Mr. Zhao said at one of
many recent interviews, almost always at restaurants or bars or shopping malls
around the city, for which his lanky frame, clad in black, would suddenly emerge
from the crowd at the appointed hour.

Mr. Zhao said he had decided to speak out because Master Li says followers
should step forward to "validate" Falun Gong. Mr. Zhao said he believed that the
authorities would find it difficult to identify him, because Zhao is a common
surname in China. He asked that this article use his anglicized first name,
which he uses with foreigners but which does not appear on any of his identity
papers.

One meeting was in a private room on the second floor of a Thai-Indian
restaurant where Mr. Zhao and two visitors were obliged to order too much food
to buy some isolation. Yet he still chose his words carefully, stopping in
midsentence whenever a waitress passed by outside or entered the room. No matter
where he is, his eyes have a habit of looking out their corners as if he were
listening for footfalls from behind.

He turns vague when asked how the end will come.

Under attack, Falun Gong has evolved from a well-regulated movement with a
structure not unlike that of the Communist Party into a nonhierarchical mass
movement whose structure mirrors that of the Internet, on which it depends.

There are no longer any national Falun Gong posts in China, only local volunteer
"tutors" and "facilitators" like Mr. Zhao who look to Master Li for guidance.
Although Mr. Zhao is an important node in that network, he is the first to
concede that he and his friends are dispensable.

If they are caught, he said, other devotees will take their place. The Communist
Party can punch large holes in the Falun Gong movement. But until the government
"re-educates" or imprisons every last true believer, he explained, the network
will endure.

Still, the destruction of the group's internal hierarchy has fragmented its
members into loosely connected groups, some following charismatic tutors or even
fake scriptures that are circulating in China.

Interpretations of Mr. Li's messages now vary widely among followers. One
manifestation of the less cohesive dogma may have been the self-immolation of
followers this year on Tiananmen Square, an act that senior followers in the
United States say went against Mr. Li's teachings.

Inspiration
After Bar Binges, A Spiritual Quest

Mr. Zhao got his start on computers in the early 1980's. By the time he reached
his 20's, he was among the first computer geeks in China, going days without
sleep while he hacked away at his keyboard. His expertise later landed him a
string of high-tech jobs. One was at a company that installed pinhole video
cameras and other surveillance equipment in hotel rooms.

For years, he softened the edges of his spiritually arid life among computers
with binges in Beijing's bars. With beer, cigarettes and sleep deprivation, his
health deteriorated to the point that he began losing his teeth. He speaks today
with a self-consciously stiff upper lip that hides a gap where his eyeteeth once
were.

Many Falun Gong followers live in an industrial urban jumble of half-finished
concrete shells, smokestacks and high-tension power lines where traditional
religion has been replaced by official atheism.

Mr. Li, a former clerk in a government grain bureau, was among dozens of
self-styled "masters" who stepped in to fill that void in the early 90's with
spiritual disciplines based on the practice of traditional Chinese breathing
exercises that seek to channel qi, the body's vital energy, to improve health or
obtain supernatural powers.

He wrapped his exercises in a complex cosmology that mixed traditional religious
tenets with popular notions of extraterrestrials and U.F.O.'s to create a vivid
belief system that struck a chord with many Chinese who were searching for moral
and spiritual guidance.

In 1996, a friend sent Mr. Zhao an e-mail message that directed him to a Falun
Gong Web site in the United States. He logged onto the site and spent the night
reading an online edition of Zhuan Falun, Mr. Li's main text, which followers
regard as their bible. Mr. Zhao bought a copy the next day. Three days later, he
said, he stopped smoking and drinking and was immersed in the world that Mr. Li
presents.

At its core, Mr. Li's message is a simple one -- be a better person and you will
be saved. He cast his followers in the pivotal role of a cosmic morality play,
the aspect that most attracted Mr. Zhao.

"Master Li has said that there is not much time left, and so all followers
should grasp this chance to reached the highest spiritual level that they can
before the day comes," Mr. Zhao said at another meeting, this time beneath the
soaring escalators of a new shopping mall here. "My aspirations are different
now. I'm pursuing the improvement of my inner self."

At the peak of the movement two years ago, thousands of Falun Gong "tutors"
guided followers in exercise and study sessions in parks and plazas at dawn each
day. The tutors were, in turn, grouped into "stations" and met regularly to
discuss the development of the movement and the planning of periodic mass
events.

Station "chiefs" communicated with the Falun Dafa Research Society in Beijing,
which took orders from Mr. Li. Falun Dafa, or Great Law of the Dharma Wheel, is
the formal name for Falun Gong, or Dharma Wheel Practice.

Mr. He, the physicist, was among the first prominent Chinese to speak out
against the growing organization. According to Mr. He, one of his students
became mentally unstable after practicing the discipline in the mid-90's, and
the physicist faulted Falun Gong for the student's trouble in a televised
interview in 1998.

In a magazine article a year later, Mr. He warned again of the movement's danger
to youth. That article inspired a 10,000-strong Falun Gong demonstration outside
the leadership compound here in April 1999, the event that precipitated the
government's eradication campaign.

Falun Gong's formal structure in China broke down after the crackdown, as
members of the hierarchy were rounded up, with the most active sentenced to
lengthy jail terms. Those tutors not under detention are now under close
surveillance by the neighborhood committees that are the lowest rung of the
Communist Party's national surveillance system.

Nonetheless, many Falun Gong followers continue to meet daily, though it is
impossible to tell how many remain active. Mr. Li says there are 70 million
practitioners in China and 100 million followers worldwide, though he has never
offered evidence to support that. Closer scrutiny suggests the movement in China
never numbered more than several million, and China's antiFalun Gong campaign
has most certainly scared off many.

The government has had more than a year to measure the breadth and depth of what
is left, and it apparently believes that it has identified the remaining core,
40,000 people, according to Mr. He. By dealing harshly with the most militant, a
manageable number in the scope of the vast internal security apparatus, Beijing
hopes to neutralize the rest.

"The detention centers are all full up!" Mr. He exclaimed, sitting in his study
in black long johns and a gray hand-knit sweater one afternoon.

He said that at the beginning of the year the government switched from its
strategy of sending followers arrested in the capital back to their home
provinces and began collecting the detainees at centers here. As many as 6,000
of the most active followers are in detention, to be held until they have
recanted their beliefs or are sent to reform-through-labor camps in the
countryside, Mr. He said.

Mr. He has become one of Falun Gong's prime enemies, described in the group's
literature as a demon in league with evil beings, including President Jiang
Zemin, who are fighting Falun Gong for control of the universe. Mr. He smiles at
the reference, his eyeglasses and thin gray hair askew, but he insists that such
talk is far from harmless. He said it recalled the language of the Taiping, the
mid-19th century spiritual movement that turned into full-scale armed rebellion,
which took over a huge swath of the country, cost millions of lives and
threatened to bring down the last imperial government before it was suppressed.

That assessment paints Mr. Zhao as a threat to China's social order, a role Mr.
He knows well. "I did underground work," he said, recalling his early days as a
Communist Party member before the party took power in 1949. "We went to
demonstrate, but the core in the movement wouldn't go to the streets. Falun Gong
is the same."

Practice
As Pressure Grows, A Movement Adapts

In Mr. Zhao's crowded apartment, a diptych that shows the Falun Gong founder
both seated and standing sits atop a white enameled bookshelf beside Mr. Zhao's
bed. The apartment's only other decoration is a round pillow with a large yellow
swastika, a Buddhist symbol of good will, surrounded by smaller swastikas and
yin-yang symbols, associated with Taoism, the other ancient philosophical strain
that has contributed to Master Li's teachings. This is where Mr. Zhao sits to
perform his exercises each day.

The pillow's emblem represents the Falun, or Dharma Wheel, and is described by
Mr. Li as a miniature of the cosmos that he says he installs telekinetically in
the abdomens of all his followers, where it rotates in alternating directions,
throwing off bad karma and gathering qi. Many Falun Gong adherents say they can
feel the wheel turning in their bellies.

The rest of Mr. Zhao's Falun Gong paraphernalia -- books, tapes and photographs
of Mr. Li -- are stored elsewhere in case his apartment is raided. Mr. Zhao and
others like him download and disseminate inspirational Falun Gong videos, Falun
Gong propaganda fliers and even Mr. Li's books formatted for desktop printers,
all with the intent of keeping the movement in China alive.

Mr. Zhao has distributed hundreds of compact disks containing a complete Falun
Gong kit, including links to secure Internet servers overseas and dozens of
Falun Gong Web sites, as well as photographs of U.F.O.'s and videos of the
corpses of some of the followers reportedly tortured to death by the police.

"When Master Li issues a new message, 99 percent of the followers in Beijing
will have it within three days," Mr. Zhao said.

China recently issued a new legal interpretation of the antisubversion laws that
allows it to hand down lengthy prison terms to followers like Mr. Zhao who
distribute leaflets or disseminate Mr. Li's messages, which have grown
increasingly apocalyptic.

"It is in fact time to let go of your last attachments," Mr. Li wrote to
followers in August, adding that believers should "let go of all worldly
attachments (including the attachment to the human body)."

On Jan. 1, Mr. Li told his disciples: "The present performance of the evil shows
that they are already utterly inhuman and completely without righteous thoughts.
So such evil's persecution of the Fa can no longer be tolerated."

That set off a debate among Falun Gong followers in China about what Mr. Li's
message meant. Senior followers in the United States were quick to issue an
appeal that followers keep calm. A week later, a similarly cautionary note was
posted on the Web site by followers in China, who wrote that "certain disciples
had some extreme interpretations" of the message.

Mr. Li never clarified his remarks, and three weeks after he made them, five
followers ignited themselves on Tiananmen Square.

The Chinese government seized on the self-immolations as proof of its
contentions that Falun Gong is dangerous. Some Falun Gong followers insisted
that Mr. Li prohibits the taking of life, even one's own, and that the five
could therefore not have been Falun Gong followers.

But contrary to the Falun Gong public relations campaign, which is organized in
the United States, Mr. Zhao said he believed that at least some of the people
who set themselves on fire were indeed followers. "What they did was wrong," he
said. "But it was very brave."

Mr. Zhao said his job was to keep Mr. Li's message pure and to prevent
additional followers from going astray. With a few keystrokes in the darkness,
he circumvents the government's electronic barriers and up pops Mr. Li's image
on the screen, along with a message that reads, "Removing the evil beings that
manipulate people to damage humankind is also protecting humankind."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lloyd Zhao, a fervent Falun Gong follower and computer
technician, at the sect's Web site. (Craig S. Smith/The New York Times); Li
Hongzhi, founder of the outlawed movement, in Manhattan. (Jeffrey A. Salter/The
New York Times); Two Falun Gong followers at their trial in April in Beijing,
where they were given 13-year prison terms for threatening to derail trains
unless the government freed Falun Gong detainees. (Agence France-Presse)(pg.
A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Special Report

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CULTS & SECTS (90%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%);
RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TORTURE (86%); FIREWALLS (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); COMPUTER NETWORK SECURITY (77%); WEB SITES (77%); COMPUTER
NETWORKS (76%); COMPUTER OPERATING SYSTEMS (73%); DEATHS (69%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (67%); HARD DRIVES (53%); SUICIDE (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

ORGANIZATION: FALUN GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)

PERSON: SMITH, CRAIG S; LI HONGZHI

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (75%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             537 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Charity Is Told It Must Abide By Antidiscrimination Laws

BYLINE:  By FRANK BRUNI and ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


The Bush administration declined a request today from the Salvation Army, the
nation's largest charity, to exempt religious charities that receive federal
money from local laws that bar discrimination against homosexuals.

The decision came on the same day that the charity's request was made public in
an article in The Washington Post, which obtained an internal Salvation Army
document that asserted that the administration had already made a commitment to
the charity's request.

The disclosure of the request outraged some civil rights groups and lawmakers
and raised fresh questions about one of President Bush's top legislative
priorities. It also threatened to amplify perceptions among many voters that Mr.
Bush was catering too much to his conservative base.

Although administration officials said around midday that they were considering
the Salvation Army's request, the White House announced early tonight that it
had decided to deny it. The announcement followed a flurry of meetings and
telephone calls this afternoon among Mr. Bush's senior aides, who said they had
not been aware of the charity's request until the news of it broke.

As soon as it became known, lawmakers who could play an important role in the
Congressional passage of Mr. Bush's initiative to funnel more federal money to
religious groups that provide social services said any such exemption seriously
jeopardized the legislation.

"It just puts a cloud over the president's intention to expand a faith-based
initiative and unfortunately might terminally wound it in Congress," said
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut.

Mr. Lieberman has supported the basic concept of the initiative but has also
sounded alarms about its ability to be implemented in a nondiscriminatory
fashion, not only when it comes to gays but also when it comes to people of
religious faiths different from those of the groups providing government-funded
social services.

Mr. Lieberman said today that consideration of an exemption like the one the
Salvation Army sought amounted to "kind of an end run" around lawmakers in
Congress.

In fact, in a compromise reached last month, Republican lawmakers changed the
bill based on Mr. Bush's initiative by adding language that appeared to prevent
religious charities from breaking local and state laws that prohibit
discrimination based on sexual orientation.

As several lawmakers fumed today about the possibility that the administration
was trying to circumvent that, leaders of civil rights organizations said the
administration was poised to endorse outright discrimination.

"Gays and lesbians are taxpayers, too," said David Smith, a spokesman for the
Human Rights Campaign, a group that advocates antidiscrimination protections for
gays. "Their money should not be used by religious groups to fund discriminatory
practices against them."

A Salvation Army spokesman, David A. Fuscus, said the group was not trying to
get permission to discriminate against hiring gays and lesbians for the majority
of its roughly 55,000 jobs and merely wanted a federal regulation that made
clear that the charity did not have to ordain sexually active gay ministers and
did not have to provide medical benefits to the same-sex partners of employees.

Mr. Fuscus said the Salvation Army, which is a church, did not want to undermine
its theology, which holds that there should be no sexual activity outside
marriage.

Although White House officials said the Salvation Army's request had never
neared the point of being adopted by the administration, the internal Salvation
Army document suggested that the matter had moved much further.

The document was written by an officer of the Salvation Army and sent to other
officers. According to excerpts of the document in The Post, the group believed
it had a firm commitment from the White House to issue a regulation that would
override local antidiscrimination laws.

In return for that, the document suggested, the charity had agreed to lobby
vigorously for Congressional passage of legislation that would make it easier to
funnel federal money into social programs administered by religious groups. Mr.
Bush on Monday identified that bill as one of the three that he wanted Congress
to pass before the August recess.

"It is important that the Army's support for the White House activities occur
simultaneously with efforts to achieve the Army's objectives," said the
document, which went on to list one of those objectives as making sure that
local governments could not "impose the category of sexual orientation to the
list of antidiscrimination protections."

The internal document also said that "the White House has already said that they
are committed to move on the Army's objectives when the legislation carrying the
charitable choice provisions passes the House of Representatives."

Officials with the White House and the Salvation Army denied any quid pro quo
and said the document mischaracterized any discussions.

Dan Bartlett, a deputy assistant to the president, said that when he and other
senior advisers reviewed the charity's request today, they decided that existing
federal laws adequately gave religious groups the only exemption from civil
rights law that was relevant to them, in that the laws allowed them to hire
people of the same faith.

As for any conflicts that might emerge between those federal laws and state and
city laws that prohibit employment discrimination against gays, Mr. Bartlett
said that these would likely be resolved by courts.

Vice President Dick Cheney, speaking to reporters today, expressed sympathy for
the Salvation Army's perspective, saying that what the Bush administration
wanted was to make sure that receiving public money for social-service work did
"not require fundamental changes in underlying principles and organization
doctrines, if you will, of the organizations that participate."

"It's not intended to discriminate against anybody," Mr. Cheney said.

There is no federal law barring discrimination against gays and lesbians, and
there are provisions in federal law that exempt religious groups from civil
rights requirements that violate their creeds. But 12 states and more than 100
cities and counties have laws to protect gays. At issue is whether religious
groups administering social programs with public money in those places should be
-- or are -- bound by those laws.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); CHARITIES (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); CHURCH & STATE (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%);
TRENDS (60%) SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS;  RELIGION
AND CHURCHES;  DISCRIMINATION;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (58%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (58%)

ORGANIZATION: THE SALVATION ARMY (94%) SALVATION ARMY

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (58%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (58%)

PERSON: JOE LIEBERMAN (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ADAM SMITH (58%) BUSH, GEORGE
W (PRES); LIEBERMAN, JOSEPH I (SEN); BRUNI, FRANK; BECKER, ELIZABETH

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             556 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 23, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sharon Booed by Fellow Rightists Who Say He's Too Soft

BYLINE:  By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, July 22


Can it be that Ariel Sharon the old warrior, bane of the Arabs, target of
international human rights groups -- has gone soft on Palestinian terrorism?

You would think so to listen to a rising chorus of critics within his own party,
the rightist Likud. These people, who in theory should be his sturdiest allies,
accuse Mr. Sharon, the Israeli prime minister, of not fighting the good fight in
the 10-month-old conflict with the Palestinians, which has claimed more than 600
lives on both sides and turned a declared cease-fire into a sad joke.

Their unhappiness spilled over tonight at a gathering of the party faithful in
Tel Aviv, where Mr. Sharon found himself booed and heckled by rightists who want
him to deliver a knockout blow to Yasir Arafat and his Palestinian Authority.

The man leading the charge was a former prime minister from Likud, Benjamin
Netanyahu, who withdrew from politics after losing the 1999 election but who is
now looking to make a comeback. Mr. Netanyahu, 51, is banking on doing that by
presenting himself as the one Israeli who can stop terrorism.

He did not say exactly how tonight. Nor did he attack the 73-year-old Mr. Sharon
by name. He did not have to. It was clear he meant Mr. Sharon when he denounced
a government that has followed a policy described as one of restraint in dealing
with the Palestinian uprising.

"Today, terror has taken over the country, and there isn't a day that goes by
without a Jew being murdered," Mr. Netanyahu said, somewhat exaggerating a
situation that Israelis find to be bad enough. He added, "Our good will and
restraint policy ended us up with more escalation."

In response, Mr. Sharon rejected any suggestion that he had gone soft,
mentioning among other things his "policy of active defense" -- code words for
Israel's practice of hunting down and killing militant Palestinian figures,
especially those from the Hamas and Islamic Holy War groups. There were reports
late tonight that Israeli helicopters had fired at the house of a Hamas leader
in Jenin, in the northern West Bank, but no one was reported to have been hurt.

"During my meetings with various national leaders, I made it clear that in
return for true peace we will be willing to make painful concessions, but not
when it comes to the security of the people and the state of Israel," Mr. Sharon
said above boos from many in the audience of 2,500, members of his party's
central committee.

Their gathering was basically a test of the relative strength of the two Likud
leaders, even though national elections are two years away.

Polls indicate that Israelis are shifting significantly to the political right.
One survey, published on Friday in the newspaper Maariv, suggests that Likud
would more than double its number of parliamentary seats if elections were held
today and that Israelis on the right prefer Mr. Netanyahu to Mr. Sharon.

So the jockeying for primacy within Likud matters, even at this early stage. And
it shows the challenge that the prime minister faces from Israelis who want him
to strike harder at the Palestinians.

From the Palestinian perspective, the Israelis have done more than enough,
assassinating suspected militants, shooting and killing teenage stone-throwers
and bulldozing houses suspected of having been used by snipers as shelter. In
the death toll, Palestinians outnumber Israelis by roughly 4 to 1.

Still, Mr. Sharon has said that, despite protests from his right, he does not
intend to topple Mr. Arafat. He has even acknowledged that he made a mistake in
calling Mr. Arafat names like "murderer," "pathological liar" and "bin Laden,"
referring to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi financier of Islamic militancy. By
contrast, Mr. Netanyahu said tonight that the Palestinian leader was "much
worse" than Mr. bin Laden, because "he manufactures many more bin Ladens in the
form of little children who learn how to blow themselves up in camps that the
Palestinian Authority organizes."

The question is whether the prime minister will resist pressure to strike even
harder at the Palestinians if there is another terrorist bombing that claims
many Israeli lives. Likud hawks implied weakness on his part tonight by holding
up signs that showed portraits of Mr. Sharon and Shimon Peres, his dovish
foreign minister from the Labor Party. "Who's in charge?" the signs said.

For days, Israelis have been holding their collective breath waiting for a
reprisal attack after a drive-by shooting, presumably the work of Jewish
vigilantes, that killed three Palestinians, including a 3-month-old boy.

The police said they apparently prevented such an attack today in Haifa, a city
on Israel's northern coast that is normally removed from the conflict. They
arrested one Palestinian and were looking for another after defusing what they
called a "very large" bomb near a building complex.

The drive-by shooting last Thursday, deplored by Israelis across the political
spectrum, bolstered Mr. Arafat in his demands for foreign observers to protect
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In Amman, Jordan, today, he and
King Abdullah repeated calls for such a force. An appeal for international
monitors was also made by the leaders of the major industrialized countries,
meeting in Genoa, Italy.

But Israel, wary of outside observers, has rejected the demands. Although there
has been talk here of possibly accepting new teams of American intelligence
agents to monitor the conflict, Mr. Sharon said tonight that Israel remained
opposed to an international force.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At a Likud meeting in Tel Aviv, Benjamin Netanyahu, left,
denounced Ariel Sharon, right, for his handling of the Palestinian uprising. Mr.
Sharon is under fire for failing to crush the Palestinian Authority. (Agence
France-Presse); (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); HAMAS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%);
ELECTIONS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); POLITICS (76%); JEWS & JUDAISM (76%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); BANKING & FINANCE (72%); POLLS &
SURVEYS (61%); MURDER (58%); HELICOPTERS (50%) BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%) HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST MOVEMENT); ISLAMIC HOLY
WAR

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (90%) SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN); NETANYAHU, BENJAMIN;
HABERMAN, CLYDE

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (92%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             559 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 28, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Macedonia Village Is Center Of Europe Web in Sex Trade

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1692 words

DATELINE: VELESTA, Macedonia


This village, tucked down in the southwestern corner of the country near the
border with Albania, is one of the strangest places in this part of the Balkans.
It has the high-walled brick homes and rutted lanes typical of villages here,
but amid the hay barns there are more than a dozen neon-lit nightclubs and sex
bars with names like Madonna and Paradiso. And beneath the strange combination
of rural quiet and nighttime glitz, the place has a very sinister reputation.

The first bar on the main street is the Expresso. A group of young men and
several young women in skimpy clothes stood by their cars outside the club on a
recent night. Nearby, in a black Mercedes, a thickset man with a shaved head and
half a dozen gold chains around his neck sat next to his driver. It was Dilaver
Leku, the richest man in Velesta.

Hundreds of foreign women, mostly from former Communist bloc countries, have
passed through Velesta and Mr. Leku's bar and restaurants in the last few years,
according to townspeople, the police, foreign civil rights workers and some of
the women themselves. A large proportion of them, these people say, are women
who are tricked into the job, forced into prostitution and held against their
will.

The women are bought by bar owners and sold when the customers tire of them.
They are moved along by a network of traffickers across borders and ethnic
communities, part of a web that spreads across the Balkans and into Western
Europe.

A decade of conflict in this region, and the grinding poverty of post-Communist
Eastern Europe, have helped breed this network. Across the Balkans, tens of
thousands of women have been caught up by the traffickers and have suffered
rape, extreme violence and slavery at the hands of criminal groups renowned for
their brutality and greed.

A recent United States government report cited all of Macedonia's neighbors --
Greece, Bosnia, Yugoslavia, Albania, Romania and Bulgaria, along with Lebanon --
as the countries with the worst records in the trafficking in women.

Macedonia at least has tried to take action: the government has gained
international praise for opening a refuge for the women and moving to close bars
and send some of the women home.

But its situation as a transit country for trafficking, and its growing home
market for prostitutes -- boosted in part by United Nations personnel and
NATO-led peacekeepers on leave from nearby Kosovo -- illustrate the regionwide
problem. And as Macedonia grapples with a spreading insurgency and a growing
likelihood of civil war, organized crime and smuggling are likely to increase,
and the young women caught up in it all may be at more risk than ever.

When two journalists turned up at his bar after midnight recently, Mr. Leku
divested himself of all but one of his gold chains and entertained his guests
into the morning. He ordered the bar girls out of sight, and when the bartender
served some questionable whiskey, he called for a new bottle and opened it
himself.

Mr. Leku complained that business had been hurt by the five-month-old conflict
between ethnic Albanian rebels and the government, and he said that most of his
customers, Macedonian Slavs and foreigners, no longer dared to come to Velesta,
since the population is largely Albanian. The police also no longer staged their
sporadic raids, but that was small consolation, he said. He no longer leaves the
village, he said, for fear of government hit men.

He denied that he was involved in trafficking in women and said that the women
who worked in his new restaurant in the nearby town of Struga all had work visas
and were there of their own will. "You can talk to them," he said, "you will see
they have work papers and visas, everything is legal."

But this month, a 22-year-old Ukrainian woman escaped from the Expresso bar and
managed to get to her embassy in the capital, Skopje. Several days later, the
woman, who refused to be identified further for fear of being recognized,
chatted with four other women in the sunlit dormitory of a government refuge for
women brought to Macedonia by the traffickers.

In Velesta, the woman said, the women were trapped; they worked for no pay and
were unable to leave. Some like her were forced into prostitution, she said, and
some were working prostitutes, but all of them -- there were up to 35 at times
-- were unable to leave for fear of beatings and worse. "He would say, 'I bought
you and you can say nothing,' " she said of her former boss. "Girls did run away
but when they got caught, then they really got it."

The Ukrainian woman said she was from the Black Sea port of Odessa and was lured
to Macedonia by a group of Serbs who offered unspecified work abroad. They drove
her from Ukraine to Yugoslavia, and then they illegally crossed the border on
foot into Macedonia. She said she was taken to an apartment in the town of
Kumanovo, in northern Macedonia, where she said she was sold to Mr. Leku, who
took her to his bar in Velesta. Held under guard, frequently beaten, she became
a prostitute. "They are criminals, they are deceiving, cunning people," she said
of the traffickers.

As she spoke, she veered unpredictably between tears and the snarling hard-edged
attitude of a street prostitute. Her hair, dyed blond, is long, the skin of her
face is rough and her dark eyes are opaque. She drew hard on her cigarette and
tapped her fingers irritably on the table. Asked what she would do when she got
home, she responded without hesitation, "Get some psychiatric help."

Human rights workers are often horrified at some of the cases they encounter and
the callousness of the traffickers. "They take the most noble thing, the desire
for a better life, especially among girls who are ready to take a risk and go
abroad, and they destroy them," said Eileen Simpson, an American lawyer working
in Macedonia as a human rights monitor for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

As many as 2,400 to 2,600 of the women may be in Macedonia at any given time,
according to one police estimate. But it is impossible to calculate the real
number, since only a small percentage are rescued or caught by the police, and
the women are often quickly moved. The International Organization for Migration
has helped repatriate 300 women in the last 10 months, and the government has
expelled about 500 more, Martin Wyss, the head of the organization's office in
Skopje, said.

Blagoja Stojkovski, the police officer in charge of asylum and immigration in
Skopje, said Macedonia had mainly been a transit country for the traffickers
moving women from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet bloc to Western Europe
over the last 10 years. More recently, he said, traffickers in Macedonia have
realized there is a home market to exploit. "They learn they can make money here
too," he said.

There is no one group or network, but numerous traffickers in Macedonia who have
links with others in Bulgaria, Romania and Yugoslavia, Mr. Stojkovski said.
Ethnic differences never obstruct criminal dealings, and Albanians deal readily
with Serbs and Macedonian Slavs despite the conflicts around them, he added.

A false passport costs 500 German marks, about $250, Mr. Stojkovski said. Guides
across Macedonia's porous hilly border with Kosovo charge about 100 marks, or
$50, and the women themselves are sold for 1,000 or 2,000 marks, or $500 to
$1,000.

"They are promised they are going to Italy and some really do go -- after two to
three months working here they are sold in Albania and taken to Italy," Mr.
Stojkovski said. "This is a small town. A lady is interesting for just one
month."

An 18-year-old from Belarus, who like the young woman from Odessa refused to be
identified, said she answered a newspaper advertisement in her hometown, Minsk,
and was offered work in a bar in Italy. An only child, she has a round face and
uncertain brown eyes, and she said she has not yet been able to tell her parents
what happened. "I called them a few weeks after getting here and told them I had
a great job in a bar, well paid," she said.

In fact, she said, she and two other women were kept by a Macedonian man in an
apartment in Skopje and forced to have sex with clients. The pimp was a former
policeman, a family man who was always talking about how much he loved his three
children, she said. But on the first day when she refused to strip for a client,
he beat her and told her he would continue until she complied.

These women's stories are typical, Mr. Stojkovski said.

Most of the women who have been rescued and repatriated in recent months have
come from the poorest countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The International Office of Migration said about 70 percent of the 300 women it
had sent home recently were from Moldova. Others came from Romania, Bulgaria,
Ukraine and Belarus.

Of those interviewed by the migration office, about 80 percent said they had
accepted the offer of a job abroad, but 90 percent said they were unaware that
it involved sex. Most described being forced into prostitution; they were denied
free movement and received little or no pay.

After six weeks in the apartment where she was forced to submit to clients, the
18-year-old from Belarus said she was given a key and allowed to go out to buy
cigarettes. Instead, she took a taxi to the Russian Embassy. Now she is going
home, but she has not worked out how to tell her parents what happened.

The woman who escaped from Velesta, where she said she spent a year, fled after
persuading a client to help her get away in the middle of the night. She does
not know what she will do now. "Just get home and have a holiday," she said.

The police know only that the problem will persist. As Mr. Stojkovski was about
to end his shift on a recent Friday afternoon, a call came to report that
fighting in western Macedonia had revealed seven more women brought here to
work, apparently as sex slaves. Five were found walking on a road after their
bar was set on fire by Albanian rebels; two more had approached international
monitors. The police were sending the women to Skopje. "I'll be working all
evening," Mr. Stojkovski said with a sigh.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Macedonia has become a major point in a network of trafficking
in women, mostly from the former Communist bloc. Some of the women talked at a
government safe house in Skopje, Macedonia's capital. (Andrew Testa)(pg. A7) Map
of Macedonia highlighting Velesta: The bars of Velesta are filled with women
forced into prostitution. (pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (89%); WOMEN (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(87%); DRINKING PLACES (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%);
RESTAURANTS (76%); SMUGGLING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); CRIMINAL
FALSE IMPRISONMENT (70%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (70%); PEACEKEEPING (68%); MEDIA
VIOLENCE (68%); CITY LIFE (67%); ORGANIZED CRIME (65%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (64%); ETHNICITY (50%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (50%) PROSTITUTION

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (96%); EUROPE (94%); ALBANIA
(93%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); ROMANIA (79%); BULGARIA (79%); GREECE (79%); BOSNIA
& HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA (79%); LEBANON
(79%); EASTERN EUROPE (54%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC);  VELESTA (MACEDONIA);  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             574 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 20, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
The Charming Face of Argentina's Brutal Past

BYLINE:  By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 782 words


In 1977, at the height of Argentina's "dirty war," a small group of mothers
gathered in the Plaza de Mayo outside the presidential palace every Thursday
afternoon to walk slowly in a circle, protesting the disappearance of their
children. After a few months, a young blond man with an angelic face and a
radiant smile appeared in the plaza. He said that his name was Gustavo Nino, and
that his brother had been kidnapped.

The women worried about the vulnerable young man, who threw himself into the
protests. At one meeting of friends and relatives of the disappeared, the young
man left abruptly. Moments later men with guns burst into the room and took away
several people, including Sister Alice Domon, a French nun.

Other members of the group and another French nun, Leonie Duquet, soon
disappeared as well. The women still did not realize that Gustavo Nino -- whose
real name was Alfredo Astiz -- was one of the kidnappers. Prisoners in the Navy
Mechanics School, the concentration camp to which he took all his prisoners,
later said that while Sister Alice was being given electric shocks, she asked
whether the blond boy had been kidnapped, too.

Twenty-four years later, Mr. Astiz, now 49, has once again escaped justice. He
was released last week following a brief imprisonment while Argentina considered
-- and rejected -- an Italian extradition request. Rome accuses him of the
kidnapping, torture and disappearance of three Italians.

Mr. Astiz today is one of the most notorious symbols of the dirty war. His role
as as a leader of a squad that kidnapped or killed alleged leftists has been
well documented by the Argentine Truth Commission in its report on the dirty
war, and by numerous witnesses and by Mr. Astiz himself.

Argentina, which argued that crimes at home should be judged in Argentine
courts, should now take the long-delayed opportunity to bring Mr. Astiz to
justice.

Mr. Astiz was 25 and a Navy lieutenant when the dirty war began in 1976, and
eagerly signed up to join the kidnapping squad, which brought its prisoners to
the Navy Mechanics School. More than 5,000 people passed through its gates. A
few hundred survived. The rest were tortured to death or sedated and thrown from
airplanes.

Mr. Astiz's Navy considered itself the aristocratic branch of the armed forces.
He was a lover of classical music, fluent in English, a member of the Yacht
Club, well traveled, well educated and well read. And he was an officer of the
most notorious group of torturers and murderers of the Argentine Junta, directly
responsible for the kidnapping of hundreds of people who suffered unimaginable
torture and then vanished forever.

Mr. Astiz achieved international fame because there were several foreigners
among his victims. Sweden is now investigating him for the death of a
17-year-old Argentine-Swedish girl, Dagmar Hagelin. Witnesses told the truth
commission he shot her in the head. In 1990, he was sentenced to life in prison
in France in absentia for the murder of the two French nuns.

Mr. Astiz, like the rest of his kidnap squad, lived at the Mechanics School. His
prisoners told me later that he spent his free time there talking to them,
especially the women who came from upper-class families, expounding on his
social theories, including his belief that white people were superior to other
races.

He was not a torturer -- that was not his job -- although he frequently watched
torture sessions in order to act quickly on new information the sessions might
yield. Some of the prisoners told me stories of his kindness, such as the time
he took one to see her dying father.

Mr. Astiz told a magazine in 1998 that he would have tortured if the Navy had
ordered him to. In the same interview, he boasted about kidnapping and killing
people during the dirty war, and said that he was the best-trained man in the
country to kill a politician or journalist. He was cashiered from the Navy after
his remarks were published.

The government would like Mr. Astiz to remain silent, but it seems unlikely to
judge him. Defense Minister Horacio Jaunarena has said that Mr. Astiz's actions
are covered by amnesty laws. But a court in Argentina has ruled those amnesties
unconstitutional, and a similar amnesty in Peru has been invalidated by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

In my brief meeting with Mr. Astiz 12 years ago, he came across as charming and
civilized. These are the qualities people often use to judge each other,
especially across cultural divides. Yet Mr. Astiz's sophistication -- his
isolation from the rest of his nation, his sense of superiority -- helped to
turn him into a killer, one unrepentant and unjudged by his countrymen to this
day.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
EXTRADITION (89%); NAVIES (78%); CHILDREN (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MISSING
PERSONS (77%); MURDER (76%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
LIBERALISM (68%); AMNESTY (67%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (65%); PARDONS (62%) FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (55%)

PERSON: ROSENBERG, TINA; ASTIZ, ALFREDO

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); SWEDEN (79%)

REGION: ARGENTINA

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             577 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 21, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

F.B.I.'s Inquiry In Cole Attack Is Nearing Halt

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1378 words

DATELINE: SANA, Yemen, Aug. 17


More than 10 months after two Arabic-speaking suicide bombers attacked the
destroyer Cole in Aden, killing 17 American sailors, an F.B.I. investigation has
virtually ground to a halt because Yemen has refused repeated American requests
to widen the inquiry to include Islamic militant groups in Yemen.

The effect of the Yemeni decision has been to frustrate efforts by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation to link the bombing conclusively to Osama bin Laden, the
fugitive Saudi, who has declared a worldwide "holy war" on the United States.

After the Cole bombing on Oct. 12, F.B.I. investigators immediately suspected
that Mr. bin Laden, from a sanctuary in Afghanistan, had inspired the attack, if
not actively directed it. But appeals from senior American officials, several of
whom have flown to Yemen to appeal directly to President Ali Abdallah Salih,
have been unavailing.

Senior bureau investigators say Yemen has denied them access to prominent
Yemenis whom the Americans want to interview in their bid to link the attack to
elements of Mr. bin Laden's network in Yemen, which became a key base for him in
the early 1990's.

Now, senior Yemeni officials have indicated that they plan to close the case by
trying six men who were arrested soon after the bombing.

"Yemen is as committed to combating terrorism as the United States," the foreign
minister, Dr. Abu Bakr al-Qurbi, said in an interview, "because the damage
caused in the Cole attack was not only to the American ship and its crew, but to
Yemen's security, too. It is therefore in our interests to trace the attack to
its ultimate source, and I don't think that any wise person can say that Yemen
is withholding information.

"But as things stand now, we believe that the investigation is complete, and
that it is time to hand over the file in the case to the prosecutor."

Dr. Qurbi said additional interviews proposed by the F.B.I. would be a breach of
Yemen's sovereignty because they would involve strictly domestic matters. In any
case, he said, Yemen's investigation, including the questioning of some
individuals cited by the bureau, had shown convincingly that there were no
Yemenis involved in the bombing other than those held in Aden.

"Just because you have an Islamic connection does not mean that you have any
relationship to the Cole bombing," he said.

Since November the government has repeatedly said it wanted to hold the trial,
only to defer it under American pressure. The F.B.I. position has been that the
men jailed in Aden were minor players and that a trial in Yemen now could
prejudice any later trial in the United States of those who planned and financed
the attack.

The impasse has its roots in the first days of the Cole investigation, when the
bureau complained of obstructionism by Yemen. But after President Clinton
demanded a "genuine joint investigation," the Americans were eventually allowed
to attend interviews with suspects and witnesses identified by the Yemenis and
pose questions.

But sources inside the F.B.I. say much about the way the Yemenis have conducted
the investigation has been troubling.

The core of the dispute lies in possible links between the bombing and a wide
array of militant Islamic groups in Yemen. In the late 1980's Mr. bin Laden,
with American encouragement, recruited widely among young Yemenis for the
guerrilla struggle against Soviet forces in Afghanistan. Although he was born in
Saudi Arabia, Mr. bin Laden's ancestral homeland is in Yemen.

A list of individuals the investigators would like to interview, first presented
to Yemen late last year, includes a firebrand Muslim cleric, an army general
with family ties to President Salih and a long-standing relationship with Mr.
bin Laden, and others with similar links, including a tribal leader who trained
as an Afghan guerrilla with Mr. bin Laden.

When the Afghan struggle ended, some of those men helped Mr. bin Laden set up a
terrorist network in Yemen, using thousands of Afghan war veterans who later
supported President Salih's forces in a civil war against Communist
secessionists in 1994.

Bureau investigators say they have little doubt that the six men held by Yemen,
in a grim, neon-lit fortress on the Aden waterfront, were involved in the Cole
bombing -- helping to acquire both a fiberglass skiff and a four-wheel-drive
vehicle, installing explosives in the skiff and obtaining false documents used
by the conspirators.

But those Americans say the prisoners were just henchmen, not the men who
directed the bombing.

With Mr. bin Laden untouchable for now in Afghanistan, the F.B.I.'s view is that
a wider inquiry in Yemen is crucial to learn how the Cole bombing was organized,
and to deepen the bureau's understanding of Mr. bin Laden's terrorist
organization, Al Qaeda.

In a videotape made by Mr. bin Laden that was posted on the Internet this
summer, he appeared to claim credit for the Cole bombing, saying that Allah
"made us victorious the day we destroyed the ship on the sea." But there was
little else on the tape to substantiate the claim.

A leading Yemeni newspaper editor said American pressures ran counter to Yemen's
interest in striking a balance between improved relations with Washington and
popular backing for Mr. bin Laden's attacks. Closer American ties in the late
1990's yielded increased American aid, and the port refueling agreement that
brought the Cole into Aden.

"It was clear from the start that the accessories to the attack would be tried,
convicted and executed, but that the people inside Yemen who financed it, and
used their power to facilitate it, would never be brought to book," the
newspaper editor said, in remarks made on a guarantee of anonymity.

"That's the way things are done here, and the Americans were naive to imagine
that it could ever have been any other way."

American investigators have long suspected that Yemen planned to follow the
pattern set by Saudi Arabia after Islamic militants mounted the truck bombing in
1996 at the Khobar Towers military housing, which killed 19 Americans.

After denying the F.B.I. access to suspects in the bombing, Saudi Arabia tried
and executed them.

Dr. Qurbi, the foreign minister, implied that Yemen's refusal to allow a wider
inquiry was partly the bureau's fault because the F.B.I. had refused to tell
Yemen what it had learned about any connection between the Cole and Mr. bin
Laden.

"Maybe there is an element of distrust in their not wanting to pass on
information to us about bin Laden, in case the information is abused," he said.

American investigators also believe that some of the suspects and witnesses they
have been allowed to interview were thoroughly coached in Yemeni jails before
meeting the F.B.I. That assertion was vigorously denied by Dr. Qurbi, who said,
"This kind of allegation alienates any kind of cooperation between the two
sides."

As for Yemen's determination to hold a trial soon, the foreign minister said it
was a question of "human rights" to take prisoners to court after their many
months in jail.

"Some of our people are becoming very critical of our delay in holding a trial,
because it involves a country which is always strongly demanding the protection
of human rights," he said.

For months Yemeni officials have said the only bin Laden link to the Cole
bombing they have uncovered involved Muhammad al-Harazi, a Saudi Arabian citizen
of Yemeni parentage who has been identified by the Yemenis as the man who
oversaw preparations for the Cole attack, then left Yemen before the bombing.

F.B.I. officials say that Mr. Harazi is now in Afghanistan, and that he has
links not only to the Cole bombing but also to the 1998 bombings of two American
Embassies in East Africa, which killed 224 people.

Another sign that Yemen might not be keen to help the bureau link the Cole
bombing to Mr. bin Laden emerged earlier this year.

American officials placed full-page announcements in Yemeni newspapers
advertising a $5 million State Department reward for information leading to the
arrest of those responsible for the Cole attack. But the Telecommunications
Ministry changed the telephone numbers given in the announcement -- for the
American Embassy here -- twice in one month. Each time, the reward had to be
announced afresh in the newspapers, with the new numbers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The destroyer Cole after the bombing in October. The F.B.I. has
pressed Yemen for help in linking the attack to Osama bin Laden, to no avail.
(Associated Press, 2000)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBINGS (91%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY VESSELS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); RELIGION
(77%); ARRESTS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  SHIPS AND SHIPPING;  COLE
(USS);  TERRORISM;  US-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-YEMEN;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (91%) BURNS, JOHN F; BIN LADEN, OSAMA

COUNTRY: YEMEN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: YEMEN

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             578 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 22, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Papers Show U.S. Knew Of Genocide In Rwanda

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21


Newly declassified government documents show that several senior United States
officials were aware of the dimensions of the genocide in Rwanda in early 1994,
even as some sought ways to avoid getting involved.

The 16 documents, released today by the National Security Archive, a research
group at George Washington University, provide new details of the deliberations
within the Clinton administration from April through May 1994 as the killings
took place. By the end of June, an estimated 800,000 people were killed by
government-backed militias.

The general contours of the inability and unwillingness of the United Nations
and its members, notably the United States, France and Belgium, to help stop the
killings have been widely reported. The United Nations studied the debacle in
detail, and its top officials have acknowledged serious mistakes.

President Clinton, during a visit to Rwanda in March 1998, expressed deep
remorse about his administration's inaction. He said people in distant offices,
like himself, did not appreciate what was happening on the fields of Central
Africa.

But the disclosure today suggests, for example, that some officials knew the
potential for mass slaughter in Rwanda. In addition, once it began on April 6 --
after the Rwandan president was apparently assassinated when his plane was shot
down -- several of them tried to persuade their superiors to act.

One of them was Prudence Bushnell, the principal deputy assistant secretary of
state for African affairs. In a memorandum dated April 6, she warned her
superiors, including Secretary of State Warren Christopher, that the killing of
the Rwandan president that day would probably produce widespread violence and
that the "military intends to take over power temporarily."

A cable dated April 29 shows that Ms. Bushnell spoke on the telephone with Col.
Theoneste Bagasora, a Rwandan official who was later identified as a leader of
the massacres. She told him Washington was aware of his actions and urged him to
end the killings.

"This shows that our officials knew who to call three weeks into the killing,"
said William Ferroggiaro, the editor of the documents for the National Security
Archive. "Ms. Bushnell, to her credit, made this initiative. She discovered who
was responsible, even though you wouldn't know it by his title." Colonel
Bagasora has since been charged with crimes against humanity and is awaiting
trial.

Mr. Christopher did not return a telephone call. Officials at the United States
Embassy in Guatemala, where Ms. Bushnell is ambassador, said she was traveling
and could not be reached for comment.

The documents also form the basis for an article in the September issue of The
Atlantic Monthly by Samantha Power, the executive director of the human rights
center at Harvard University.

Her article, which examines how American policy makers behaved during the
massacres, concludes that American officials allowed the genocide to occur out
of a combination of disinterest in Africa, a preference for negotiations over
military intervention, and the residual trauma from the recent deaths of 18
American peacekeepers in Somalia.

The documents also provide more details behind the American government's
decision to avoid calling the killings genocide.

One document, dated May 1, 1994, summarizes a meeting of several unidentified
officials who were analyzing the Rwanda situation. The meeting ends with a
warning against branding the massacres genocide.

"Be careful," the document reads. "Legal at State was worried about this
yesterday. Genocide finding could commit U.S.G. to actually 'do something.' "
"Legal" refers to the legal adviser at the State Department and U.S.G. is the
United States government. The officials worried that if "genocide" was used,
Washington would have to act because it is a signatory to antigenocide
conventions of 1948.

Other documents show that some officials pressed Mr. Christopher to authorize
the use of the term genocide. A memo from Toby T. Gati, assistant secretary of
the State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research, concluded that
genocide had indeed occurred. Similarly Joan Donoghue, of the legal adviser's
office, concluded in a memo disclosed today that genocide had taken place.

Using the Gati and Donoghue memorandums, several senior officials urged Mr.
Christopher to authorize the use of the term, arguing that failure to do so
would undermine American credibility, and contending that it would not force
Washington to act.

In response, Mr. Christopher authorized officials to say that "acts of genocide
had occurred." Mr. Ferroggiaro said Mr. Christopher did not flatly call the
slaughter genocide until June 10.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%);
EXECUTIVES (73%); FOREIGN POLICY (70%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (70%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY (58%) NATIONAL
SECURITY ARCHIVE

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (77%); SAMANTHA POWER (58%) CLINTON, BILL; BUSHNELL,
PRUDENCE; LEWIS, NEIL A

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (92%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);
GUATEMALA (79%); FRANCE (57%); BELGIUM (57%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             589 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 30, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Macedonian Hawk Vows To Extend Pursuit of Rebels

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 774 words

DATELINE: SKOPJE, Macedonia, Aug.29


Macedonia's interior minister, Ljube Boskovski, said today that NATO's operation
to collect weapons from rebels was only a "symbolic disarmament," and he warned
that his anti-terrorist police would seize any remaining illegal weapons as soon
as NATO was finished with its 30-day mission.

While Mr. Boskovski promised to deal definitively with any continuing threats
from the rebels, it was not clear if Macedonia's coalition government would
ultimately take such action. Mr. Boskovski wields considerable influence in the
government, particularly through his association with the prime minister, Ljubco
Georgievski, who shares his views.

But Mr. Boskovski, who is a founding member of the nationalist Macedonian party
that leads the government coalition, also represents the hard-line faction
within that coalition. Ultimately, the government might not go along with Mr.
Boskovski's ideas as it tries to find common ground in carrying out a peace plan
with the rebels.

Despite the government's backing of the peace plan, Mr. Boskovski and Mr.
Georgievski have continued to criticize international efforts to head off a
civil war here, and they have blamed the West for supporting the ethnic Albanian
insurgents. They have also been seen to encourage anti-Albanian sentiment in
Macedonia and among the police, which Mr. Boskovski, through his ministry, has
the power to order into action.

Mr. Boskovski, 40, made it clear today that he would use that power to begin
anti-terrorist operations against rebel bases after NATO finished its operation
to disarm the insurgents.

"Basically we have to clear the field of weapons according to our laws," Mr.
Boskovski said, "and take weapons away from those who illegally possess them.
That would be done and is done by every democratic state, because weapons
threaten the stability of democracy."

His comments, of course, were not expected to go down well with the rebels, or
with NATO mediators, who have already complained that his hard-line positions
have only complicated the peace process. A NATO task force of 4,500 troops is
trying to help that process along by collecting 3,300 weapons in the next 30
days. NATO hopes that its operation will defuse tensions and end the rebel
insurgency.

Mr. Boskovski is a hawk who has supported a military solution to the ethnic
Albanian insurgency, and who has been accused of allowing his police forces to
inflict violence on ethnic Albanian civilians. Human rights organizations and
even government officials have criticized him for arming thousands of Macedonian
Slav reservists, encouraging attacks on ethnic Albanian properties and the
Macedonian Parliament, and organizing paramilitary units that, among other
things, have hindered NATO troop movements around the country.

Mr. Boskovski's promise of further action against the rebels came as NATO's
secretary general, Lord Robertson, was visiting Macedonia today to assess the
NATO operation. Lord Robertson, who met with Mr. Boskovski, urged Macedonian
politicians to adopt political changes that are a crucial part of the
internationally mediated peace plan to end the six-month conflict.

After the meeting, Lord Robertson said that Mr. Boskovski had agreed to prevent
any illegal paramilitary groups from operating in the country -- something the
secretary general stressed was an important commitment.

In an interview today, Mr. Boskovski voiced support for President Boris
Trajkovski's peace plan and for NATO's presence in Macedonia.

"There are no dilemmas regarding this issue," he said. But he said he would
pursue the rebels "to the end," because, he said, they were set on creating a
greater Albania and seizing control of territory from the government.

He expressed his distrust of NATO's special envoy in Macedonia, Pieter Feith,
who has negotiated with the ethnic Albanian rebels in southern Serbia and in
Macedonia. He blamed Mr. Feith and the rebel leader, Ali Ahmeti, for failing to
ensure that the July cease-fire agreement was observed by the rebels, and for
allowing attacks on as many as 20 Macedonian Slav civilians in western
Macedonia.

And one diplomat made it clear that Mr. Boskovski was not trusted, saying: "We
are concerned about him and his stunts and tricks. There is a lot that could
knock this thing off its tracks."
 --------------------

German Troops Head to Macedonia

BERLIN, Aug. 29 -- Chancellor Gerhard Schroder won a large majority in
Parliament today on a vote to send 500 German soldiers to help NATO troops in
Macedonia.

Parliament must approve any troop deployments outside Germany, and in special
session voted 497 to 130, with 8 abstentions, to support the government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ljube Boskovski, Macedonia's interior minister, wants to
continue to disarm ethnic Albanian rebels even after NATO ends its operation.
(Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (90%);
ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (85%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); POLITICS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%);
PRIME MINISTERS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); POLICE FORCES (58%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA; BOSKOVSKI, LJUBE

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (97%); ALBANIA (95%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC)

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             590 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 1, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

PALESTINIANS GIVE U.N. RACISM TALKS A MIXED MESSAGE

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1286 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Aug. 31


Yasir Arafat denounced Israel as a racist colonial power at a United Nations
conference on intolerance tonight, just hours after one of his senior aides
announced that the Palestinians would reject a proposed declaration that labeled
Israel a racist state.

The change in position came after the Rev. Jesse Jackson said he had brokered an
agreement to eliminate language in conference documents that the Bush
administration considered offensive. The language described the Israeli presence
in places like the West Bank and Gaza as a "new kind of apartheid."

In a handwritten statement drafted after a meeting here between Mr. Jackson and
Mr. Arafat, a senior Palestinian official suggested that the Palestinian
Authority, which is led by Mr. Arafat, wanted to quell the furor surrounding the
proposed language.

The official, Nabil Shaath, the minister of planning and international
cooperation, said the meeting -- the World Conference Against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance -- was "too important to let
it fail for whatever reason."

Mr. Shaath wrote in his statement: "We are not interested in raising an
ideological issue against Israel. Therefore, we will not support statements
against Zionism, nor are we going to support statements equating Zionism with
racism."

But hours later, Mr. Arafat backtracked, saying Israel was characterized by a
"supremacist mentality, a mentality of racial discrimination."

"Our tortured Palestinian people, faced with this harsh treatment with this
settler colonialism and racial discrimination, looks to this conference to stand
by us to stand by justice, to stand by international legitimacy which is now
being trodden upon by the Israeli government," Mr. Arafat said during a round
table discussion on racism with the leaders of 14 countries.

The Bush administration refused to send Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to
the meeting on racism, sending a mid-level delegation instead. Israel also sent
a mid-level group.

The heated debate over the issue has also touched off shouting matches here
between Palestinians and delegates of Jewish civic groups, and has threatened to
eclipse a meeting dedicated to tolerance and international understanding.

The back-and-forth over the Palestinian position overshadowed a day in which
United Nations officials urged delegates to embrace South Africa's model of
racial reconciliation.

Hoping to break the diplomatic impasse, several black American members of
Congress met privately with Mr. Arafat. The meeting was arranged by Mr. Jackson,
who persuaded Mr. Shaath to write his conciliatory statement this morning. But
while the Palestinians were meeting with Representatives John Conyers Jr.,
Democrat of Michigan, and Sheila Jackson-Lee, Democrat of Texas, Mr. Arafat
learned of clashes between the Israelis and the Palestinians in Hebron.

In an interview late tonight, Mr. Arafat repeatedly refused to say he endorsed
the language of compromise used by Mr. Shaath.

"Who can bear what we are suffering?" Mr. Arafat said. "In spite of all that, we
are insisting on the peace process. And my delegation is studying all the
conference tracts, and all the formulas which they are offering. We want to
arrive at a conclusion through consensus, from all the countries who are
participating."

An American official said the government would not comment on Mr. Arafat's
statements. But the official said the United States supported any efforts by
intermediaries to resolve the logjam.

And today, the American delegation, headed by E. Michael Southwick, the deputy
assistant secretary of state for international organizations, spent the day
trying to negotiate away any language critical of Israel.

The United States official, who was familiar with the government's goals at the
conference. said: "Given that the objective of our mission is to eliminate the
offensive references to Israel, we encourage others who have the same goals that
we do to move the conference forward in a positive way. We're encouraged that
others are doing that, whether it be Reverend Jackson or other delegations."

Meanwhile, Canadian officials condemned Mr. Arafat's remarks at the round table
meeting. In a statement, Hedy Fry, the Canadian secretary of state for
multiculturalism and the status of women, described his language as "totally
unacceptable to Canada.'

"It constitutes provocation and is unhelpful to the prospects for peace," Ms.
Fry said. "Such language is even more unacceptable at a global conference
against racism, convened to break down intolerance, to build understanding and
to develop strategies to combat racism."

Mr. Jackson, who met with Mr. Arafat twice today, said he was surprised to hear
of the Palestinian leaders' change of heart. He said he was still hopeful that
disputes over the language of the proposed declaration could be resolved.

"I sought to meet with him and to make the case that at a global conference on
racism xenophobia and racial discrimination that his legitimate concern of the
killings and the occupation could not be resolved," Mr. Jackson said in an
interview tonight. "The point was to get some movement on the issue.

"What America should be doing now is engaging as an honest broker to break the
cycle of violence," he said. "Only the Americans have the power at this point."

The failure of Mr. Jackson's effort to break the diplomatic impasse was only the
latest problem dogging the conference that was intended to highlight
discrimination in all forms -- from concerns about racism in the criminal
justice system in the United States, to the plight of women in Afghanistan, to
modern-day slavery in Sudan.

Questions about whether Israel should be condemned for its treatment of
Palestinians and whether the West should pay reparations for slavery and
colonialism have roiled conference preparations for months, despite the efforts
of conference organizers to resolve the disputes.

Arab nations have argued strongly that Israel should be sharply criticized. But
Mr. Jackson and other human rights leaders said the language of the proposed
declaration against racism seemed to target Israel unnecessarily, particularly
given the dismal human rights records of many countries taking part in the
conference.

In his speech today, the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, urged
delegates to remember that both Jews and Palestinians were victims. And he urged
the delegates gathered here for the weeklong conference not to point fingers.

"Let us admit that all countries have issues of racism and discrimination to
address," he said.

During the week, the delegates from different countries will work mostly behind
closed doors, trying to formulate a declaration against racism, discrimination,
xenophobia and other forms of intolerance. Another group will work on the
language of an action plan to remedy discrimination.

The conference drew 15 heads of state and government, most of them from Africa,
but including the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro. The meeting drew about 5,000
participants and observers.

Even if Mr. Arafat were to soften his stance on Israel, how significant such a
breakthrough would be is far from clear. The conference's final declaration can
be adopted only by consensus, and whether the Arab counties that have been
pushing the anti-Israel language would change their stance is uncertain.

In an interview tonight, Egypt's foreign minister, Ahmed Maher, said he was
encouraged by Mr. Jackson's intervention but insisted that the plight of
Palestinians remain a part of the declaration that emerges from the conference.

"The suffering today of the Palestinians should be recognized," Mr. Maher said.
"It's only normal that this conference deal with this issue."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Thousands of protesters backing various causes marched
yesterday in Durban, South Africa, but the police stopped them from entering the
convention center where delegates were attending a conference on racism. (Agence
France-Presse); A group called Christians Unite Against Racism held a
candlelight vigil yesterday in Durban, South Africa, at the start of the racism
conference. (Associated Press)(pg. A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (96%); RACE & RACISM (94%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTERVIEWS (74%); AFRICAN AMERICANS
(73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (64%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;
PALESTINIANS;  BLACKS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JESSE JACKSON (79%); JOHN CONYERS (56%); SHEILA JACKSON-LEE (56%)
SWARNS, RACHEL L; ARAFAT, YASIR; SHAATH, NABIL (MIN); JACKSON, JESSE L (REV)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(94%); SOUTH AFRICA (94%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  HEBRON (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             594 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking On the Taliban, From Here

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 137 words


To the Editor:

Karl F. Inderfurth ("Teaching the Taliban About Human Rights," Op-Ed, Aug. 29)
is right that the Taliban should be set straight by the Muslim countries that
recognize them as the legitimate rulers of Afghanistan.

It is hard to explain to those not of the Islamic faith just how deeply painful
the Taliban's barbaric actions are to Muslims everywhere.

For Muslims, it is an added responsibility to set the record straight on the
depth of the Koran's teachings on tolerance, spirituality, scholarship and
respect for women.

But the darkness and cruel nature of the deeds of the Taliban make it equally
incumbent on the entire world and, notably, the major powers to apply any
leverage that can expediently fight the spread of the Taliban's brand of order.

SANOBER Q. HAIDER
Princeton Jct., N.J., Aug. 30, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (71%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: HAIDER, SANOBER Q; INDERFURTH, KARL F

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             596 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In America;
Doomed to Irrelevance

BYLINE:  By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 683 words


It was inevitable. There was no chance that the United Nations World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance would
end up being more than a grandiose gathering of the cynical and the naive.

If absolutely everything had gone well at the heroically named conference --
which is still under way in Durban, on the east coast of South Africa -- all
that could have emerged would be a paper telling us that racism, anti-Semitism
and other forms of intolerance are bad.

In its essence, the paper's theme would be, "Now, now, you stop that!"

The conference would close with handshakes and congratulations, and all the
nations of the world -- especially the ones teeming with ethnic and religious
hatreds -- would proceed to ignore the admonition.

But, of course, things did not go well.

The conference machinery was immediately jammed by the insistence of Arab
delegates that Zionism be denounced as racist and Israel characterized as a
nation that is practicing a new kind of apartheid. The U.S. and Israel walked
out, taking with them any hope that the conference would be even minimally
successful.

But the truth is that the conference was doomed to irrelevance from its
conception. The tragic problems of ethnic, religious and gender intolerance have
stained every region of the globe. They are much too big and much too complex
and intractable to be seriously addressed by a U.N. conference.

Making matters worse in Durban is the extent to which the conference was plagued
by cynics chasing their own agendas and delegates befouled by their own bigotry.
Some of the loudest attackers of Israel were from countries in which
anti-Semitism is a way of life and proponents of civil or human rights are
hunted down, imprisoned, tortured and sometimes killed.

Some African countries represented at the conference have demanded apologies and
reparations from Western countries formerly involved in the slave trade. But
African delegates have been conspicuously quiet on the issue of present-day
slavery in Sudan and Mauritania.

The United States was as wary as anyone else about addressing the hard issues.
Fearing lawsuits from the descendants of slaves, American representatives
objected to language describing slavery as "a crime against humanity."

If slavery is not, what is?

People and governments want to talk, talk, talk about racism and other forms of
intolerance, but no one really wants to listen. We are obsessed with racial and
ethnic issues. But we come to these issues wearing earplugs and blinders, and in
a state of denial that absolves us of complicity in any of these hateful
matters.

Thus, the other guy is always wrong.

Organizers of the U.N. conference may have had the highest motives, but you
can't launch a global fight against racism from a base of bad faith and
hypocrisy.

Even as the delegates in Durban wrestled with the minutiae of their various
resolutions came more evidence of the intransigence of intolerance and hatred.
Catholic schoolgirls in Belfast, Northern Ireland, were cursed and spat upon,
and had bottles, stones and a pipe bomb thrown at them by Protestants who were
enraged because the girls had walked down a Protestant street on their way to
class. The girls, aged 4 to 10, were terrified and clung desperately to their
mothers. They had to be shielded by the police and British soldiers.

You can't fight that kind of hatred with a resolution.

The problems in Northern Ireland, in the Middle East, in Afghanistan and Sudan,
in the United States require sustained efforts to find creative solutions by
mature and open-minded individuals. They do not lend themselves to easy
solutions of any kind, and certainly not to the watered-down one-size-fits-all
proclamations of a worldwide convocation against racism.

To make progress on the many forms of prejudice plaguing the world you need a
specific focus, a willingness to learn, the ability to empathize, and patience.
And even then the road will be hard.

An amorphous worldwide gathering in Durban may have been a noble idea, but it
never had a realistic chance of success.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (95%); RACE & RACISM (92%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); SLAVERY (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); ETHNICITY (78%); RELIGION
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); LITIGATION (73%); TORTURE (68%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD
CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: HERBERT, BOB

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (93%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (79%);
MAURITANIA (79%); SUDAN (77%)

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             598 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Present Aid Team's Sins, Complete With Theology Lesson

BYLINE:  By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Sept. 6


Most foreign ministers do not begin news conferences with religious commentary,
but Wakil Ahmad Muttawakil seemed compelled today to explain that the people of
Afghanistan have great respect for Jesus Christ. After all, Jesus was not only a
man of wisdom, but also someone who "cured lepers" and "brought the dead back to
life."

But Jesus was not the greatest of the holy men, Mr. Muttawakil further
expounded. That distinction goes to "Muhammad, peace be upon him, in that he was
the last prophet."

Such matters of comparative theology are currently a pertinent topic in
Afghanistan, for while Jesus may be highly regarded here, Christianity is not --
and that has become yet another big source of friction between international
relief agencies and the Taliban mullahs who rule one of the world's poorest
countries.

The news conference came on the third day of closed-door court proceedings for
eight foreign aid workers accused of preaching Christianity, a crime that the
Taliban have suggested may bring them the death penalty. Mr. Muttawakil used the
news conference to display what he called more evidence of Christian evangelism:
confiscated Bibles in local languages, audio tapes and videos.

"O.K., turn it on," said Rehmatullah Hashmi, a foreign ministry official. A
television set -- itself a forbidden thing -- brightened into life. A movie
called "Jesus" appeared, its narrator extolling "the good news of the Virgin
Mother and the Savior's birth." Soon, a young Jesus was on screen asking
precocious questions of startled rabbis.

"That's enough," said Mr. Hashmi, who tried some levity to accompany the grave
accusations. "We have to put it off. Otherwise, we will also be proselytizing."

He then held up various items, including a children's book with Bible lessons on
flash cards. "These books say Jesus Christ was the son of God," Mr. Hashmi
patiently explained. "We don't believe this. We believe Jesus was a prophet but
not the son of God."

The Christian materials were said to have been found in the vacated offices of
the United States-based International Assistance Mission, one of two aid groups
that were expelled from the country last week. Some 50 employees of the agency,
most of them Americans, hurriedly departed, leaving behind their work of feeding
the hungry.

Had the "hundreds" of Persian- and Pashto-language Bibles been found earlier,
these foreigners might too have been arrested -- or that is what the Taliban are
declaring publicly. Privately, some officials say the timing was a way to avoid
adding to the headache of what to do about the eight Christians already
imprisoned since early August.

Those arrested aid workers -- two Americans, two Australians and four Germans --
were employed by the German-based agency Shelter Now. Sixteen other workers, all
Afghans, are also jailed. But court proceedings began only against the
foreigners on Tuesday.

"How long the trial will take is not clear, but we are moving along rapidly,"
said the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Noor Muhammad Saqib.

The case skipped the lower courts, going directly to an assemblage of 22 legal
experts and religious scholars. They have been reviewing the evidence, trying to
decide how to proceed, Chief Justice Saqib said. Eventually, the matter will be
turned over to an even larger group, which will allow the accused to appear and
make statements.

"We have no obligation to allow them legal counsel, but if they are having
difficulties, this can be permitted," said the justice. "They can have any
lawyer they want, Muslim or non-Muslim, Afghan or foreigner. This is for them to
choose."

Ultimately, the case will be decided by Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban's
seldom-seen supreme leader. He lives in Kandahar, far from Kabul, the nation's
capital.

There has been confusion about the possible punishments for preaching
Christianity. A recent edict from Mullah Omar would seem to indicate that the
penalty for foreigners is 3 to 10 days in prison followed by expulsion.

But today, Mr. Muttawakil, the bespectacled foreign minister, said that this
rather light jail term applies only to people accused of the crime. "In this
case, there is a difference. This is not just an accusation. There is proof."

The two Americans -- Heather Mercer, 24, and Dayna Curry, 29 -- were caught by
the religious police in an Afghan home, itself an offense. They confessed to
playing a CD-ROM about the life of Jesus. It lasted an hour, until "we had a
problem with the computer."

"The Shelter Now people have been preaching for a long time and their tentacles
are everywhere," said Mr. Muttawakil, who is considered a moderate voice among
the immoderate Taliban. "I cannot say what the parameters of the punishment may
be."

There was a broader purpose to the foreign minister's timely remarks. While thus
far closed to the press, the court proceedings, which Afghanistan considersa
"trial,", have nevertheless drawn a fair-sized contingent of the international
media, all of them hopeful for a look at Taliban jurisprudence in so riveting a
case. Mr. Muttawakil had an unusually large audience, and he used the
opportunity to vent some frustration.

Only three nations recognize the Taliban as a legitimate government, he reminded
the group, and the United Nations has imposed economic sanctions, insisting that
Afghanistan no longer play host to the accused terrorist Osama bin Laden. But,
he complained, what happens when the Taliban comply with the world's difficult
requests? The growing of poppy plants has been banned in Afghanistan but little
has been done to provide farmers with replacement income.

"We believe that we are actually here to serve human rights but there is a
slight difference on the definition of these rights," he said, addressing the
many criticisms of the international community. "We believe in rights according
to Islam, and if anybody is trying to impose their definition of the human
rights on us, they will be sadly mistaken because this world is not a world of
one culture or one religion."

Afghanistan is in its 4th year of a catastrophic drought and 22nd year of
unremitting war. The United Nations and hundreds of relief agencies provide help
that now accounts for more than $300 million a year. But these organizations and
the Taliban frequently have been at odds over issues steeped in cultural
conflicts and mutual distrust.

Today, Mr. Muttawakil announced that a new commission had been formed to
supervise the activities of the United Nations and the relief agencies, the
so-called nongovernmental organizations or NGO's. Strict rules, overlooked in
the past, would be enforced, he said. Taliban approval would be required for the
hiring of staff workers. Money would have to be channeled through the
Afghanistan National Bank.

"We have been relaxed, but now the NGO's will be made to obey the laws," he
said.

The gathering had taken on a hostile air. The foreign minister seemed to realize
this and returned to the more ecumenical tone of his religious commentary.

He said, "We will end this conference by saying, praise be to Jesus Christ, who
will eventually come as a Muslim and will follow the teachings of Islam."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Irene Salimi, a German diplomat, alighting from a van after a
meeting with detainees at the United Nations guest house in Kabul. Offering his
hand was John Mercer, father of an American being held, Heather Mercer.
(Associated Press)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (94%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); PRESS CONFERENCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(89%); FOOD CHARITIES (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (73%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%); ARRESTS (72%); CHILDREN'S
LITERATURE (62%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (53%) CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;
ISLAM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM OF RELIGION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE MISSION; SHELTER NOW
INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY; MUTTAWAKIL, WAKIL AHMAD (MIN)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  GERMANY;  AUSTRALIA

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             601 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: CIVIL LIBERTIES;
Some Foresee A Sea Change In Attitudes On Freedoms

BYLINE:  By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


The political pressure to do something anything -- to ensure that there is never
a repeat of this week's terrorist attacks is immense on Capitol Hill. And civil
liberties advocates are watching with quiet concern.

Across the political spectrum, lawmakers are arguing that the United States has
entered a new and more dangerous era that demands heightened security measures,
including armed guards on commercial airliners and greater surveillance powers
for federal agents.

Senator Trent Lott, the Republican leader, declared the day after the attacks:
"When you are at war, civil liberties are treated differently. We cannot let
what happened yesterday happen in the future."

The attitude shift is not confined to conservative Republicans. Representative
Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, said, "The general assumption in this
country is freedom and individual privacy." But he added, "When conditions turn
adverse, you respond to them."

In his case, Mr. Frank said, "I think I will be more supportive of more freedom
for electronic surveillance than I was before, and I think more of an armed
presence on airplanes."

Civil liberties groups, while initially muted as the nation grieved, were just
beginning to voice their concerns today.

"It's very important at a time of crisis to reaffirm national principles,
national ideals," said Marc Rotenberg, director of the Electronic Privacy
Information Center. "I certainly understand the sense of frustration and tragedy
-- my own family has been touched by what's happened this week -- but it would
be an enormous cost to severely limit American freedoms."

Some advocates were dismayed by a proposal the Senate approved on Thursday night
that would, among other things, make it easier for federal law enforcement to
wiretap computers.

Senator Jon Kyl, Republican of Arizona, who is a member of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, declared: "We are in a race to the finish line with
agents of terror. Will we enhance our security and defenses before they are able
to strike again?"

But Barry Steinhardt, associate director of the American Civil Liberties Union,
said today, "This amendment proposes significant and dangerous changes to our
wiretapping laws and should not have been adopted literally in the middle of the
night without debate or scrutiny."

Civil liberties groups are also concerned about ideas like expanding use of
face-recognition technology, which allows security cameras tied to computers to
search a crowd for criminals.

Representative Martin T. Meehan, Democrat of Massachusetts, said: "I don't think
we've done a good enough job in this country utilizing the technology available,
like facial recognition technology. We need to make greater investments there."

Mr. Meehan, who was interviewed while the Capitol was being evacuated on
Thursday night, also felt that the nation's attitudes had fundamentally changed
after the attacks.  "Given this unspeakable act, Americans will tolerate some
restraint on their liberties for the sake of security," he said.

And polling suggests that they are more than willing to make that tradeoff.

With many of these proposals, like face-recognition systems, "we have to really
reflect on how much we value privacy," said Walter Dellinger, who served as
acting solicitor general in the Clinton administration.

"With terrorism, our only defense might be infiltration and surveillance," Mr.
Dellinger said, "so we're going to have to choose between security and privacy."

To monitor such proposals from both Congress and the administration in the
coming months, a new coalition of civil rights, civil liberties, religious and
other organizations is beginning to form, advocates said. Already, such groups
were sounding the alarm about the possibility of a backlash and discrimination
against Arab-Americans.

In part, such fears are a reaction to history.

"We know what happened post-Pearl Harbor; we know what happens when you have
these national security situations," said Ralph Neas, president of People for
the American Way, a liberal rights group, recalling the wartime relocation and
internment of Japanese-Americans after the 1941 attack.  "Many times," Mr. Neas
said, "there are overreactions, not based on fact or careful analysis, that lead
to a violation of the Constitution."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); WIRETAPPING (89%);
BIOMETRICS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); VOICE
RECOGNITION (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); CONSERVATISM (78%); POLITICS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION
AIRCRAFT (77%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (76%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT
(76%); LEGISLATION (76%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (76%); INTERNET PRIVACY (76%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (76%); APPROVALS (71%); PATTERN RECOGNITION (71%); AIRLINES (71%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (61%) TERRORISM;  SURVEILLANCE OF
CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  GUARDS;  UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: BARNEY FRANK (73%); TRENT LOTT (58%); JON KYL (58%) TONER, ROBIN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (89%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (89%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             603 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

America Mourns, and Looks at the Path Ahead;
Falwell's Comments

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 58 words


To the Editor:

If the Rev. Jerry Falwell blames the American Civil Liberties Union for the
terrorist attacks on America (news article, Sept. 14), let him direct his anger
at our founding fathers, who wrote the Bill of Rights that we defend.

BARBARA BERNSTEIN
Executive Director
New York Civil Liberties Union
Nassau Chapter
Mineola, N.Y., Sept. 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HIJACKING (87%); POLITICS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (85%); EXECUTIVES (84%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (84%) TERRORISM;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  UNITED
STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  CONSTITUTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%); CHRISTIAN COALITION (59%)
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION; CHRISTIAN COALITION

PERSON: BERNSTEIN, BARBARA; FALWELL, JERRY (REV)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (66%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             605 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE OPPOSITION;
Afghan Rebels Courted by U.S. and Russia to Defy Taliban

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: DUSHANBE, Tajikistan, Sept. 24


The tiny, long-ignored embassy of the alliance of Afghan rebel groups fighting
the Taliban was buzzing with activity today. American diplomats and Russian
generals are coming courting, testing the mettle of the new commander of the
Northern Alliance, appointed after his predecessor died from wounds suffered in
an assassination everyone here blames on the Taliban's most infamous guest,
Osama bin Laden.

American officials -- who in general have ignored the alliance for years --
contacted the group last Wednesday, seeking possible cooperation, rebel leaders
said.

The Bush administration is trying to build a coalition that can replace the
Taliban after America strikes at Afghanistan to try to remove Mr. bin Laden, the
prime suspect in the Sept. 11 terror attacks against the United States.

Saleh Muhammad Registani, the Northern Alliance's military attache to Moscow,
said the diplomatic contacts continued. The administration, he said today,
should not rely solely on Pakistan in its confrontation with the Taliban. The
Northern Alliance, Mr. Registani said, needs direct American assistance and can
coordinate land assaults while the Americans strike from the air.

On Saturday, the chief of staff of the Russian military met with the alliance's
new commander, Gen. Muhammad Fahim. Today, alliance officials assembled for a
trip to Italy to meet with Afghanistan's exiled king, who at age 86 is at the
center of renewed efforts to build a unified anti-Taliban coalition out of his
country's famously fractious ethnic and political groups.

While alliance officials here put on a brave face, doubts exist about its
military abilities. The group claims to field 15,000 soldiers, but Russian
officials say the number is closer to 5,000. They claim to control 15 percent of
northwest Afghanistan; Russian officials put the figure at 5 percent.

The alliance is supported mainly by Tajiks, Uzbeks and other northern minority
groups, representing about 10 to 15 percent of the population. Afghanistan's
population ation is mainly Pashtun.

The killing this month of Ahmed Shah Massoud, long the alliance's military
leader and a master tactician and veteran of the Soviet invasion, could prove
crippling.

The alliance has also been accused of drug and gun-running and human rights
violations, including summary executions, the burning of houses and looting.
Most of the targets were ethnic Pashtuns, a base of Taliban support.

If it gains power, there are fears that the vicious internecine war that
followed the Soviets' departure in 1989 could rekindle.

Mr. Registani and other alliance officials today claimed gains in a new ground
offensive in chaotic northern Afghanistan. The envoy to Moscow pointed to the
moves as proof that his group of former warlords is holding together despite the
death of Mr. Massoud. The commander was buried eight days ago after succumbing
to injuries suffered when two suicide bombers posing as Arab journalists visited
him Sept. 9, two days before the terrorist attacks on the United States.

The Afghan rebels are convinced that Mr. Massoud's death was the work of Mr. bin
Laden in a quid pro quo for the Taliban's continued protection after Sept. 11.

"Things are not like the Taliban predicted, that our affairs would collapse, and
there would be disunity," Mr. Registani said. Mr. Registani was at pains to deny
any wrongdoing by the Northern Alliance, insisting that it wanted a multiparty
democracy in Afghanistan and that it would fight on, even without American
backing, particularly if an alliance backed by Pakistan took over.

Mr. Registani said the rebels had gained ground in recent days in Balkh and
Samangan Provinces in northwest Afghanistan and Reuters reported heavy fighting
in the strategic Panjshir Valley today. A leader who had split with the
alliance, Gen.  Rashid Dostum, was said to have rejoined it over the weekend.
Taliban officials have admitted losing control of a strategic village in Balkh
Province.

The alliance leaders are the latest of dozens of proxies financed over the
centuries by outside powers in Central Asia, notably in recent history in the
1980's, when the United States lent huge support to resist the 1979 Soviet
invasion.

The Northern Alliance has long been backed by powers as disparate as Russia and
Iran. Moscow supports the group because it blames the Taliban for exporting
Islamic insurgency into the Russian republic of Chechnya. The Islamic rulers of
Iran oppose the Taliban's strict brand of Islam, and they almost went to war
with Afghanistan three years ago after 10 Iranian diplomats and an Iranian
journalist were killed.

Besides being wooed by diplomats, officials of the alliance embassy here are now
besieged by reporters from around the world trying to get into Afghanistan.
--------------------

Ex-Rebel to Join Fray
By The New York Times

WASHINGTON, Sept. 24 -- Abdul Haq, who forged a reputation as one of the
mujahedeen leaders during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, declared today
that he would soon return from exile in Dubai to join the fight against the
Taliban.

Mr. Haq spoke from Rome, the home of the exiled 86-year-old king of Afghanistan.
He indicated that he had had contacts with the National Security Council but had
yet to obtain a commitment of financial support from the White House. He said he
would go to Pakistan on Tuesday.

The former commander said his plan is to head a resistance force of thousands of
fighters. He estimated that as many as one-third of the fighters with the
Taliban were disaffected.

"One of the easiest things in Afghanistan is to get fighters," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fighters with the Northern Alliance outside the village of
Shahrak, Afghanistan. Opposition forces battled Taliban troops yesterday for
control of areas north of Kabul. (Mikhail Metzel/Associated Press)(pg. B1);
Anti-Taliban rebel forces of the Northern Alliance guard the front line fifteen
miles north of Kabul, near the former Soviet air base, Bagrame. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. B2) Map of the Afghanistan/Pakistan highlights the location
of the Northern Alliance: Afghanistan's rebel forces control land in the north
of the country. (pg. B2)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TALIBAN (92%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); ASSASSINATION
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (69%); ETHNIC GROUPS (69%); POPULATION SIZE (69%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (92%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (73%); DUSHANBE,
TAJIKISTAN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); AFGHANISTAN (96%);
TAJIKISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); UZBEKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             608 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1066 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

During a Yearlong Intifada, Fear Has Gripped Mideast
Among the facts upon which Israelis and Palestinians disagree is what day the
intifada began. Palestinians say Sept. 28, 2000, when Ariel Sharon, now the
Israeli prime minister, visited a site sacred to Muslims; Israelis tend to say
the day before or the day after. But people on both sides describe similar
effects of the events since: fear and desperation.   A3

Shooting Rampage in Swiss Hall
A 57-year-old gunman stormed into a crowded regional legislature in Zug, killing
14 people and detonating a hand grenade before shooting himself dead. It was the
bloodiest episode in the normally tranquil country's recent criminal history and
prompted talk of tightening Switzerland's relaxed security.   A6


Macedonia Insurgency Ends
Ali Ahmeti, the political leader of the National Liberation Army, said that the
ethnic Albanian rebels had formally disbanded and were returning to civilian
life. The rebels ended their eight-month insurgency for greater rights hours
after NATO agreed with the Macedonian government on the mandate for a new task
force to keep the peace effort on track.   A7

Britain Considers I.D. Cards
The British government is considering issuing mandatory identity cards to its
citizens as part of a package of antiterrorism measures, raising the hackles of
civil libertarians.   A10

Deadline on Delhi Buses
The Supreme Court is scheduled to decide today whether to banish from the roads
thousands of diesel buses that New Delhi's four million citizens ride daily,
after ordering two years ago that the buses be replaced by more environmentally
friendly buses. But the city never did, and the deadline is Sunday.   A4

Tibetan Scholar Held in China
Khenpo Jigme Phuntsok, the renowned founder of a Tibetan study center in the
mountains of western China, is being held against his will in a Chinese military
hospital, human rights monitors abroad said.   A8

World Briefing   A12

NATIONAL   A16-28

Tighter Border Security Cuts Flow of Illegal Drugs
Customs officials said that increased security along the border with Mexico
since the terrorist attacks has helped reduce the flow of illegal drugs, at
least temporarily.   A16

Curfew in Cincinnati
The mayor imposed a nighttime curfew after protesters set small fires and pelted
cars with rocks and bottles overnight in response to a white city police
officer's acquittal in the death of an unarmed black man.   A16

Donation Fraud Warning
Reports of con artists trying to prey on donors are increasing as millions of
Americans try to help victims of the terrorist attacks, watchdog groups said.
A18

Spy Sentenced to Life
The highest-ranking American military officer ever convicted of spying, George
Trofimoff, a retired Army Reserve colonel, was sentenced to life in prison.
A22

Boardinghouse Scholarships
A woman who was so frugal that she slept in the hallway of her boardinghouse so
that each room had a tenant has left $3.5 million to her alma mater, Western
Kentucky University, for scholarships.   A22

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Ethics of Sex Selection
In a letter that has stunned many leading fertility specialists, the acting head
of their professional society's ethics committee says it is sometimes acceptable
for couples to choose the sex of their children by selecting either male or
female embryos and discarding the rest.   A16

Rise in Health Insurance
The number of Americans without health insurance declined last year for the
second year in a row, after rising steadily for more than a decade, the Census
Bureau said.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   D1-5

Two Mayoral Candidates Back Extension for Giuliani
Mayor Giuliani told the three mayoral candidates that he would seek a third term
if they did not agree to a three-month extension of his term. Michael Bloomberg,
the Republican candidate, and Mark Green, one of the two Democratic candidates,
said that they would support the extension. Fernando Ferrer, who will face Mr.
Green in a Democratic runoff next month, said that he could not support the
plan.   A1

Manhattan Shifts Gears
While drive time may have been a little more annoying than usual on the first
day of the morning ban on vehicles with one person entering Manhattan, commuters
and transportation officials said that, by and large, traffic was not the muddle
that it could have been.   D1

Refugees in Their Own City
As New Yorkers try to return to normalcy, some 8,000 residents still displaced
from their apartments near the World Trade Center calamity are increasingly
frustrated. The main complaints are the constantly changing rules on access to
the "frozen zone," a lack of authoritative information and the absence of a
timetable for returning home.   D1

WEEKEND   E1-30; E31-40

Broadway Brightens
Box office figures rebounded for every Broadway show, dispelling some of the
gloom that had fallen over the industry after two terrible weeks. The partial
recovery was enough to cause some to suggest that producers may have panicked in
the first days after the terrorist attacks, when theaters went dark and several
shows folded.   E2

SPORTS   D7-13

OBITUARIES   D6

Stanley S. Herr
A lawyer whose career of crusades for the mentally disabled altered the legal
landscape from schools to death rows, he was 56.   D6

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Buyer Sought for Part of AT&T
AT&T has approached at least three of the nation's largest local telephone
companies -- Verizon Communications, SBC Communications and BellSouth -- about
buying its consumer and business telephone operations, people close to the
companies said.   C1

Billionaire's Garage Sale
Craig O. McCaw built a telecom fortune that reached about $9 billion last year.
Today, the value of those holdings has crashed to about $1 billion. Now he is
holding a garage sale of sorts. For-sale signs have appeared on three homes, a
private island, three jets, a yacht and even a collection of rare California
wines.   C1

OPEC Maintains Production
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries decided to hold to its
current production level of 23.2 million barrels a day.   C2

Investors Seek Safety
Stocks of large companies rose as investors sought relatively safe places to
park their money.   C11

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: The mayor's dangerous idea; progress on airline security; aid for a
terrorized economy.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E30
Weather   D14
TV Listings   E29

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); SENTENCING (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TERRORISM (75%); ARMIES (75%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); JAIL SENTENCING (74%); PRISONS
(74%); BORDER CONTROL (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (74%); LITIGATION (74%);
CORRECTIONS (74%); CURFEW (74%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(72%); RELIGION (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (69%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); CITY GOVERNMENT (68%); RANKINGS (65%); ACQUITTAL (64%); ESPIONAGE (62%);
ILLEGAL DRUGS (61%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (61%); PEACE PROCESS (54%); POLICE FORCES
(52%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (82%)

CITY: CINCINNATI, OH, USA (79%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (72%); ZUG, SWITZERLAND (55%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); CHINA (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); TIBET (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); INDIA
(79%); ALBANIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             609 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain May Require ID Cards for All

BYLINE:  By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 26


The British government is considering issuing mandatory identity cards to its
citizens as part of a broad package of antiterrorism measures.

There has been no formal proposal yet. The home secretary, David Blunkett, has
said only that he is giving the question of identity cards "a fairly high
priority." The suggestion that a proposal might be forthcoming, though, has
already raised the hackles of civil libertarians, who worry that the government
is capitalizing on the attacks in the United States to push through hasty and
intrusive legislation.

Many European countries already have some form of national identity card, used
as much to establish the identity of those seeking various state service as for
law-enforcement reasons. But opponents of the cards argue that they rob people
of a precious freedom -- the right to walk down the street without being
challenged by the authorities -- without being much help in the struggle against
terrorism.

"ID cards only help you track people if you know who you are looking for, if you
are certain they cannot possibly be carrying plausible fake papers, and if you
stop them," said John Wadham, the director of Liberty, a civil liberties group.
"That means you have to use the police to stop vast numbers of people on the
street, to detain large numbers who aren't carrying a card or who in some way
are deemed to arouse suspicion."

If cards are introduced, they are likely to be far more sophisticated versions
of the cards in use here decades ago, with fingerprint or iris identification to
make them difficult to forge. They could also contain computer chips with the
capacity to carry vast amounts of information about, for instance, the
cardholder's criminal record or immigration status.

"If it's a standard, simple-use card, I don't have any objections," said Lord
Lester, a human rights lawyer and member of the House of Lords. "But if it
contains huge amounts of information so that the government knows everything
about the individual with no cause for them to have that knowledge, then that is
a problem."

Britons carried identity cards during World War I and again in World War II and
beyond. The cards were abolished in 1953, after a court ruled that the police
powers that went with them -- including the power to stop citizens at random and
demand that they present identification -- tended to make people resent the
authorities and "to obstruct the police instead of to assist them."

Mr. Blunkett discussed the possibility of new national identity cards earlier
this week as the appetite has grown among Europeean governments, as in the
United States, for tougher anti-terrorism laws. Last week, members of the
European Union agreed on a variety of Europe-wide measures, including setting up
a quicker form of extradition, backed by a European Union arrest warrant, to
ensure that fugitives are dealt with swiftly.

They also pledged to establish common definitions of and penalties for
terrorism; to find new ways to freeze terrorists' assets and to gather
cross-border evidence against them and to set up a Europe-wide antiterrorism
group.

Britain, which has dealt with terrorism attacks for decades because of the
unrest in Northern Ireland, is already known for its tough antiterrorism laws.

A law passed in 2000 widened the definition of terrorism, made it illegal to be
a member of a variety of exile groups and granted the state broader powers to,
for instance, detain suspected terrorists without charge.

"There is a question of why we are looking at radical new measures when we
already have more stringent powers against terrorism than almost any other
state," said Roger Bingham, a spokesman for Liberty.

Civil liberties campaigners have often turned to the courts to overturn
legislation they feel infringes on citizens' rights, but Mr. Blunkett, the home
secretary, told the BBC that Parliament and the government should have the final
say.

"It is elected representatives who are held to account by the electorate, and it
is they who should be the prime protectors of our rights, rather than having to
rely on the judicial system," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); IDENTITY SECURITY (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%);
NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); FINGERPRINTING (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); BRITISH NOBILITY
& GENTRY (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); BIOMETRICS (78%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%);
HIJACKING (76%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); LAWYERS (73%);
EVIDENCE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); LITIGATION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); MISSING PERSONS (67%); IMMIGRATION (63%); WORLD WAR I (60%); WORLD WAR II
(60%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  IDENTIFICATION DEVICES

PERSON: ;BLUNKETT, DAVID (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             612 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 29, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Response To Attack Splits Arabs In the West

BYLINE:  By PATRICIA COHEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1893 words


Since the end of the First World War, when the French and British willy-nilly
carved up the decaying Ottoman Empire, people have been divided over who is to
blame for the veil of misery that shrouds millions of people across the Arab
world.

Are outsiders or insiders, Westerners or Arabs primarily responsible for the
persistent poverty, corruption and repression? The question has been bubbling up
since Sept. 11, as people grope to explain the virulent radicalism that has been
growing across the region. For while a single madman can be dismissed as an evil
aberration, what intelligence reports describe as a sprawling army of nearly
11,000 cannot.

Among Arab intellectuals educated and living in the West, who are at once both
outsiders and insiders, the question is particularly pointed. Revulsion at the
murderous attack has brought a moment of unity here. (In the Arab world it is
not hard to hear voices calling the attack justified retribution.) Across
continents Arab writers and scholars have been e-mailing one another vehement
condemnations.

But the attack has also created new pressures to choose sides within a group
that is at times wrung with suspicion over loyalties and motives. Now, like
feuding brothers who etch a chalk line across their bedroom floor, Arab
intellectuals in the West are split over how to respond to the attack. All are
horrified at the senseless deaths. But on one side are those who argue that it
is essential to understand how United States policies helped create the
conditions that produced such monstrous fanatics. On the other are those who
insist that any attempts to link the attacks to grievances against the West play
into terrorist hands.

"I say that's wrong," the author Kanan Makiya said. "Of course there's power and
there's injustice, but we should be at the forefront of separating those issues
from what happened Sept. 11." Islamic extremists have appropriated
"anti-imperialist and anti-Zionist rhetoric" in order to erase the distinction
between themselves and the broader Muslim world, he said. Including such
qualifications now lends "credence to what the terrorists did," he continued,
adding, "That's what they want to do."

Fawaz A. Gerges, a professor at Sarah Lawrence College and the author of
"America and Political Islam," agreed. "This terribly hideous act, you can never
justify it, never rationalize it, regardless of what American foreign policy has
done," he said. "This is not the time to condemn" United States policy, he
continued. "This is the time to condemn what has happened. It's time Arab
intellectuals rise to the occasion."

To Edward Said, one of the most prominent intellectuals, Arab or otherwise, such
logic is flawed. "The appropriation or hijacking of language by self-appointed
spokesmen goes on all the time," he said in an e-mail. "But why should we simply
accede to the hijackers? To understand is not to condone."

This split among the community of Arab scholars here mirrors the long-running --
and at points bitter -- discussion over American responsibility for the wretched
conditions in most Arab countries. Vigorously defend the United States (and
Israel) and risk being labeled an Uncle Abdul, the Arabs' Uncle Tom; keepquiet
about the absence of freedom and rights and risk being called a silent
accomplice.

No serious scholar denies that the reasons for the Arab world's ills are
enormously complex. The question is how to calculate the algebra of blame. And
to most Arab intellectuals the United States now commands the stage. As Rashid
Khalidi, a professor of Middle East history at the University of Chicago, said,
"To say the U.S. determines everything is to deny agency of the people, and
that's obviously wrong." But he added, "The greater share of power is obviously
in the hands of the West."

America's entry into the Arab theater came midcentury. Before then the United
States was considered a world apart from corrupt European imperialists. Woodrow
Wilson's call in 1918 for self-determination electrified the Arab world. The
following year an unscientific survey of representatives from some 1,500 Arab
villages found that if forced under the rule of a foreign power, a majority
would choose the United States.

From the moment the United States supported Israel's creation in 1948 and the
partition of Palestine, Arabs scholars detail the catalog of wrongs: American
and British support for the 1953 overthrow of the democratically elected
Mossadeh government in Iran; backing of Israel in the 1967 war that led to its
occupation of the West Bank and throughout the intifada; cold war opposition to
Arab nationalism; support of undemocratic regimes like the one in Saudia Arabia;
sanctions imposed after the gulf war that blocked food and medical supplies,
contributing to malnutrition and death among Iraqis; American-led globalization
that has widened the chasm between rich and poor.

"I think blame can be distributed pretty evenly," Mr. Said said in a telephone
interview, adding that "the main problem with the Arab national movement
throughout the century has been the lack of attention to democracy and
democratic rights."

Still, he offered a blunt summation of America's shortcomings. "To most people
in the Islamic and Arab worlds the official U.S. is synonymous with arrogant
power, known mainly for its sanctimoniously munificent support not only of
Israel but of numerous repressive Arab regimes and its inattentiveness even to
the possibility of dialogue with secular movements and people who have real
grievances," he wrote last week in The Observer in London.

"Anti-Americanism in this context is not based on a hatred of modernity or
technology envy," he continued. Rather, "it is based on a narrative of concrete
interventions, specific depredations and, in the cases of the Iraqi people's
suffering under U.S.-imposed sanctions and U.S. support for the 34-year-old
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories, cruel and inhumane policies
administered with a stony coldness."

Mr. Said sees imperial designs in the United States' threatened military attack
on Afghanistan as well, arguing that it would help solidify its control of oil
"from the gulf to the northern oil fields."

Afghanistan, one of the most blighted spots on the map and where Osama bin Laden
is said to be holed up, is a place where outsiders -- in this case the former
Soviet Union even more than the West -- has a lot to answer for, Mr. Khalidi
said. The Soviets, who fought a brutal 10-year war there, and the Americans, who
helped train militant rebels to oppose them, "created the conditions which put a
monster into the world, a golem," he said, "one million killed, one and a half
million maimed and five to six million refugees."

Muslims' view of the United States now very much depends on America's next move,
Mr. Khalidi said. If its military response fails to distinguish "between
innocent people and people who have committed these crimes against humanity,"
and thousands of Afghans are killed, he said, to most Arab eyes the United
States will be seen as no better than the suicidal hijackers.

To a small group of Arab scholars in the West, however, too many of their
colleagues devote too much energy detailing outsiders' wrongs instead of
focusing on the maladies at the heart the Arab system: tyrannical regimes,
rejection of modernity and individual rights, rigidly hierarchical social
structures and lack of freedom.

"The dominant tendency among Arab intellectuals is to put the blame for most of
the problems in the area on the shoulders of the West," said Mr. Gerges, who
spent the last two years doing research in the Arab world. That doesn't
exonerate American policies, he said. "To suggest that somehow the U.S. in the
second part of the 20th century has not played a preponderant role is to
simplify and distort." He cited in particular United States support of Israel in
its gnawing conflict with the Palestinians. But to ignore "the failure of the
Arab leadership" to create accountable political institutions, ensure civil
liberties and provide their people a measure of social justice and economic
equity, he said, is also to distort and simplify.

These failings are the major reasons for the lack of Arab development, yet few
Arabs take moral or personal responsibility for their predicament, he argued.

Mr. Makiya, who detailed the atrocities of Saddam Hussein's regime in his book
"Republic of Fear," said that since Israel defeated the Egyptian-led Arab
alliance in the 1967 war, Saddam Hussein and other dictators in Libya, Algeria
and Sudan have legitimized their rule by "finding scapegoats for their
problems."

"For a while it worked," said Mr. Makiya, who is compiling an archive of Iraqi
documents for the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at Harvard. But then "one
catastrophe followed another: the Iran-Iraq war, the Lebanese civil war, the
Iranian revolution, all leading to enormously large body counts and claiming
more victims than all the Arab-Israeli wars together."

"A very, very important lost opportunity was the 1991 gulf war," he said. "Here
the bankruptcy of this previous two decades of rhetoric was revealed in Saddam's
land grab, the exposure of his Nazilike terror of the Arab world." But Arabs
failed to seize the moment.

That's when Mr. Makiya wrote "Cruelty and Silence," which he described as his
"J'accuse" of Arab intellectuals, a book that he said elicited some expressions
of support and lots of fury.

"The responsibility for the failure of the Arab political order can no longer be
placed on the West or Israel, as Arab intellectuals are so fond of doing," he
wrote. "It cannot even be placed only, or primarily, on the shoulders of the
rulers of the Arab world."

"The deeper problem lies not in their psychology, but in the distorting lens
through which they have been viewed by the real source of failure in the culture
of modern Arab intellectuals," he continued. The title of his book referred to
their silence on human rights.

Mr. Makiya argues that the language of human rights and the language of Arab
nationalism and political Islam are irreconcilable.

Rather than trying to accommodate these two traditions, Arab intellectuals have
defended not only the noble elements of Islamic culture but the repressive ones
as well, said Hazem Saghyeh, an author and columnist for Al-Hayat, an Arabic
newspaper published in London. The intellectual should be "the one who
contradicts his nation, his army, his church, his national institutions," Mr.
Saghyeh said in a telephone interview from London, "while the tradition that
predominates in the Arab world is that the intellectual is the one who fights
for the sake of his nation, his institutions, his hierarchy and his own
heritage."

Whether the terrorist attacks will prove a transforming moment for Arab thinkers
depends both on what the United States does and whether Arab intellectuals can
shake their habit of mind, he said.

Mr. Gerges said he was hopeful that would happen. "For me as an Arab-American
intellectual it's a watershed," he said.

But to Mr. Said, the dilemmas of expatriate intellectuals are ultimately beside
the point. "I think the crucial debate is the one taking place inside the Arab
world," he said, adding that was why he started writing for an Arab audience at
the end of the 1980's. "That's where the battle is, not in New York."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pondering blame: Rashid Khalidi, left, and Fawaz A. Gerges.
(Susan Harris); (Jean-Marie Huron/Editing, for The New York Times)(pg. A11);
(Horacio Cardo)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR I (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
APPROPRIATIONS (86%); RELIGION (67%); FOREIGN POLICY (64%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (50%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             614 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 2, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lord Aldington, 86, Libeled for 1945 Yalta Repatriations

BYLINE:  By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 606 words


Lord Aldington, a British politician and an executive who won the highest libel
damages ever awarded by a British court in his suit against a great-nephew of
the Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy, died on Dec. 7 at his home in southern
England. He was 86.

Lord Aldington's long dispute with the nephew, Count Nikolai Tolstoy, who had
accused him of war crimes, brought an award of $:1.5 million, or $2.3 million,
in 1989. But he never received a penny.

The case centered on one of the Allies' most shameful acts of World War II, the
forced repatriation, under the terms of the 1945 Yalta agreement with the Soviet
Union, of thousands of captured anti-Communist Russians and Yugoslavs, most of
whom were promptly executed or imprisoned.

As a brigadier on the staff of the British forces occupying Austria at the end
of the war, Toby Austin Richard William Low, as Lord Aldington was known, was
involved in sending back 70,000 so-called Cossacks and anti-Tito Ustasha who had
surrendered to the British in the belief that they would be safe. The group
included 11,000 women and children. He acted on the direct orders of Harold
Macmillan, Winston Churchill's minister in the Mediterranean.

In the mid-1980's, when he was in his 70's and winding down a successful
political and business career, Lord Aldington felt obliged to bring a libel
action against Count Tolstoy and an embittered property developer, Nigel Watts,
who had circulated a pamphlet saying that Lord Aldington "had the blood of
70,000 innocent men, women and children on his hands" and that his wartime
activities merited "comparison with those of the worst butchers of Nazi Germany
and Soviet Russia."

Count Tolstoy had already published several books and articles attacking
Macmillan and Britain's wartime government for handing over the anti-Communist
prisoners in the hope of pleasing Stalin and securing the release of British
soldiers held in Eastern Europe. The books included "Victims of Yalta"(1977) and
"The Minister and the Massacres" (1986).

At the trial, Lord Aldington agreed that the fate of the returnees had been
"ghastly" but said he had not known that they faced execution. "There were many
officers who were very unhappy about what we had to do, and I was amongst them,"
he testified. "But I didn't make a fuss about it. I just got on with the job."

Lord Aldington won his case and the award. But Count Tolstoy declared himself
bankrupt to avoid payment and repeatedly appealed the decision. In 1995, the
European Court of Human Rights ruled that the original damages had been
excessive. Meanwhile, legal costs had crippled Lord Aldington's own finances.

Born on May 25, 1914, Lord Aldington was educated at Winchester and New College,
Oxford, before serving in World War II in Greece, Crete, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia,
Italy and Austria. He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order, the Croix de
Guerre and the American Legion of Merit.

He entered Parliament in 1945 as a Conservative member for Blackpool North and
became minister of trade when Churchill returned to office in 1951 and, later,
vice chairman of the Conservative Party. He was ennobled in 1962.

His business career included serving as chairman of the General Electric
Company, Grindlays Bank, Westland Aircraft, Sun Alliance and London Insurance.
Surviving are his wife, Araminta, whom he married in 1947; two daughters; and a
son.

The day after Lord Aldington's death, an Oxford court ordered Count Tolstoy to
make a first payment of $85,000 toward the legal costs in the case. But he
remained unrepentant, saying of the man whom he had libeled, "He'll get a frosty
reception at the Pearly Gates."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (Foreign)

PERSON: Lord Aldington

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lord Aldington (Camera Press, 1974)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); DAMAGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LIBEL &
SLANDER (90%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%); WRITERS (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES (78%); REAL ESTATE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); WOMEN (71%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (69%);
ARMED FORCES (68%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ALDINGTON (LORD); LEWIS, PAUL

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UKRAINE (92%); EUROPE
(92%); ENGLAND (90%); MEDITERRANEAN (79%); GERMANY (74%); EASTERN EUROPE (58%);
AUSTRIA (56%)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             616 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Put War Criminals on Notice

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 125 words


To the Editor:

President Clinton's signing of the treaty to establish an International Criminal
Court shows that there really are differences between the mainstream left and
right on foreign policy (front page, Jan. 1). But it also shows that left and
right agree on fundamental goals and differ only on tactics.

President Clinton voices the left's perspective: signing the treaty puts America
in a better position to seek measures exempting American war criminals. The
right disagrees, arguing that, on principle, no one should have jurisdiction
over America's freedom to use violence abroad. It's too bad that those who
oppose war crimes regardless of who perpetrates them don't have a place in this
debate.

JAKE WERNER
Evanston, Ill., Jan. 1, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); FOREIGN POLICY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
JURISDICTION (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TREATIES;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%) WERNER, JAKE; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             632 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 56 words


A report in the World Briefing column on Saturday about Turkey's opposition to a
bill in France that would apply the genocide label to the killing of Armenians
under the Ottoman Empire referred imprecisely to the number of dead. While the
figure is disputed, it is acknowledged to be in the hundreds of thousands, not
the tens of thousands.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%) CORRECTION
STORIES;  ARMENIANS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (88%); FRANCE (87%); TURKEY (72%)

REGION: TURKEY;  FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             664 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Rabbis Plead Guilty in Conspiracy to Divert Federal Money

BYLINE:  By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 684 words


Two Brooklyn rabbis who were given a $2.5 million federal grant to help
Holocaust survivors pleaded guilty yesterday to a felony conspiracy charge for
defrauding the program by using hundreds of thousands of dollars for themselves
and others.

Although prosecutors did not specify exactly how much money was taken, the two
rabbis promised in a plea agreement to share a total restitution of $325,000.
Under the deal, each rabbi would serve 33 months in prison.

The rabbis, Jacob Bronner, 51, and Efroim Stein, 55, both of Borough Park,
declined to comment after yesterday's proceeding in Brooklyn Federal Court. They
were allowed to remain free on bail pending a further hearing at which a judge
will decide whether to accept the proposed sentence.

Rabbi Bronner, a Hasidic leader, gained citywide political prominence in the
1980's as an unpaid adviser to Mayor Edward I. Koch. He was appointed to the New
York City Human Rights Commission by Mr. Koch and reappointed by Mayor David N.
Dinkins.

The prosecutors' charges said that the money was diverted variously to the two
rabbis, a bogus institute, phony expenses, relatives of Rabbi Stein, and his
synagogue, which was not identified.

At the heart of the scheme was Project Social Care, a nonprofit organization
founded by the two men. They "managed, oversaw and ran its affairs, controlling
virtually all aspects of its operations," the government charged. The financing
came "almost exclusively" from the $2.5 million grant, paid by the federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1995 and 1996.

The program's stated purpose was to "develop and operate an integrated
multilingual multiservice center in Brooklyn, N.Y., to serve elderly Holocaust
survivors and immigrants," the grant application said.

Its services were to include "a customized program of support and counseling
tailored to meet the needs of elderly Holocaust survivors," enabling them "to
discuss their problems in a confidential setting and to deal directly with the
Holocaust experience."

Instead, the prosecutors charged, the two rabbis "did knowingly and
intentionally conspire to embezzle, steal, obtain by fraud, convert to their own
use and the use of others without authority and misapply property." The rabbis
stole "hundreds of thousands of dollars," the government said, "for their
personal financial benefit and the benefit of others."

Admitting their crimes in court, the two men read prepared statements in barely
audible voices.

Rabbi Bronner described how the program paid for goods and services from
companies "which in fact I knew did not supply such goods and services and
instead secretly returned the bulk of the funds."

Echoing his partner, Rabbi Stein admitted that grant money went for "nonapproved
purposes, including for the benefit of myself and others."

How much, if any, of the grant was spent for its intended purpose was not clear.
The assistant United States attorney in the case, Timothy A. Macht, declined to
comment.

According to the charges, the rabbis' fraud took three basic forms:

The program paid "phony invoices" from three companies, which the court papers
did not identify, for goods and services that were not provided, the prosecution
said.

Money was also channeled to a bogus organization, the Community Leadership
Training Institute, which was supposed to train workers for the Holocaust
program. The prosecution said that Rabbi Stein's relatives were officers of the
institute and some were also on the payroll to do training, when in fact "no
such training was being provided." The relatives were not identified. The
institute also funneled money to a synagogue that Rabbi Stein controlled.

Finally, payments went to the local Council of Jewish Organizations, or COJO,
which kicked back half to businesses "controlled and designated by the
defendants" and which provided no goods or services.

COJO became defunct after one of its officials, Paul Chernick, pleaded guilty
and another, Rabbi Elimelech Naiman, was convicted of making illegal payments to
Assemblyman Dov Hikind for help in getting state aid. Mr. Hikind was acquitted.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); GUILTY PLEAS (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); MAYORS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); CONSPIRACY (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); FELONIES (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CITIES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (89%); GRANTS & GIFTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HOUSING
AUTHORITIES (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); EMBEZZLEMENT (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BAIL (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (55%)
NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;  FRAUDS AND SWINDLING

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (54%)

PERSON: LAMBERT, BRUCE; BRONNER, JACOB (RABBI); STEIN, EFROIM (RABBI)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             665 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cautious U.S. Hope on Report of Lower Afghan Opium Crop

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 9


A top narcotics expert in the United States Drug Enforcement Administration said
this week that American agencies were receiving reports similar to those
received by United Nations agencies of a sharply reduced opium crop in
Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan, but he cautioned that it was too soon
to confirm the trend or to explain the cause.

United Nations narcotics officials in the region began a survey last week that
appeared to show large areas of the country taken out of poppy cultivation. Last
year, Afghanistan had the world's largest opium poppy crop, accounting for
nearly three-quarters of all production. Opium is the base for making heroin.

In Washington, Steven Casteel, chief of intelligence for the Drug Enforcement
Administration, said in an interview that drawing the conclusion that the ruling
Taliban have definitely begun to cut back significantly "is a bit premature."

Using electronic surveillance and informers on the ground, Mr. Casteel said, the
United States expects to have a firmer measurement of this year's Afghan opium
crop by the end of March or early April.

"From a law enforcement perspective, we're just extremely cautious about this --
cautiously optimistic but cautious," Mr. Casteel said. "To see a sudden
turnaround in this, I am more interested almost not in what is happening but
why."

Mr. Casteel said a severe drought might be a factor in the reduction, an
explanation United Nations drug experts also mention. Whatever the cause, a
substantial drop in opium poppy production could help the Taliban ease its
diplomatic isolation.

The militant Islamic government, which controls most of the country, has been
under Security Council sanctions for not turning over to the United States Osama
bin Laden, who is believed to finance terrorism, and has been criticized widely
for its human rights record.

In the longer term, Mr. Casteel said, narcotics experts will be looking for
evidence that a sudden reduction in poppy growing in Afghanistan could be linked
to financial decisions by international drug dealers.

"These organizations are getting more sophisticated," he said. "They make
multinational business decisions. This could be simply a price issue." Opium, he
added, can be stockpiled indefinitely and released later for maximum profit.

"If you are making widgets, and you stockpile your widgets for a period of time
and get the price to double or treble, that's a business decision you probably
want to do," he said. "So we're seeing the price of heroin that a few months ago
-- before the Taliban's ban on opium poppies -- was probably between $600 and
$700 is now going for as much as $2,500."

American experts agree with United Nations officials that there are stockpiles
of heroin along the northern border of Afghanistan, but there is no clear sense
of who is in charge of it.

Mr. Casteel said individuals connected to both the Taliban and their opponents
fighting for about 5 percent of the country's northeast had been linked to drug
traders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OPIUM (95%); HEROIN (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); NARCOTICS
ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TALIBAN (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%); NARCOTERRORISM (78%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); TRENDS (77%); INTERVIEWS (74%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE
(73%); DROUGHT (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); TERRORISM (69%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (63%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (61%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY
(53%); RELIGION (50%) DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  OPIUM;  HEROIN

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); US DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION (90%)
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             666 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawsuit Says I.B.M. Aided The Nazis In Technology

BYLINE:  By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 722 words


Lawyers who have represented victims of Nazi oppression in lawsuits against
European banks, insurers and manufacturing companies in the last five years have
turned their sights to American executives of I.B.M.

In a lawsuit filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the lawyers
contend that I.B.M., the world's largest computer company, shares responsibility
for the way the Third Reich used its data-processing technology. The lawsuit
says I.B.M supplied technology that it knew would be used to "facilitate
persecution and genocide."

The lawsuit was timed to coincide with the release tomorrow of a book, which the
lawyers declined to identify, exploring I.B.M.'s links to the Nazis. The lawyers
acknowledge that public relations strategies have been an important element in
their record of achieving Nazi-era settlements totaling more than $7 billion
without winning a judgment.

I.B.M. declined to comment directly on either the book or the lawsuit, but it
noted that the Nazis' use of tabulating machines made by Dehomag, I.B.M.'s
German subsidiary, has been known for decades and is part of an exhibit at the
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.

"As with hundreds of foreign-owned companies that did business in Germany at
that time, Dehomag came under the control of Nazi authorities prior to and
during World War II," Carol J. Makovich, an I.B.M. spokeswoman, said in a
message to employees posted on Friday on the company's internal Web site.

Filed on behalf of concentration camp survivors, the lawsuit seeks restitution
from I.B.M. based on "profits made through its violations of international law."
It also urges the court to require the company to make its records public.

I.B.M. says it has donated its records from that period to New York University
and Hohenheim University in Stuttgart, Germany.

The suit argues that Thomas J. Watson, I.B.M.'s chairman from 1915 to 1956, and
other senior executives in New York did nothing to stop the Nazis from using
I.B.M. technology because they wanted to protect profits. It charges that they
knew or should have known where the technology was being used because the
company leased the equipment to customers rather than selling it, serviced the
machines, and helped customers customize punch cards for each application. The
machines were used in German censuses in 1933 and 1939, to organize civil and
military operations and, according to documents cited in the lawsuit, to manage
concentration camps.

Like other lawsuits based on human rights violations, Holocaust litigation often
stands on shaky legal ground because evidence is missing or because it focuses
on matters that courts have traditionally left to politicians and diplomats to
negotiate on behalf of citizens. But the sensitivity of multinationals to
negative publicity and, in some cases, shame about past activity can sometimes
give class-action lawyers a strong hand in negotiating settlements.

Deutsche Hollerith Maschinen Gesellschaft, as Dehomag is formally known, was
founded by Willy Heidinger in 1910 to exploit tabulating technology invented by
the American Hermann Hollerith. World War I left Dehomag deep in debt, giving
I.B.M., then called the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company, the leverage to
buy 90 percent of Dehomag's stock.

After that, the suit alleges, Hollerith technology was controlled by Mr. Watson
and I.B.M. USA. There is no evidence in the suit that officials in New York
explicitly ordered that technology be supplied to the Nazis with the
understanding it would be used in concentration camps.

But the suit says that when Dehomag opened a plant near Berlin in 1934, Mr.
Heidinger gave a speech touting the use of Hollerith cards to record "individual
characteristics of every single member of the nation," expressed pride in giving
Hitler data that could be used in "corrective interventions," and pledged to
"follow his orders blindly."

Documents assembled by the lawyers show that I.B.M. USA resisted pressure from
both the Nazi government and Mr. Heidinger to surrender its ownership rights,
but that the Nazis controlled all Dehomag equipment placements beginning in
1937. On Dec. 2, 1941, I.B.M. reported to the United States secretary of state
that it had refused to sell Dehomag but that "we have practically no control
under present conditions."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (95%); SUITS & CLAIMS (94%); LAWYERS (91%); COMPUTER MAKERS
(90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); INSURANCE
(78%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
EXECUTIVES (77%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (76%); INTERNET & WWW
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); PUBLIC RELATIONS (74%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (72%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (71%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (66%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (66%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  CONCENTRATION CAMPS;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP

INDUSTRY:  SIC3571 ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS; SIC7373 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN
SERVICES;

PERSON: FEDER, BARNABY J

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); GERMANY (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             667 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

IN BRIEF: GOVERNMENT;
NEW AGENCY HEAD

BYLINE:  By Elsa Brenner

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 86 words


Alison Greene, formerly a top official in the federal Department of Health and
Human Services, is the new executive director of the Westchester Human Rights
Commission.

The agency investigates discrimination complaints and promotes education
programs to combat bigotry. Ms. Greene is a native of New Rochelle and a
longtime resident of White Plains. She will be paid $121,035 a year. She worked
for four years as the attorney in charge of the civil division of the Legal Aid
Society of Westchester.   Elsa Brenner

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXECUTIVE MOVES (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEWS
BRIEFS (90%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (88%); LEGAL AID (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); LAWYERS (83%) APPOINTMENTS AND
EXECUTIVE CHANGES;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES (84%); LEGAL AID SOCIETY
(NEW YORK) (57%)

PERSON: GREENE, ALISON; BRENNER, ELSA

REGION: WESTCHESTER COUNTY (NY)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             669 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Croatian Rally Protests U.N. And Demands Early Elections

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: SPLIT, Croatia, Feb. 11


Some 100,000 people turned a mass protest today against the investigation of a
former general suspected of wartime atrocities into a huge rally against
Croatia's year-old democratic government.

By backing a declaration that demanded early elections and a halt to cooperation
with the United Nations tribunal examining war crimes in the former Yugoslavia,
the crowd -- war veterans, pensioners, disaffected youths and some priests and
nuns from the influential Roman Catholic church -- underscored a building
confrontation between the government and the nationalist party that governed for
a decade under the late president, Franjo Tudjman.

Protesters were bused from across Croatia to Split, 150 miles south of Zagreb,
while three smaller protests were held in other towns. The giant rally followed
days of protests by veterans who blocked roads in southern and central Croatia.

Mirko Norac, 33, a former major general, is still at large and has not been
formally charged. But the opening last week of an investigation against him in
connection with the 1991 massacre of Serbian civilians in the central city of
Gospic angered veterans of the 1991 war in Croatia for independence and their
supporters.

Under Mr. Tudjman, Croats were represented as victims in the war, and many
people resent the new government's attempts to shed light on possible atrocities
against Serbs.

Prime Minister Ivica Racan told reporters that the demands voiced at the rally
"represent an attack on the government."

Ivo Sanader, who now heads the party that Mr. Tudjman founded, told the crowd:
The government has two options: to step down and call an election or organize
its own counter-protest, in which case we shall all go to Zagreb," Reuters
reported.

Many in the crowd held pictures of Norac and banners declaring, "We all are
Mirko Norac."

Mirko Condic, the head of one of the veterans' organizations behind the rally,
demanded that the government resign.

"By prosecuting Norac, they want to prosecute the Croatian army and the Croatian
people," he told the applauding crowd. "Norac can only be tried over our dead
bodies."

Mr. Tudjman's party was often accused of condoning war crimes by Croats -- a
notion that brought the country to the brink of international sanctions. The new
government has opened several inquiries into Croatian war crimes in Croatia and
neighboring Bosnia.

Mr. Norac was promoted to colonel by Mr. Tudjman in 1992 and to major general in
1995, when Croatian forces recaptured large swaths of territory held by the
Serbs since the 1991 war. Many Croats view the young officer as a war hero for
his role in defending Gospic, but prosecutors contend that he was responsible
for the deaths of some 40 Serbian civilians.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); VETERANS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); ARMIES (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(77%); POLITICS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); RELIGION (76%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (70%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: TUDJMAN, FRANJO (1922-99); NORAC, MIRKO

CITY: ZAGREB, CROATIA (73%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: CROATIA;  SPLIT (CROATIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             674 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clearing Path to Arrest of Milosevic, Judges He Picked Are Fired

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Feb. 14


Closing in on former President Slobodan Milosevic, lawmakers in Serbia fired
judges and prosecutors loyal to him today and replaced them with others ready to
try him on charges ranging from corruption to war crimes.

The Serbian Parliament, now dominated by the coalition that ousted Mr. Milosevic
last October, voted to replace dozens of judges of the Supreme Court and
municipal courts, public prosecutors and other judicial officials. Some asked to
be relieved of their duties while others -- loyal to Mr. Milosevic's government
and often working under its orders -- were fired.

The legislature also reinstated 16 judges removed last July for expressing
support for the opposition movement that later triumphed over Mr. Milosevic and
for questioning the independence of the country's legal system.

Removal of pro-Milosevic people in the Serbian judiciary paves the way for legal
prosecution of Mr. Milosevic announced months ago by the new government.
Although Mr. Milosevic was swept from power by a popular revolt in October that
forced him to concede electoral defeat, his allies have kept their hold on the
judiciary, presenting an obstacle to his prosecution.

Yugoslavia faces increasing international pressure to take action against Mr.
Milosevic, who remains free though under police surveillance. He could face a
variety of charges, including inciting election fraud, embezzling huge sums or
involvement in war crimes.

Yugoslavia's new leaders, including President Vojislav Kostunica, insist that a
trial in Serbia for Mr. Milosevic has priority over proceedings abroad as they
resist demands by the United States and others to hand him over quickly to the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Yugoslavia's prime minister, Zoran Zizic, reiterated this stand today, saying
Yugoslavia should prosecute its own war crimes suspects. He said a government
committee would be formed to adjust Yugoslavia's laws to cooperate with the
Hague court, but added: "Cooperation with The Hague does not automatically mean
acceptance of all its demands."

The United States has given Yugoslavia a March 31 deadline to start working with
the Hague court or risk losing crucial financial support and a seat in major
international financial institutions. Yugoslav leaders interpret cooperation as
falling short of extraditing suspects like Mr. Milosevic to the tribunal,
although they have suggested he might be handed over to the Hague court once he
has been tried at home.

Determined to keep the pressure on Yugoslavia, the tribunal's chief prosecutor,
Carla del Ponte, began a tour of European capitals today arriving in Montenegro,
Serbia's smaller partner in the Yugoslav federation. Mrs. del Ponte will meet
Montenegro's independence-minded leaders and probably press for the arrests of
any fugitives who might show up there.

Her spokeswoman, Florence Hartmann, insisted that any legal proceeding in Serbia
would not diminish the tribunal's prerogative to try Mr. Milosevic for war
crimes. Tribunal officials also have said their court has first claim to war
criminals it has indicted.

The tribunal "has primacy and will use this primacy in the case of Milosevic and
other known fugitives living in Yugoslavia," she said.

Yugoslav officials have said that Mr. Milosevic might be arrested and put on
trial very soon.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CORRUPTION (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
EXTRADITION (89%); POLITICS (78%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); ELECTION FRAUD (77%);
SUPREME COURTS (73%); EMBEZZLEMENT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); BANKING & FINANCE (62%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  COURTS;
JUDGES;  SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); MONTENEGRO
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             677 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 19, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

8 Die in Brazil Prison Riots; Hundreds Held Hostage

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 281 words

DATELINE: SAO PAULO, Brazil, Feb. 18


At least eight prisoners were killed and hundreds of people were taken hostage
when an apparently coordinated wave of riots erupted in prisons across the
Brazilian state of Sao Paulo today.

The police said they had crushed rebellions in 10 of the 18 prisons, but the
standoff was tense at Carandiru, home to 8,000 inmates in the heart of Sao
Paulo.

Carandiru was the scene of Brazil's worst prison massacre nine years ago, when
111 inmates were shot to death as the police stormed the penitentiary.

The state security secretary, Marco Vinicio Petrelluzzi, said eight inmates died
during the first 10 hours of riots. Two of them were killed by guards in
Carandiru, Latin America's biggest penitentiary.

Luiz Eduardo Greenhalgh, a lawmaker on the Congressional Human Rights Committee,
said as many as 3,000 people, including 1,200 children, could still be inside
Carandiru 10 hours after the start of the rebellion.

Most of the hostages were inmates' spouses and children making the weekly visits
allowed every Sunday, when family members go to cells for conjugal relations or
a meal.

Security officials said negotiations to release the hostages would continue
throughout the night.

Justice Minister Jose Gregori, who was in Sao Paulo, said he was flying back to
Brasilia tonight, confident that the situation was under control.

"The situation was worse and remains worrying, but the majority of prisons where
there were rebellions are back under control of authorities," Mr. Gregori told
reporters.

Mr. Petrelluzzi said the rebellions were organized by a criminal organization,
First Commando of Capital, to protest the transfer of 10 of its leaders from
Carandiru to other prisons on Friday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RIOTS (92%); HOSTAGE TAKING (92%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); SHOOTINGS (73%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%) PRISONS AND PRISONERS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND
RIOTS;  HOSTAGES;  ORGANIZED CRIME

CITY: SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (90%); BRASILIA, BRAZIL (58%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%); LATIN AMERICA (58%)

REGION: BRAZIL;  SAO PAULO (BRAZIL)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             679 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2001 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

3 SERBS CONVICTED IN WARTIME RAPES

BYLINE:   By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 22


In its first trial dealing exclusively with sexual violence, the United Nations
war crimes tribunal today found three former Bosnian Serb soldiers guilty of
raping and torturing Muslim women and girls. It also convicted two of the three
men of enslaving their captives, the first time that an international tribunal
has prosecuted and condemned sexual slavery.

The charges stem from events in 1992 and 1993, during the early part of the
Bosnian conflict, after Bosnian Serb forces seized the town of Foca, southeast
of Sarajevo.

The court said that the two convicted of slavery had kept their captives, some
as young as 12, for up to eight months, abusing them sexually, forcing them to
do domestic work for their captors, and renting and selling them to other
soldiers.

The verdict, read by Judge Florence Mumba of Zambia, also defined rape for the
first time as a crime against humanity, one of the most heinous crimes. The
tribunal has previously tried cases involving rape, but defined the rape as
torture.  And after World War II, only slave labor was prosecuted as slavery;
the Japanese military's use of "comfort women" as sex slaves never came before
an international tribunal.

Prosecutors said they were satisfied with the convictions.

"The judgment makes clear that slavery means not only slave labor but that it
can also be sexual slavery," said Peggy Kuo, one of the prosecutors and a lawyer
from the Justice Department in the United States. "We are pleased with the
court's decision because the sentences showed that the court took the crimes
very seriously."

The sentences were handed down in a hushed courtroom by a three-judge panel,
before an overflowing public gallery. Many other visitors followed the
proceedings by looking at monitors elsewhere in the building on the outskirts of
The Hague.

Dragoljub Kunarac, 40, a former commander of the Bosnian Serb army, was
sentenced to 28 years imprisonment. Radomir Kovac, 39, a former paramilitary
commander, was sentenced to 20 years. Both men were accused of multiple rapes,
torture and enslavement. Zoran Vukovic, 39, also a former paramilitary
commander, was given 12 years for rape and torture.

As Judge Mumba's words rang through the court, the three men sat stone-faced in
the dock.

Representatives of women's groups, which have played an important role in
pressing the tribunal to prosecute war crimes, were elated.

"I'm so glad, we've been waiting so long for such clear language and
convictions," said Gabriela Mischkowski, a founder of Medica Mondiale, a
German-based support group for women who have suffered trauma in war.

Legal scholars said that the judgment is likely to set new standards for trials
at this tribunal and elsewhere. They said it will almost certainly influence
rules for the new, permanent international criminal court and possibly national
legal systems as well, as did decisions of the Nuremberg trials after World War
II. Military officers who deal with codes governing the conduct of war are
certain to be informed of this decision, lawyers said.

Women's groups have argued that male historians have tended to describe mass
rape, along with pillage, as an inevitable aspect of war. It was the pressure of
women's groups that drew attention to the abuse of women in wartime Bosnia.
Activists from Europe and the United States also lobbied experts preparing the
Yugoslav war crimes tribunal in Geneva, ensuring that rape would be prosecuted
as part of war crimes.

In their summary, the judges did not use the terms "sexual slaves," as
prosecutors had during the trial, to describe the prolonged abuse of the girls
and women of Foca. The crime of enslavement appears in the tribunal's statutes,
but the charge of sexual slavery does not formally exist.

As she described the enslavement of four young Muslim girls by one of the
accused, Mr. Kovac, Judge Mumba said the girls were handed over or sold to other
soldiers, beaten, poorly housed and fed, and "had to obey every order and do
whatever they were told to do, including the cooking and household chores."

"It's clearly a milestone in the recognition of wartime violence against women,"
said Kelly Askin, author of the book "War Crimes Against Women."

But she said she was troubled that the ruling had not defined sexual enslavement
more explicitly. "The women were enslaved so they could be raped, not vice
versa," she said. "The definition of enslavement did not make that clear
enough."

The ruling, however, described the individual and mass rapes in Foca in numerous
ways. In her summary, Judge Mumba said the Bosnian Serb armed forces used rape
"as an instrument of terror."

Investigators of the European Union and many human rights groups who went to
Bosnia in 1992, after the first reports of mass rape became known, said that
rape was often used in the Balkan conflict as a tactic of intimidation and
weapon of war. They said that all three parties to the conflict -- Muslims and
Croats as well as Serbs -- had committed sexual abuses, but that Serbs in Bosnia
had been the main perpetrators. The European investigators calculated that in
1992 alone, some 20,000 Muslim women and girls were raped by Serbs.

The tribunal has not mentioned any numbers. In Foca in 1992, hundreds of women
were believed to have been raped, of whom 16 came to the tribunal to testify.
Some had not told their story before, prosecutors said. The victims testified
behind blinds, their voices altered, but in the courtroom they faced their
tormentors and identified them. Prosecutors said they knew of many more cases of
rape in Foca, but some women refused to testify, and others could not be
contacted.

In her summary, Judge Mumba frequently berated the accused first as a group,
then individually. To Mr. Kunarac, who was accused of rape and of providing the
men of his unit with women, she said: "You were a soldier with courage in the
field, somebody whom your men undisputedly are said to have held in high esteem.
Your active participation in this nightmarish scheme of sexual exploitation is
therefore even more repugnant."

At one point, after a young woman was raped by two soldiers and "you were raping
her," Judge Mumba said, "you further mocked the victim, saying that she would
carry Serb babies and that she would not know the father."

The three defendants were not among the political or military masterminds behind
the conflicts and atrocities, the ruling said, noting however that such leaders
are rendered powerless if ordinary people refuse to carry out criminal
activities in the course of war.

And, Judge Mumba said, even "lawless opportunists should expect no mercy, no
matter how low their position in the chain of command may be."

She added, "In time of peace as much as in time of war, men of substance do not
abuse women."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 17, 2001



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Feb. 23 about the conviction of three former
Bosnian Serb soldiers by the war crimes tribunal in The Hague and a front-page
article on March 1 about rapes in East Timor during political violence there in
1999 misstated the precedent for a conviction for rape as a crime against
humanity. The first such conviction occurred in September 1998 at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It was not the conviction last month
in The Hague.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); SEX OFFENSES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WOMEN (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); LITIGATION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMIES (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
JUDGES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); LAWYERS (75%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%) SEX CRIMES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
SLAVERY;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (54%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; MUMBA, FLORENCE (JUDGE); KUNARAC, DRAGOLJUB; KOVAC,
RADOMIR; VUKOVIC, ZORAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); GERMANY (55%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  FOCA (BOSNIA);

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             682 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Landmark Ruling on Rape

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 472 words


The conviction this week by the Hague war crimes court of three Bosnian Serbs
for rape and sexual enslavement marks the first time an international tribunal
has convicted defendants exclusively for sexual violence or prosecuted sexual
slavery at all. The decision shows the progress that women's issues have made in
international justice, which used to ignore mass rape, considering it a natural
occurrence in war. The tribunal's verdict should also encourage individual
nations to treat sexual violence more seriously.

The three Serbs were commanders in the Bosnian town of Foca in 1992 and 1993,
where hundreds of women were abducted and sexually enslaved by Bosnian Serb
soldiers. Women and girls as young as 12 were kept for months and subjected to
repeated rape. Some were rented or sold to other soldiers. All three defendants
were convicted of rape and torture, and two of them were convicted of enslaving
the women. The men received prison terms of 28, 20 and 12 years.

The three-judge panel ruled that rape had been used as an instrument of terror.
Significantly, the judges ruled that mass rape is a crime against humanity, the
second most serious category of international crimes after genocide.

Forced prostitution, though common in the Far East during World War II, was
never prosecuted in the international tribunals that followed the war. Although
the ensuing 50 years have seen a dramatic expansion in women's legal rights,
mass rape was almost completely ignored in the Hague court's counterpart
tribunal for Rwanda for its first four years of existence. Only the prodding of
the sole female judge forced prosecutors to go back and investigate rape, and
hire female investigators.

The tribunal for Yugoslavia, based in The Hague, has treated rape more
seriously, in part due to persistent lobbying by women's groups. In addition,
crimes like those committed in Foca were a major reason for the world's outrage
over Bosnia, which led to the establishment of the tribunal. The Hague
prosecutor has a legal adviser for sexual crimes, and a large proportion of the
tribunal's indictments include sexual violence. Even so, the Hague tribunal also
has only one woman judge. Both need more.

One of the most important roles played by the Hague and other international
tribunals is that of global legal model. The Nuremberg principle that following
an illegal order is no defense, for example, has been incorporated into the laws
of most major nations. There is probably no area of law more deficient in more
places than that concerning the protection of women's rights. The tribunal's
energetic prosecution and strong legal condemnation of rape and sexual slavery
should inspire nations around the world to be more vigilant about defending
women's rights through the enactment of strong laws and their vigorous
enforcement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); SEX OFFENSES (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WOMEN (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); JUDGES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ARMED FORCES (75%);
GENOCIDE (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); WORLD WAR II (73%); TORTURE
(73%); PROSTITUTION (66%) EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SLAVERY;  SEX
CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (54%) UNITED NATIONS

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (96%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); RWANDA (79%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             694 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Truth About Timor

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 136 words


To the Editor:

Re "Truth Commissions Take On a Local Flavor," by Tina Rosenberg (Editorial
Observer, Feb. 26):

East Timor has begun the difficult task of examining the terrible crimes
committed by Indonesia during its 24-year occupation, and seeking national
reconciliation for those Timorese who were involved.

It is an imperfect process, since many of the true criminals remain in power in
Indonesia, and support for an international criminal tribunal has waned.

The United States could help East Timor by declassifying documents that reveal
its own role in supporting Indonesia's invasion and occupation since 1975. Those
countries that turned a blind eye to East Timor's enormous suffering must also
seek reconciliation with the Timorese, and with their own shameful pasts.

BRAD SIMPSON
New York, Feb. 28, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); PUBLIC POLICY
(70%) CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION;  GOVERNMENT INFORMATION POLICIES;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

PERSON: SIMPSON, BRAD

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDONESIA (91%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             700 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Stubborn Factions Divide Coming U.N. Meeting on Racism

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 9


A four-day meeting intended to bring some coherence to the agenda of an
international conference on racism in August ended today in Geneva with
virtually every major issue still in dispute, human rights officials said.

European countries and a bloc of Asian, African and Latin American nations are
growing increasingly divided over what the conference will address, said Michael
Colson, executive director of U. N. Watch, a private monitoring group based in
Geneva. The United States has stood largely on its own, he said, but supports
Europe on many issues.

Some diplomats say it is too early to declare the conference agenda in trouble.
"I don't think this meeting was ever intended to come to any final conclusions
on the document," a Western diplomat said. "It was supposed to be an initial
reading, and we have finally started to do that. You've got 100 or so
delegations in the room and everyone is making suggestions."

Nevertheless, a second, previously unscheduled working-group session may now
have to be planned.

Mr. Colson said India, Pakistan, Iran and Syria dominated the meeting, which
began on Tuesday. The four have tried to limit discussion to the Asian and
Middle Eastern platform adopted last month at a regional meeting in Iran to firm
up the August agenda. "They are largely playing out of the same song book," he
said.

Australia and New Zealand were barred from attending the Iran meeting by the
Asian nations, which -- together with Middle Eastern and Pacific nations --
sought to curb all discussion of issues they did not want included on the agenda
of the August conference, which is to be held in Durban, South Africa.

The theme of the conference is broad: racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance are all part of its title. That approach had encouraged
groups around the world that say their experiences with discrimination are never
heard in this kind of forum. But leaders of a number of groups found themselves
barred from attending the Iran meeting, among them the Bahais and
representatives of the Simon Wiesenthal Center.

Benny Widyono, a leader of Gandi, a relatively new Indonesian rights
organization fighting for an end to racism and discriminatory laws against
Indonesia's ethnic Chinese people, was among those who left the Iran meeting
dissatisfied. In an interview here this week, he said neither his organization
nor groups representing the ethnic Chinese of Malaysia had been able to get
their cases included on the Asian agenda for Durban. Advocates for dalits, or
untouchables, in India also remained unacknowledged.

"There are 43 legal documents in Indonesia that discriminate against
minorities," Mr. Widyono said. "We wanted to ask for their repeal. Most of these
were instituted by President Suharto as a punishment for all Chinese."

Mr. Widyono said he did not believe that participants in the Iran meeting had
acted out of malice toward ethnic Chinese -- an ethnic Papuan from Indonesia was
also sidelined -- but rather that the Iranians, backed by other large Asian
nations, had organized the conference in a way that effectively kept unofficial
campaigns from being aired.

Various groups feeling that they have been excluded from the planning of the
conference will have another chance to lobby when a final preparatory meeting
takes place in Geneva from May 21 to June 1.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (91%); RACE & RACISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
EXECUTIVES (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (76%);
INTERVIEWS (76%) RACE;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (92%)

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (94%); EUROPE (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
INDONESIA (93%); INDIA (92%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); AUSTRALIA & NEW
ZEALAND (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); LATIN AMERICA (91%); CHINA (79%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); NEW ZEALAND (79%); MALAYSIA (79%); AFRICA (79%);
AUSTRALIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: GENEVA (SWITZERLAND);  LATIN AMERICA;  FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST
ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS;  EUROPE;  AFRICA

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The New Storm In the West Bank

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

Re "Under Pressure, Israel Eases Blockade a Bit at West Bank City" (news
article, March 14):

It is time that the United States sent a strong message to the Israeli
government that human rights offenses against the Palestinian people will no
longer be tolerated. The $3 billion a year that we provide in aid to Israel
should be withheld until Israel stops applying collective punishment,
restricting civilian freedom of movement and applying its reprehensible policy
of killing Palestinians. The campaign of terror that Israel is waging against
the Palestinian people must end in order that peace be achieved.

A. AHMED
Berkeley, Calif., March 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (77%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             720 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Serbs' Choice

BYLINE:  By Stjepan Mesic;  Stjepan Mesic is president of the Republic of
Croatia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia


In the past several months, it has become apparent that the removal of Slobodan
Milosevic has led to a willingness to tolerate both Belgrade's marked reluctance
to cooperate with the Hague war crimes tribunal and the Serbs' refusal to
confront the conduct of Mr. Milosevic's regime. I was among those who welcomed
the overthrow of Mr. Milosevic, but I warned then, and I repeat today, that it
is not enough that he is out of power. His policy of a Greater Serbia must go,
too.

In the name of that policy, Mr. Milosevic was the primary instigator of four
wars. He lost them all. That some of the people who overthrew him believe Mr.
Milosevic's biggest sin was that he lost the wars -- not that he started them --
understandably demands caution.

Nobody expected the new government to deliver Mr. Milosevic and others for
immediate trial in The Hague. Serbia required a timeout and got one. But now it
is time to question whether the new government has used this intermission to
establish a foundation for moving forward. Serbia should not forget or deny its
past, and it should not be forgiven obvious sins and crimes that it has yet to
acknowledge.

The United States Congress has set a deadline of this Saturday for the Yugoslav
government to comply with certain conditions in order to receive the remainder
of $100 million in aid and acquire access to international lending institutions.
The conditions include cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, a cessation of specified types of aid to the Serbian
entity in Bosnia (Republika Srpska) and progress in the rule of law. Not holding
the new government to those criteria would create grave risks for the countries
of Southeastern Europe and for Serbia itself. True democratic reformers in all
countries in the region, including Serbia, will be undermined if Belgrade is
held to a different standard.

I know what I am talking about, as my country has been painfully confronting the
dark aspects of its recent history. Croatia used its influence to hand over
Bosnian Croats indicted by the Hague tribunal, and during the past year has
begun holding trials of Croatian citizens accused of committing war crimes
against Serbian victims. This journey has not been easy, but Croatia is
determined to face the past in order to become a truly democratic state and a
reliable partner in the international community.

This must also happen in Serbia, not only because other countries in
Southeastern Europe, including my own, were rightly forced to respect and obey
democratic standards, but for the Serbs themselves. Unless they face all that
has been done in their name for the past 10 years, the Serbian people could one
day fall for the nationalist-populist politics of a new Milosevic, with
inevitably tragic consequences. Serbia's neighbors and the international
community do not deserve this. The Serbian people do not deserve this, either.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (77%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (77%); RULE OF LAW (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(69%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (68%); POLITICS (67%); FOREIGN LENDING (50%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (54%)

PERSON: MESIC, STJEPAN (PRES); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); ZAGREB, CROATIA
(74%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); CROATIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); SOUTHERN
EUROPE (91%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (73%)

REGION: SERBIA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             725 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Those Not Yet Free

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 108 words


To the Editor:

This year we will incorporate Anthony Lewis's March 24 column, "No Greater
Tragedy," into our Passover seder.

In our Haggadah, we read that freedom "must be won anew in every age" and that
"the pharaoh of the Exodus is symbolic of the tyrants of our day as well as of
the tyrants in every era of history."

Relating Mr. Lewis's poignant stories of existing slavery in Sudan will
reinforce the truth of this message and remind us that we cannot take our own
freedom for granted when so many in our world have not yet experienced their own
Exodus, their own crossing from slavery to freedom.

JOAN KLEINMAN
Lexington, Mass., March 28, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); PASSOVER (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%) SLAVERY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: KLEINMAN, JOAN; LEWIS, ANTHONY

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (68%); UNITED STATES (50%)

REGION: SUDAN

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             727 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE MILOSEVIC SURRENDER: THE WHITE HOUSE;
Milosevic Should Face Trial By Hague Tribunal, Bush Says

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 878 words


President Bush praised the Yugoslav government yesterday for arresting Slobodan
Milosevic but cautioned that the extent of his crimes warranted a trial at the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague and not just a trial on local
charges in Serbia.

In relatively strong language, Mr. Bush's statement described the "chilling
images of terrified women and children herded onto trains, emaciated prisoners
interned behind barbed wire and mass graves unearthed by U. N. investigators,"
all traceable to Mr. Milosevic's "brutal dictatorship."

Mr. Bush did not specify whether he believed that the United States should move
ahead and certify that Yugoslavia had met conditions that call for cooperation
with the war crimes tribunal before American economic assistance can be
released.

But he seemed to suggest that for the moment, the Yugoslavs had done well enough
in meeting the demands, saying, "I am encouraged by the actions that Belgrade
has already taken to work with the tribunal, including its assistance over the
last several weeks in transferring two indictees to The Hague."

Mr. Bush said that he appreciated the "hard job" Yugoslavia faced in building
"its new democracy" and that its government could "count on the friendship" of
the United States as it continued on a path of reform.

But one author of the aid legislation, Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, said in an interview yesterday that while the Yugoslavs had a taken a
step forward with Mr. Milosevic's arrest, it was not enough.

The decision to arrest Mr. Milosevic just as the deadline for the renewal of aid
approached showed that the Yugoslav authorities had acted only under outside
pressure, Senator Leahy said. That leverage should be maintained in an effort to
encourage the government to comply fully with the legislation by extraditing Mr.
Milosevic to The Hague, he added.

"A good administration policy would be to say, 'You adhere to international law
or you don't get the money,' " Mr. Leahy said.

Prosecuting Mr. Milosevic on Serbian charges of corruption was a "long way away"
from prosecuting him on international charges of crimes against humanity, Mr.
Leahy said.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, whose department was preparing last week to
certify Yugoslavia as cooperative, is expected to indicate today what he will
do.

What is at stake is $50 million in economic assistance, Washington's support for
Yugoslavia's membership in the World Bank and support for loans from the
International Monetary Fund.

Mr. Leahy said there was no rush for certification, because some aid
appropriated last year to Yugoslavia was just being distributed now. "It is not
as though a check for $50 million is going to be written tomorrow," he said.

Mr. Leahy said he would consider working out a compromise with the
administration to allow some aid to move forward without certification. That
could prod the Yugoslavs to extradite Mr. Milosevic before a local trial began,
the senator added.

In reaching his decision, General Powell must balance what turned out to be a
dramatic test of the resolve of the government of President Vojislav Kostunica
to follow through on the arrest and the fact that the authors of the legislation
say the arrest alone does not satisfy their intent.

Mr. Leahy was joined in writing the law by Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican
of Kentucky. The two senators, who run the appropriations subcommittee that
handles foreign aid, could block further assistance to Yugoslavia, Mr. Leahy
said.

But the administration is eager to have Yugoslavia as a partner in dealing with
Albanian insurgents in the Presevo Valley in southern Serbia, and on a broader
scale it wants to help the ruined country revive itself as a going economic
concern.

The stability of southeastern Europe, which includes the economically and
politically precarious Macedonia, is largely dependent on a rebound in
Yugoslavia, administration officials assert. Among the results of withholding
certification, they argue, could be a backlash from Serbian nationalists and a
fraying of a very fragile political consensus.

As a way of illustrating what he described as the progress of the Kostunica
government, a senior administration official said the arrest of Mr. Milosevic
was not a last-minute act but a result of groundwork laid over several months.

The Yugoslav leadership, as it went through fierce internal debates on Mr.
Milosevic's future, made efforts to prepare the public for his arrest, the
official said.

Perhaps as a result, a recent public opinion survey showed that when foreign
economic assistance was tied to Mr. Milosevic's extradition to The Hague, people
wanted the money rather than maintaining the principal of keeping Mr. Milosevic
in Serbia.

The Bush administration was also encouraged by a draft Yugoslav law that
specifically provides for extradition, the official said. Once that law is
passed, officials have argued, it may be only a matter of time, perhaps a year,
before Mr. Milosevic would be transferred to the international tribunal.

But human rights groups have argued that the drafting of the law on extradition
is a delaying tactic. As a member of the United Nations, Yugoslavia has an
obligation to transfer Mr. Milosevic to a United Nations tribunal, they say.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
LEGISLATION (86%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); INTERVIEWS (79%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); APPRENTICESHIPS &
INTERNSHIPS (76%); APPROPRIATIONS (75%); POLITICS (74%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS
(74%); CORRUPTION (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ECONOMIC
NEWS (69%); WRITERS (65%); TRENDS (60%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND
TRENDS;  FOREIGN AID;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); PATRICK LEAHY (89%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PERLEZ,
JANE; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             739 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Alabama, 1963 and 2001

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 170 words


To the Editor:

Re "Another Delay in Alabama Justice" (editorial, April 16):

The notion that Bobby Frank Cherry was of sound mind when he allegedly planted
the dynamite that killed four black girls in 1963 should challenge the most
rigorous psychiatric diagnostic criteria.

Those capable of the sort of terror tactics associated with the Ku Klux Klan
relinquished any claim to mental clarity when they joined the Klan. Even so,
this does not absolve them.

I have worked for more than 10 years in Latin America researching death squads
and human rights violations. I have criticized the culture of impunity that has
permitted the authors of crimes against humanity from being brought to justice.
As the United States strives to promote democracy throughout the so-called third
world, we should ask ourselves if this is the best model we offer for justice
and the rule of law.

KIMBERLY THEIDON
Stanford, Calif., April 16, 2001

The writer is a visiting scholar at the Center for Latin American Studies,
Stanford University.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WRITERS (88%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); RULE OF LAW (73%);
TERRORISM (72%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (65%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: STANFORD UNIVERSITY (82%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); LATIN AMERICA (54%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             747 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seattle, Quebec and the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 153 words


To the Editor:

Re "Hearts and Heads," by Paul Krugman (column, April 22):

When peaceful demonstrators campaigned against segregation and American
involvement in Vietnam, they were labeled radicals.

The same could be said about the founding fathers and the pro-choice and
workers' rights movements.

Now, Mr. Krugman joins capitalists criticizing the anti-globalization
demonstrators in Seattle and Quebec as wrong, defending sweatshops employing
children as necessary for the development of an economy in poor countries.
Corporations promote poor pay and working conditions and pollution under the
guise of free trade to maximize profits.

Yet poor countries, developed countries and responsible corporations can
flourish together with trade, fair wages and working conditions and
environmental protections. This concept will become as mainstream as democracy
and human rights.

JERRY FRANKEL
Plano, Tex., April 22, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); CHILDREN (87%); GLOBALIZATION (87%); GARMENT WORKERS
(87%); SWEATSHOPS (87%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (87%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CHILD LABOR (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); TRADE SHOWS
(51%) INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET;  LABOR;  WAGES AND SALARIES;
ENVIRONMENT

PERSON: PAUL KRUGMAN (90%) FRANKEL, JERRY; KRUGMAN, PAUL

CITY: SEATTLE, WA, USA (94%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); VIET NAM (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             772 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Egypt, Law of Man Creates A Caste of Shunned Children

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1550 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, May 13


In Egypt, as in most of the Arab world, children born to women who marry
foreigners often endure a painful awakening that they are not quite like other
citizens. In every country except for Tunisia, in fact, they are not considered
citizens at all.

For Joseph Aladdin Huber, the devastating moment came at age 12, just after he
won his opening match in the national tennis championship for young players. A
referee ousted him, saying it was reserved for Egyptians and he did not qualify
since his father was Austrian and only his mother Egyptian.

Iman Ahmed Wahid was dismissed from school at age 12, when she tried to enter
the equivalent of junior high. Her elementary school had somehow overlooked the
fact that her father was Syrian, but the upper school demanded the tuition
required of all foreigners, money her family could not afford. Her formal
education effectively ended that day.

Women's organizations across the Arab world have taken up cases of people like
Joseph and Iman to highlight the demand for sweeping new citizenship laws,
arguing that the existing ones discriminate against women and wreak untold
damage on children.

"It is very tribal, which is why Arabs in many countries are against changing
it," says Dr. Iman Bibars, director of the Association for the Enhancement and
Development of Women, a group spearheading the fight to rewrite Egypt's laws.
"Women belong to the tribe, so if you go to another tribe to marry, you are no
longer one of us."

Changing the law to allow women who marry foreigners to pass on citizenship to
their children is an uphill battle across the region because it touches on a
broad range of delicate issues ranging from prostitution to state security to
the Arab male's image of himself.

"The male mentality prefers that the family be linked to the man, under his
control, so that he is the person who gives them their status in the society,"
said Asma Khader, a human rights lawyer working to change Jordan's citizenship
laws. "If children feel that their mothers cannot provide them with the same
protection as their fathers, then the whole status of women will remain less
important."

While Middle Eastern countries have their own traditions that make them
resistant to the change, similar citizenship laws were overturned on the basis
of discrimination in Western European countries only in the early 1980's.
Although much of Middle Eastern law is derived from European systems, only in
Tunisia, which has the strongest women's rights laws, were citizenship rules
altered in 1993.

Opponents of the restrictions hope that the Egyptian effort will succeed, as it
could influence the rest of the region.

Although the problem has been recognized for some time, women's groups say they
are pushing the debate now since globalization is increasing the number of such
marriages. Still, it is difficult to pin down exactly how many women in any Arab
country marry foreigners.

In Egypt, the statistics range from the dubious official figure of 50,000 to
287,000 according to the Center for the Rights of Women. The number of Egyptian
children believed affected ranges from 150,000 to nearly one million.

Children of foreign fathers cannot go to public school here or state
universities free, are barred from certain professional schools like medicine or
engineering even if they are willing to pay, and cannot get jobs without
residency and work permits for foreigners.

The most widespread objection is rooted in the numbers. Opponents say Egypt, as
a developing country with nearly 70 million people, cannot afford to suddenly
add another million citizens.

Many vociferous critics also claim that allowing mothers to pass on their
nationality will encourage what some call thinly disguised prostitution. Every
summer hordes of older men descend on Egypt from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other
rich Persian Gulf states, buy a young village girl as a bride for a few months,
then abandon her pregnant.

A number of regulations devised to thwart the practice, like requiring a bank
deposit of more than $5,000 if the age difference between the two to be married
is more than 25 years, are easily circumvented. Women's organizations say a
whole network of sleazy lawyers prey on poor villages known for their attractive
women, with destitute families willing to sell daughters into unofficial
marriages.

"There are brokers who the Saudi men go to and say, 'I want a girl, I want her
fat, I want her blond, I want her young,' " Mrs. Bibars said. "You end up with
entire villages where many of the kids are not citizens."

The fathers do not register them at home, so they cannot get any identity
papers. With 30 percent of all marriages to foreigners involving Gulf Arabs,
opponents of changing the citizenship law say it is the one disincentive to the
practice.

"Every woman wants an apartment, a car," said Azza al-Kashef, a member of
Parliament from the ruling National Democratic Party who denounced the proposed
changes. "The guy will get her these things and six months later he is gone. She
is not looking for a good relationship in order to bring up children to serve
the country."

Several attempts are under way to change the law, which the National Council for
Women has adopted as a priority issue. A draft law has been submitted to
Parliament -- even though an earlier attempt was flattened by opposition from
the Ministry of the Interior.

Lawyers are also trying to get one of several court cases all the way to the
highest court, the constitutional court. They want to argue that the law
violates the Constitution, which guarantees equal rights for all Egyptians. The
foreign wives and children of Egyptian men are given citizenship automatically.

Opponents frequently argue that a revised law would contradict Islamic
teachings, but no religious leaders have weighed in with official misgivings.

Proponents of change say religion might be neutral because there were no states
at the time of the Prophet Muhammad. They point out that Muhammad had only
daughters, so his descendants all arrived at their status through women. And
Islamic tradition holds that on the Day of Judgment, the righteous will be
summoned according to their mother's names.

Opponents often cite a a national security concern: children of Egyptian mothers
and Israeli fathers, they say, would become natural-born spies since they would
be citizens of both nations, but are likely to be more loyal to their father's.
Women's rights advocates argue that the children of Arab fathers and Israeli
mothers are automatically dual citizens. (Most such marriages involve
Palestinian citizens of Israel.)

Those seeking change are focusing less on the issue of women's rights than on
the problems children face. "There is always resistance to changing any law that
has to do with women," said Rabea Naciri, a Moroccan lawyer. "I think the
question of nationality might face fewer problems because it also affects the
children."

Young adults born of foreign fathers say their biggest problem is feeling like
strangers in the only place they really know.

"Here in Austria everybody is Christian and I am a Muslim and I don't feel
integrated," said Joseph Huber, now 17 and pursing his tennis career in his
father's country. "I want to get the Egyptian citizenship because I love Egypt
and I lived there over 16 years and my mother is Egyptian and my heart is simply
just for Egypt."

His mother says she faces constant rebukes, especially whenever she has to show
passports at Egyptian border controls. "I am always harassed by officers asking
why I couldn't find an Egyptian to marry," Soumaya Ibrahim Huber said.

The Hubers recognize that Joseph and his younger sister, May, are in relatively
privileged positions having Austrian passports to fall back on. The children of
fathers from other Arab countries face the most difficulty, given that Middle
Eastern governments often treat one another's citizens with contempt.

"Some of these women married as a result of unity with Arab countries like
Syria, Yemen and Libya, so now what can they do?" said Faiza Tahnawi, an
independent member of Parliament who introduced the latest draft law on
citizenship. "When the politics change, the women suffer the consequences."

Iman Wahid, now 28, says that although she has lived her whole life in
Alexandria, speaks Egyptian Arabic and has never left Egypt, the Egyptian
government considers her Syrian because of her father. The Syrians call her
Egyptian.

Miss Wahid says she and her four siblings often get pinioned between
regulations. At the moment they are having trouble getting residency permits
because the Egyptians say they must have Syrian passports to obtain one, while
the Syrian Embassy refuses to issue passports unless they produce Egyptian
residency permits. She is forced to change jobs every few months.

Miss Wahid notes that girls have an out; they can just marry an Egyptian and
eventually get the citizenship. Boys, however, are caught in an endless circle
since their children will face the same problem. Miss Wihad thinks that she,
like all others in a similar predicament, deserves to be recognized simply for
who she is.

"When people hear that I am Syrian they say, 'You are welcome in Egypt!' " she
scoffs. "What is this 'Welcome in Egypt?' I am Egyptian.  I was born here."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iman Ahmed Wahid, 28, of Alexandria, Egypt, is considered a
foreigner because she was born to an Egyptian mother and a Syrian father. (Neil
MacFarquhar/The New York Times)(pg. A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CITIZENSHIP (91%); WOMEN (90%); CHILDREN (89%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); MARRIAGE (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS
(78%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); TENNIS (76%); SPORTS (76%); TUITION FEES
(75%); MARRIAGES & MARRIAGE RATES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
LEGISLATION (72%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (71%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH
SCHOOLS (70%); LAWYERS (69%); GLOBALIZATION (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS (61%); TENNIS
TOURNAMENTS (56%) DISCRIMINATION;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  CITIZENSHIP;  WOMEN;
LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT (79%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (95%); TUNISIA (94%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); SYRIA (90%); WESTERN
EUROPE (79%); JORDAN (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: EGYPT;  TUNISIA;  MIDDLE EAST

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             775 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Complaint Of Aid Obstruction

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 70 words


The United Nations complained yesterday that the ruling Taliban movement has
been harassing and abusing people trying to provide aid to the poor and
drought-stricken nation. The protest came the same day that workers at an
Italian-financed hospital treating war victims announced that it would close
indefinitely after a raid by Taliban religion police officers who beat workers
and took away three Afghan employees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(88%); DROUGHT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) FOREIGN AID;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  ITALY

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             781 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Propose an Identity Label for the 'Protection' of Hindus

BYLINE:  By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, May 22


The Taliban rulers, worldwide pariahs for their harsh treatment of Afghan women
and Buddhist statues, face further scorn with a proposal that would force Hindus
to wear an identity label on their clothing to distinguish them from Muslims.

The plan originated with the Ministry for the Promotion of Virtue and the
Prevention of Vice. Taliban officials insisted today that the scheme was
actually a harmless effort to safeguard Hindus from harassment.

"Hindus should not look like Muslims, for their own protection, so that they are
not bothered by the religious police," said the main spokesman for the
government here, Abdul Hai Mutmain.

Pickup trucks with heavily armed militants routinely patrol city streets, making
sure that Muslim women are wearing the head-to-toe burka and that Muslim men are
diligently attending the rituals of prayer.

The proposal, which would have to be approved by the supreme Taliban leader,
Mullah Muhammad Omar, to take effect,drew immediate criticism. To some, the
scheme brings to mind the yellow Star of David that Nazis imposed on Jews.

Hindus in India are waging irate protests. "We absolutely deplore such orders,
which patently discriminate against minorities," said a spokesman for the
Foreign Ministry, Raminder Singh Jassal. "It is further evidence of the backward
and unacceptable ideological underpinning of the Taliban."

In Washington, the State Department added its condemnation. "We want to make
quite clear that forcing social groups to wear distinctive clothing or
identifying marks stigmatizes and isolates those groups and can never, never be
justified," a spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said at a news conference. "We
remain committed to bringing the Taliban and other Afghan factions into
compliance with international norms of behavior on all human rights issues. And
those norms would certainly preclude any step such as these."

The precise requirements of the proposal remain unclear. The militia's Voice of
Shariat radio station quoted Maulawi Abdul Wali, chief of the Virtue and Vice
Ministry, as saying, "The non-Muslim population of the country should have a
distinctive mark such as a piece of cloth attached to their pockets so they can
be differentiated from others."

The law would primarily apply to Hindus, because there are few Jews and
Christians in Afghanistan, and the Sikh population is readily identified by
their turbans, Mr. Wali said.

Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Hindus live in Afghanistan, primarily in Kabul
and Jalalabad. Most of the men would be difficult to confuse with Muslims: The
Hindus are clean shaven; the Muslims are required to grow beards.

"I can't understand what this is all about," said Raj Kumar, a Hindu in
Kandahar. "I know the Taliban's religious police. They've never demanded that I
wear a beard or given me any problems at all. As for our women, they are veiled
just like the Muslims. That's been our tradition for generations."

The Taliban control 80 to 90 percent of Afghanistan, a country that has been
involved in 22 years of war. Battles continue between the Taliban and their last
remaining opponents, the Northern Alliance.

With the Taliban has come a stern interpretation of Islam that outlaws watching
television, listening to music and playing cards.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); TALIBAN (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (90%); SIKHS & SIKHISM (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (78%); DISCRIMINATION
(78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (77%); APPROVALS (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%);
WOMEN'S CLOTHING (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); MOTOR VEHICLES (55%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
AFGHANISTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  HINDUISM;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); JALALABAD,
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  INDIA

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             795 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Disabled in China

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 126 words


To the Editor:

Your May 23 news article "College Entrance in China: 'No' to the Handicapped"
depicts one more variant among the blatant human rights abuses in China.

The policy taken by the universities in China -- screening out people with
disabilities -- not only reflects a national mind-set of discrimination but also
enforces it.

While other countries around the world are using the Americans With Disabilities
Act as a blueprint for protection against discrimination, denying people with
disabilities a college education will not only keep the barriers in place in
China but also ensure that they continue for future generations.

CARL HERR
Flushing, Queens, May 23, 2001

The writer is a disability rights advocate, Queens Independent Living Center.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISABLED PERSONS (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
LAW (87%); DISABLED ACCESS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); US
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (72%) COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;
DISCRIMINATION;  HANDICAPPED

PERSON: HERR, CARL

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             796 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kandahar Journal;
This Job Is Truly Scary: The Taliban Are Watching

BYLINE:  By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan


He is a nervous man with nervous eyes, going about a nervous business. If the
Taliban catch him at his secretive work they will consider him an enemy of Islam
and beat him up in the street before locking him away.

"It is crazy, I know, exposing myself to danger like this," he says. "Even now,
I think I am under surveillance. What if I am arrested? I have children to
support."

But this is the daring life he has chosen for himself -- the life of a
television repairman.

"Yes," he says. "I think I am someone brave."

In most nations, television may be a waste of time and a corrupting influence.
But in Afghanistan it is simply illegal. No owning. No watching. No repairing.

Under the ruling Taliban's stern interpretation of Islam, the human form is not
to be depicted in moving or still pictures. This dictum is enforced by religious
policemen from the Ministry for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of
Vice. They ride around in pickup trucks with scowls on their faces and automatic
weapons at their sides.

But many Afghans have refused to live without their television privileges. They
want to see the world's video montage -- the torrid lovers, the family crises,
the epic battles, the recreated disasters, the romantic comedy. The dim glow of
the television screen furtively lights thousands of rooms in each of
Afghanistan's major cities.

How many people watch the forbidden electric box? It is difficult to say. Here
in Kandahar, just as in the cities of Kabul and Herat, the question leads to a
wide span of guesses, from 15 percent to 80 percent. The television repairman --
who provided the pseudonym Jahan Mir for safety's sake -- assumes the truth to
be toward the higher estimate.

But then his judgment is distorted by the company he keeps, the turbaned couch
potatoes of this troubled country, which has endured 22 consecutive years of
war.

"Some of the Taliban watch television too, even a few commanders," said Mr. Mir,
speaking in English. "Their eyes open very wide, and they remember everything.
They can tell you exactly where they were when they were watching what movie."

Indeed, it is movies -- brought alive on small video discs -- that are the heart
of this nation's clandestine entertainment industry. The Taliban control about
90 percent of Afghanistan's territory and they refuse to allow a television
station to broadcast in any of it. Foreign channels can be picked with the right
hookup but only a small number of the most defiant people risk the telltale
outdoor placement of even a small satellite dish.

So movies must suffice, the discs kept in concealment, as are the TV's and video
CD players themselves. If offenders are caught they usually receive one to three
months in prison, according to people here in Kandahar. Their equipment is
destroyed.

"But if they find you with a sex movie, that's much worse, three years in jail,"
Mr. Mir said dourly. "This is very bad because most American films have sex. You
are better off watching kung fu movies or Rambo or movies from India, which are
very popular."

The television repairman is also a movie smuggler. He periodically makes the
five-hour drive to Quetta, in Pakistan, to buy new ones. The Taliban search for
the contraband at their checkposts, where they then display the shredded
remnants of what they have discovered. Mr. Mir hides his copies of bootlegged
movie discs in a hollowed-out radio.

"Actually, smuggling is easy," he said. "Many drivers have hidden compartments
in their cars. Movies are a big business. You can sell them for 200 rupees,"
about $3.

Mr. Mir has a small shop -- nothing more than a stall, really -- in one of the
many bazaars in dusty Kandahar, a city of about 500,000 on the edge of the
Registan Desert.

There are many electronics stores in the area -- and none are much to look at.
Gutted car stereos are piled one atop the other. Frayed wires dangle from the
ceiling. Broken antennas, orphaned by dead signals, lie across wooden tables.

Popular music is also banned in Afghanistan, but recordings of unaccompanied
chanting by the Taliban faithful are available on audio cassettes. This means
that used stereos can be displayed openly, their old plastic faces staring out
through new plastic covering. Small, timeworn, discreet TV's sell on the black
market for about $50.

"The Taliban expect you to work and pray and do nothing else in between," the
television repairman groused, looking out at a street as busy with donkey carts
as automobiles.

Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban's reclusive supreme leader, resides in
Kandahar, shunning Kabul, the capital. Since an August 1999 assassination
attempt, he lives within a walled compound on the city's outskirts, issuing his
austere edicts.

Rule-breakers take great risks here. People are jailed for playing cards.
Thieves have a hand cut off. Homosexuals are buried alive beneath a stone wall.
In February, two prostitutes were hanged in Kandahar as more than 1,000 people
watched.

"I need a new business," said the television repairman, patting perspiration off
his forehead with a cloth. "I would change to any other job if I could make as
much money."

Someone had brought him a broken TV that morning. He kept it under a few towels,
disguising the shape of the contents. He would take it home for studied repair.

"I can fix just about anything," he said proudly.

Then he turned quiet. He was looking out into the street, squinting at a man who
looked back at him. It was one of the Taliban, and for a moment there was a
shudder of fear going through everyone in the shop.

But finally, the television repairman smiled easily and made a nod of
recognition. "Yes, it is the Taliban," he said. "But that man, I know him. He
watches TV."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Under the Taliban's stern rule, the human form is not to be
depicted in moving or still pictures. Hence no television. But many Afghans,
like these four in Kandahar, keep sets hidden. Commonly, they watch movies. Map
of Afghanistan highlighting Kandahar: Dimly glowing TV sets light many rooms in
cities like Kandahar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (89%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS REPAIR (89%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (78%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (75%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS (75%);
VIDEO INDUSTRY (75%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (75%); AUDIO & VIDEO EQUIPMENT
(70%); COMEDY FILMS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); MOTOR VEHICLES (52%); CD & DVD
DRIVES (50%) TELEVISION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (95%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             797 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women, Out of Your Cars

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 31


Afghanistan's Taliban authorities have banned all foreign women from driving,
saying such conduct is "against Afghan traditions" and has a "negative impact"
on society.

Afghan women are already barred from driving, and the new order, will mostly
affect aid workers employed by the United Nations and nongovernmental
organizations.

Those groups have recently complained of harassment by the Taliban, the
fundamentalist Muslim militiamen that control most of Afghanistan, and have
threatened to discontinue relief efforts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (87%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(59%) WOMEN;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             803 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Aid Group Warns Taliban

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 80 words


The group coordinating almost all assistance to Afghanistan warned that the
policies of the ruling Taliban could bring the entire aid program to a halt.
"How are we going to continue to work if on the Taliban side the conditions for
working in Afghanistan become more difficult?" said Hans-Joachim Daerr, chairman
of the Afghanistan Support Group, made up of 15 countries. The Taliban's strict
interpretation of Islamic law has led to increasing conflicts with aid
organizations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); RELIGION (51%) FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AFGHANISTAN SUPPORT GROUP

COUNTRY: ASIA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             807 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Church and State;
Seeking Complicity in a Genocide

BYLINE:  By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1077 words


TO the outside world, it may have seemed incomprehensible that two Catholic nuns
were convicted in a Belgian court last week of helping Hutu militiamen to
massacre Tutsi during the 1994 killing frenzy in Rwanda. But Catholic clergymen
and nuns, as well as pastors of several Protestant churches, were caught up in
the ethnic hatred that ripped the country apart, just like everyone else.

"Not that many actually resisted," said Filip Reyntjens, a professor of African
law and politics at the University of Antwerp. "The church has been the mirror
of the Rwandan society."

It is impossible to talk about the country's modern history without talking
about the Catholic Church. That goes for the genocide, too, and not just
because, with Hutu hatemongers spewing propaganda depicting the Tutsi as
cockroaches and snakes, few religious leaders were willing to stand up and say
"Thou shalt not kill."

In the late 19th century, when white colonists began arriving, they found a
feudal society in which the cattle-owning Tutsi controlled most wealth, trading
milk and meat for the labor of Hutu peasants. The church's white missionaries
and the Belgian authorities came to regard the Tutsi as natural aristocrats, and
came up with a ludicrous theory that they were more closely related to Europeans
than the Hutu, who looked more like the Bantu-speaking tribes of West Africa.
Together, the missionaries and administrators established the two-tiered ethnic
caste system that eventually exploded in bloodshed.

Most of the nuns and priests the missionaries educated and promoted in the
1920's and 1930's were Tutsi. The same was true in the civil service; the
colonial authorities, in essence, trained the Tutsi to govern. The monarch put
in power in the early 1930's was Tutsi, and Catholic.

All that changed in the late 1940's and the 1950's. It became apparent to the
Belgians and the church that independence was coming, and in the aftermath of
World War II, the prevailing thinking among European powers was to favor
democratization. The church began championing the rights of the downtrodden Hutu
peasants.

The Swiss-born Archbishop of Kigali, Msgr. Andre Perraudin, himself of working
class stock, began promoting more Hutu to the priesthood. He supported the
violent Hutu revolt against the Tutsi in 1959, which eventually became a
political movement aimed at overthrowing the Tutsi monarchy and vesting power in
Hutu hands.

Those goals were realized by the time Rwanda became independent in 1962. It is
telling that the country's first president, the founder of the main Hutu party,
Gregoire Kayibanda, had been educated at a seminary and started his career
editing the church's Kinyarwandan newspaper.

Over the next three decades, Hutu priests gained power. The archbishop of Kigali
in the late 80's, Msgr. Vincent Nsengiyumva, was a Hutu closely allied with the
Hutu ruling party, then led by Major General Juvenal Habyarimana, who had ousted
Mr. Kayibanda in a 1973 coup.

Still, Hutu and Tutsi served side by side in parishes, monasteries and dioceses.
But when Tutsi rebels in Uganda began a civil war in 1990, political and ethnic
divisions emerged among the priests and nuns, just as they did in the rest of
the society, historians say, with their politics sometimes bleeding into sermons
and pastoral letters.

In April 1994, President Habyarimana's plane went down as he returned from peace
talks with the Tutsi rebels. Extremist Hutu politicians seized power and
mobilized Hutu militia to kill Tutsi civilians. The rebels restarted their
offensive.

At least 500,000 moderate Hutus and Tutsis were killed over the next three
months.

Because they were educated, Tutsi priests and pastors were among the first to be
killed. More than a hundred died.

MANY of the top Hutu religious leaders remained silent or encouraged the
killing, according to African Rights, a human rights organization that has
documented the genocide with thousand of interviews. Among those whose silence
or vocal support helped the killers, it says, were the archbishops of the
Catholic, Anglican, Methodist and Adventist churches.

"There was a complete failure at the level of leadership," said Rakiya Omaar,
the director of African Rights. "This is a hierarchical society. Obedience is
ingrained. The leadership was very, very much -- among all the denominations --
on the side of the forces of genocide."

For example, an Anglican bishop, a Hutu, awaiting trial in Tanzania, Samuel
Musabyimana, is accused of turning 500 Tutsis who had sought refuge at his
church over to militiamen. According to the United Nations indictment against
him, he said he did not oppose the killing of Tutsis as long as it was not on
church grounds.

Farther down the clerical ladder, people went their own ways. The Rev. Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka of the Sainte Famille Church in Kigali allowed Hutu militiamen
access to his church to kill Tutsi hiding there, witnesses said. He has been
accused of raping Tutsi women before they were killed, Ms. Omaar said. He is
somewhere in France.

But at a nearby church, the Saint Paul Pastoral Center, another Hutu priest,
Father Celestin Hakizimana, bribed the militiamen who tried to break in. He wore
his robes to intimidate the crowd. He saved more than 1,500 people.

And in Ginsenyi, a Hutu nun, Felicitee Niyitegeka, tried to hide dozens of
Tutsis but was discovered. She chose to die with the Tutsi rather than step
aside and let the death squads at them.

But Ms. Omaar's organization has identified at least three dozen Hutu priests
and pastors whom she maintains participated in the genocide. The Tutsi-dominated
government has accused at least 20 Catholic priests of war crimes. Two have been
convicted and sentenced to death in Rwandan courts. Another, Bishop Augustin
Misago, was acquitted. He said he had been forced to attend meetings where
killings were discussed because he feared for his life.

The nuns convicted in Belgium, Sister Gertrude and Sister Mary Kisito, were Hutu
who allowed ethnic hatred to trump religious conviction. Not only did they let
Hutu militiamen into their convent to hack hundreds of Tutsi women and children
to death, they helped burn more than 500 people alive in a locked garage. The
sisters carried the cans of gasoline and fanned the flames, witnesses said.

"This is not something that came out of the blue," Ms. Omaar said. "The church
is so deeply implicated in the social and political mindset that led to the
genocide."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a wrecked Catholic church in Rwanda, reminders of the 1994
geonocide. (Brennan Linsley)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (94%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); WAR CRIMES (78%); PROTESTANTS
& PROTESTANTISM (77%); HISTORY (76%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (76%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); POLITICS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (71%); WORLD WAR II (67%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;
TUTSI TRIBE

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: MCKINLEY, JAMES C JR

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (89%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (95%); BELGIUM (91%); AFRICA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             826 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

I.L.O. Code Would Protect Employees With H.I.V.

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 768 words


The International Labor Organization, in a campaign to fight workplace
discrimination against people infected with the AIDS virus, is expected to adopt
a code of conduct today for businesses, governments and workers.

The policy will also propose benefits for victims and their families, agency
officials said.

Juan Somavia, the Chilean human rights lawyer and former diplomat who is now
director general of the I.L.O., called the code a "comprehensive blueprint for
workplace policy on AIDS."

The code of conduct drafted by the organization, a United Nations body based in
Geneva, will be presented to a special General Assembly session on AIDS
beginning on Monday in New York.

International AIDS experts have argued that is essential to deal with the
effects of the epidemic in offices, factories and even informal work sites for
economic as well as medical and social reasons.

"H.I.V.-AIDS is a major threat to the world of work," the new I.L.O. policy
says. "It is affecting the most productive segment of the labor force and
reducing earnings, and it is imposing huge costs on enterprises in all sectors
through declining productivity, increasing labor costs and loss of skills and
experience."

Mr. Somavia said that at least 23 million people between 15 and 49 were infected
with the virus. "AIDS is not only a workplace issues but also a challenge to
development worldwide," he said.

In many countries, people who are H.I.V. positive can lose jobs, social standing
and even medical care. Attitudes vary widely. In Thailand, for for instance,
concern about AIDS in the military helped propel effective government policies.
In India, on the other hand, officials take the position that soldiers who test
positive will be dismissed and that the disease does not exist in the armed
forces, an assertion Indian and international AIDS experts reject.

Fear of AIDS in many countries often leads to the denial of fundamental rights
on the job, the organization found. The epidemic's social effects include more
exploitation of women and child workers.

Moreover, in poor countries, including many in Africa and Asia where health
systems cannot cope, the only hope most people may have of getting help with
prevention and treatment will be at work, Peter Piot, the director of Unaids,
said in a recent interview. He added that employers were also learning that they
would pay a price in lost labor if they did not join in battling the disease.
Several corporations have taken this step in Africa, he said.

In the United States, AIDS and H.I.V. infection are considered disabilities
under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Federal courts have ruled that the
act prohibits employers from discriminating in hiring, firing, promotion or any
other action against people with AIDS or H.I.V.

The act also requires employers to make reasonable accommodations to enable
people with AIDS or H.I.V. to continue working so long as they can perform their
essential job functions. Employers in the United States cannot ask job
applicants whether they are infected with AIDS and cannot require applicants to
take an H.I.V. antibody test.

The I.L.O. code, directed at governments, employers and workers' organizations
-- all of them would have to play roles in turning the policy into law --
proposes a number of rights. Among them are these:

*"There is no justification for asking job applicants or workers to disclose
H.I.V.-related personal information."

*"H.I.V. infection is not a cause for termination of employment."

*"All workers, including workers with H.I.V., are entitled to affordable health
services."

The Labor Oraganization urges governments to ensure that national laws governing
benefits in time of illness are fully extended to H.I.V. patients. Labor laws
should be revised where necessary to deal with this exceptional disease, it
says. A grievance procedure should be instituted in places of work, and
disciplinary measures should be brought against anyone discriminating against an
employee with H.I.V.

Prevention is considered an essential part of a workplace program in the new
code. "To support behavioral change by individuals," it says, "employers should
also make available, where appropriate, male and female condoms, counseling,
care support and referral services."

Employers are asked to train workers who may come in contact with blood or other
body fluids in what are called the "universal precautions" to protect the
uninfected. Those measures, devised in 1985 by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta, teach self-protection and the handling of possibly
contaminated materials.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIDS & HIV (95%); EMPLOYMENT (93%); ETHICS (90%); VIRUSES (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); EPIDEMICS (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS
(89%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); AIDS & HIV POLICY (78%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%); FAMILY (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%);
LABOR FORCE (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); WOMEN (73%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (73%); PRODUCTIVITY (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (69%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (64%); US AMERICANS
WITH DISABILITIES ACT (62%); DISABLED ACCESS (60%); DISABLED PERSONS (60%)
ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME;  LABOR;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION (93%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)
INTERNATIONAL LABOR ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); AFRICA (92%); INDIA (79%); ASIA (79%); SWITZERLAND
(79%); THAILAND (68%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             836 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1147 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

U.N. War Crimes Tribunal Expands Milosevic Charges
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague issued an expanded indictment against
Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, charging him with additional
atrocities and naming more victims of war crimes during the 1999 conflict in
Kosovo. Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor, pressed for the arrest of 38
other people indicted for war crimes who are still at large.   A7


Prime Minister Zoran Zizic, the leader of the Montenegrin faction in the
Yugoslav government, which was allied with Mr. Milosevic, announced his
resignation after meeting with President Vojislav Kostunica. Mr. Zizic warned
that "Yugoslavia is at the beginning of a crisis."   A7

A day after Mr. Milosevic was taken to The Hague, public opinion in Serbia was
divided on the handover.   A1

Shaky Mideast Cease-Fire
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell left Jerusalem, and Israelis and Palestinians
differed over what they had agreed to in a timetable for cementing their wobbly
cease-fire.   A3

In Paris, Secretary Powell won support from France and China for a plan to
loosen restrictions on trade in civilian goods with Iraq, but he said that
continued resistance from Russia made it unlikely that the proposal could be
adopted at the United Nations by a deadline next week.   A3

G.I.'s Questioned in Rape
The police said a Japanese rape victim and a witness had identified her
attackers as foreigners who were probably members of the United States military.
The announcement came hours before Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan
departed for a visit to the United States.   A4

U.N. Chief Begins New Term
Kofi Annan of Ghana, 63, swore himself in for a second five-year term as
secretary general after the 189-member General Assembly re-elected him by
acclamation. In his acceptance speech, Mr. Annan reaffirmed his determination to
keep a focus on human rights.   A4

World Briefing   A4

NATIONAL   A8-12, 16

Vice President Expected To Receive Heart Regulator
Vice President Dick Cheney said doctors would probably implant an advanced
pacemaker and defibrillator during an operation today, his third medical
procedure to combat heart disease since the November election. He also said he
expected to be back at work on Monday.   A1

Senate Approves Patients' Bill
The Senate, voting 59 to 36 with 9 Republicans joining all 50 Democrats, passed
a bill that would establish a wide range of patients' rights for more than 200
million Americans with health insurance. President Bush has threatened to veto
it. The bill next goes to the House, where Republican leaders hope to address
Mr. Bush's concern about the possibility of a huge increase in lawsuits.   A1

Economy May Shrink Surplus
The Bush administration raised the possibility that the slowing economy could
push the budget surplus down this year by more than the government had
estimated. Democrats said that by their definition such a shortfall could create
a budget deficit.   A1

Maneuvering on Oil Plan
Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, vowed a "fight to the death" against
plans for oil drilling in the Gulf of Mexico and said he would hold up a Senate
vote on an Interior Department nominee in protest.   A16

Snowmobile Ban Review
The Interior Department said it would reconsider a Clinton administration plan
to ban snowmobiles in Yellowstone National Park.   A10

Osprey Inquiry Cites Officer
The commanding officer of the only Marine Corps squadron of V-22 Ospreys
falsified maintenance records because he felt pressure from his superiors to
make the innovative but crash-plagued aircraft appear ready for full production,
a Pentagon investigation found. Investigators also concluded that other officers
had condoned the falsifications.   A12

Report Criticizes Regulators
Congressional investigators faulted federal regulators for saying no evidence
supported accusations that power companies had manipulated California's
electricity market.   A9

Religion Journal   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

3 Vieques Protesters Freed After Finishing Sentences
Roberto Ramirez, the Bronx Democratic chairman; Adolfo Carrion Jr., a city
councilman from the Bronx; and Assemblyman Jose Rivera of the Bronx were
released from a federal detention center after serving 37 days of 40-day
sentences for trespassing during protests at the Vieques naval bombing range in
Puerto Rico. The Rev. Al Sharpton, who was given 90 days, remains jailed.   B1

Outburst at Terror Trial
Mokhtar Haouari, 32, an Algerian accused in a millennium terrorist plot, brought
proceedings in his federal trial in Manhattan to a halt for the day by flailing
his arms and banging his head on the counsel table as an old friend and former
co-defendant testified against him.   B3

Mayor Is Apartment Hunting
Mayor Giuliani has looked at more than 10 schematic drawings of two- and
three-bedroom Upper East Side apartments renting for $3,000 to $5,000 a month,
and he expects to move out of Gracie Mansion within six weeks, a friend said.
B3

EDUCATION

Inquiry Said to Block Test Deal
The chief executive of TestU, an online test-preparation company, said New York
City school officials had abruptly halted plans to buy test materials. The
reason, he said, is an investigation into whether Dr. Irving S. Hamer Jr., a
member of the Board of Education who was a vice chairman of the company,
improperly used his influence on its behalf.   B1

SPORTS   D1-8

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-16

OBITUARIES   A13

Modjadji V
The last of a line of rain queens and the only woman to serve as a tribal ruler
in modern-day southern Africa was 64.   A13

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Lobbying the Microsoft Case
Federal and state prosecutors are coming under enormous lobbying pressure from
Microsoft to settle the antitrust case, and from Microsoft's rivals, most
notably AOL Time Warner, to continue litigating.   A1

Prospects Dim for G.E. Deal
General Electric's acquisition of Honeywell International appeared all but dead
after G.E.'s chairman, John F. Welch Jr., rejected a last-ditch change by
Honeywell intended to satisfy European regulators.   C1

Advice to Investors
The S.E.C., responding to an outpouring of complaints, has issued an alert to
investors advising them not to rely solely on stock analysts' reports when they
make decisions about buying and selling stocks.   C1

Profits Drop, Spending Rises
Corporate profits shrank as the economy barely limped ahead in the first
quarter, the government said, but a brightening mood among consumers implied
that a recession might be averted. The Commerce Department lowered its estimate
of growth in gross domestic product in the first quarter to an anemic annual
rate of 1.2 percent, from 1.3 percent.   C3

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Mr. Cheney's new heart problem; the Supreme Court exits; youth
movement in the N.B.A.
Column: Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B10
TV Listings   B16
Crossword   B14
Weather   A16
Public Lives   A8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INDICTMENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(86%); CARDIOVASCULAR DEVICES (85%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (85%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (79%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); VETO (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (77%); WITNESSES
(76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%);
ECONOMIC DECLINE (74%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (71%); APPROVALS (70%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (69%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (69%); HEART DISEASE (66%); BUDGETS (63%);
MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (60%); HEALTH INSURANCE (60%); RESIGNATIONS
(55%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO
(92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); FRANCE (91%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); JAPAN (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); IRAQ (79%); GHANA (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             839 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Revives Lesbians' Suit Over Housing

BYLINE:   By LAURA MANSNERUS

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1133 words


New York State's highest court yesterday reinstated a lawsuit challenging
Yeshiva University's policy of excluding same-sex couples from university
housing, a decision that legal experts say opens a new avenue for discrimination
lawsuits in New York City.

The Court of Appeals ruled that the two plaintiffs in the case could sue under
the city's human rights law, which protects gays -- as well as racial and other
minorities -- against discrimination in housing and employment.

The two lesbian students who filed the suit argued that the university's policy
had a "disparate impact" on gays and lesbians -- even if it wasn't intended to
discriminate.

The suit against Yeshiva had been dismissed by lower courts on the ground that
the housing benefits were also denied to unmarried heterosexuals, because
housing is available only for married students, and the plaintiffs cannot
legally marry.

Under that reasoning, the lower courts concluded that the university's policy
did not have a "disparate impact" on gays and lesbians. But the Court of Appeals
said, without dissent, that if the effect was greater on homosexual couples, the
policy would constitute discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.

The Court of Appeals returned the case to the lower courts, where the
plaintiffs, in order to win, will have to prove that the policy had a disparate
impact on gays and lesbians and then that the university did not have a valid
business reason for the rule.

Mark A. Jacoby, a lawyer representing Yeshiva, did not return a telephone call
asking for comment. A spokeswoman for Yeshiva said university officials were
still reviewing the opinion.

Legal experts said that yesterday's ruling has potentially far-reaching effects
for employers.

"I think this will have significant impact within New York City on
employer-provided benefits," said Lance Liebman, a professor at Columbia
University who specializes in employment law.

Gay rights advocates said the decision could affect employer-provided housing,
some family-oriented benefits like bereavement leave and perquisites like club
and gym memberships that are extended to spouses.

"This is big," said Miriam Hauser Wugmeister, a New York lawyer who advises
employers. "The language of the decision was broader than anticipated. It wasn't
on the radar of most employers." But now, she said, she expects employers to
review their benefits policies very carefully, because "many private employers
do not want to be a test case."

Experts are not sure whether the ruling might also affect health plans and
pension benefits, which are governed largely by federal law.

Yeshiva University was sued by two students at the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, which is part of the university. Both women, Sara Levin and Maggie
Jones, were turned down when they applied for apartments with their partners,
who were not students at the medical school, on the Bronx campus, forcing them
to choose, they contended, between their partners and their right to the
university-subsidized housing.

Both took on-campus apartments initially but left to join their partners in
housing that they said was much farther away and more expensive. Both women have
graduated, and are now in medical residencies in San Francisco.

The decision is not expected to have much immediate effect on other
universities' housing policies. Columbia University and New York University both
have policies explicitly permitting students' domestic partners to live with
them in university housing, said Michael Adams, the deputy legal director of the
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, which represents gays and lesbians in
gay rights cases. Most other schools in New York City do not have housing for
couples.

Sheldon E. Steinbach, the general counsel of the American Council on Education
in Washington, said that even though the decision is limited to schools in New
York City, "it is certainly a warning shot to other universities to reconsider
what their policies are vis-a-vis access to student housing."

"What's important about this case," Mr. Adams said, "is that the court says you
can't make believe that this is neutral and fair."

Matt Coles, the litigation director of the American Civil Liberties Union in New
York, which assisted the plaintiffs, said the decision showed "a growing
recognition that if you make the major qualification for anything turn on being
married, that's going to wind up discriminating in most circumstances against
lesbians and gay men."

"This is a very bold decision," Mr. Coles said. "We've been trying to get courts
to understand for 20 years."

Many state and local governments include gays and lesbians in their
antidiscrimination laws, but the New York City law is unusual in its provision
for lawsuits based on a disparate-impact theory.

There have been very few court decisions in other states, legal experts said,
that address the question of whether providing benefits only to married people
is discriminatory.

Mr. Coles said that in the early 1980's he brought court challenges in
California to employer policies limiting bereavement leave and dental benefits
to married employees. He said he had also handled a suit against an airline that
extended free flights to spouses but not same-sex partners. He lost all three
cases.

Professor Liebman said state courts had rejected these arguments before.

But he said, "We are in a long-term process in which we are coming gradually to
the notion that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is forbidden."

That notion, he said, is in constant tension with the restriction of marriage to
heterosexual couples: in the Yeshiva case, the court had to make a choice.

The Court of Appeals rejected the reasoning of two lower courts, the State
Supreme Court and its Appellate Division, that the university housing policy had
the same effect on homosexual and heterosexual students. But the Court of
Appeals agreed with the Appellate Division that the students could not sue under
a state law prohibiting discrimination on the basis of marital status.

The state antidiscrimination law does not cover gays and lesbians, although it
would under an amendment that has passed the Assembly.

The opinion was written by Judge Carmen B. Ciparick. Judge George Bundy Smith
and Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye filed concurring opinions. Judge Kaye said she
believed that the plaintiffs had a case under the state law prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of marital status.

Many civil rights groups, the City Bar Association and the state attorney
general, Eliot Spitzer, filed briefs supporting the two students.

"The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. supported the suit because we
think the disparate-impact model is just central to discrimination law," said
Robert H. Stroup, a staff lawyer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 4, 2001



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about the reinstatement of a lawsuit
challenging Yeshiva University's policy of excluding same-sex couples from
university housing misspelled the surname of a Court of Appeals judge in some
copies. She is Judge Carmen B. Ciparick, not Ciparik.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maggie Jones, at the Court of Appeals in April, was one of two
students who sued the Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Yeshiva University.
(David Jennings for The New York Times)(pg. B6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (95%); LITIGATION (93%); SUITS & CLAIMS (92%);
DISCRIMINATION (91%); STUDENT HOUSING (90%); COHABITATION (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); APPEALS (90%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS
(89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); LAWYERS (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); MARRIAGE (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION
IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); VERDICTS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); EMPLOYEE HEALTH PLANS
(68%) COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  DORMITORIES;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: YESHIVA UNIVERSITY

PERSON: MANSNERUS, LAURA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             840 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Little 'Quiet' in Israel: 3 Arabs Die, Palestinians Retaliate

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM A. ORME Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1212 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, July 2


The tenuous truce that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell tried to reinforce
here last week was strained to the breaking point today when Palestinians killed
an Israeli motorist and detonated car bombs in retaliation for Israel's killing
of three West Bank militants late Sunday.

In an effort to keep the violence from worsening, American intelligence agents
held a late-night meeting with Palestinian and Israeli security officials in Tel
Aviv. But diplomats were deeply pessimistic about the prospects for the full
week of "quiet" that Israel has demanded before it will relax economic and
travel restrictions on Palestinians and resume political talks.

"The events of the past two days show how fragile the cease-fire is," Terje
Larsen, the chief United Nations representative in the region, said today. "All
indications now are that it will not hold."

The car bombs, which exploded early this morning in a blue-collar neighborhood
east of Tel Aviv, caused no serious injuries. But an Israeli driver was shot
dead this afternoon on a border-zone road near a Palestinian town, Tulkarm,
prompting cries for retaliation from the Israeli right.

Nearby on the West Bank, in Jenin, thousands of angry Palestinians marched in a
funeral procession, bearing aloft the bodies of three young men killed late
Sunday night by missiles fired on their car from Israeli helicopters. An Israeli
military spokesman said the fusillade thwarted a terror attack.

The bodies were wrapped in the flags of the radical Islamic Jihad movement, and
mourners chanted slogans vowing revenge.

Hours later, outside Nablus, Israeli troops shot and killed a Palestinian who
they said was holding a suspicious object. Palestinians said the man was a taxi
driver tossing a bag of garbage into a rubbish heap.

In the evening, Palestinian snipers wounded a Jewish settler driving in the West
Bank, and the Israeli Army reported isolated shootings at its posts in
Bethlehem, Ramallah and southern Gaza.

"We think the Palestinians have not done enough to fight terror and to end the
violence," Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said in
Washington. "We also want to make clear that we remain opposed to Israel's
policy of targeted killings."

At the United Nations, Secretary General Kofi Annan called on both the Israelis
and Palestinians to exercise maximum restraint, adding that neither side could
achieve security without progress on political issues.

Mr. Larsen met in Gaza this morning with the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat,
whom he described later as "furious" about the previous night's helicopter
strike by the Israelis.

"This was a flagrant violation of the cease-fire," Mr. Arafat told reporters as
he left the meeting. "It is an ugly crime against our citizens."

Still, Mr. Arafat vowed to continue to try to enforce the cease-fire, Mr. Larsen
said.

But several Palestinian militant groups declared after Israel's attack that the
truce Mr. Arafat had asked them to honor was no longer in force. The Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestinian, a small leftist faction, claimed
responsibility for the car bombs this morning, which they said were retaliation
for the helicopter assault and the killing of two other Palestinian activists
earlier Sunday.

The Islamic Jihad declared that "every Zionist in every inch of Palestine and
the depth of Zionist settlements will be a target for our human bombs, our car
bombs and our bullets."

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, defending the helicopter strike as "active
self-defense," shrugged off the threats, saying: "The Palestinians announced
they will end the cease-fire. I don't know what cease-fire they are talking
about. I don't know of one quiet day so far."

Israeli politicians from across the spectrum endorsed the helicopter strike,
accepting the army's assertion that the three men had loaded the car with
explosives and were planning to bomb an Israeli target. An army spokesman said
today that the army knew when and where the men had planned to strike, but could
not give details without compromising intelligence information.

"This is not fire directed against innocent people," said the transportation
minister, Efraim Sneh, a Labor party leader and former general. "This is an
operational action against those who are planning terror attacks."

Palestinians challenged the suggestion by some Israeli officials that the
helicopters were dispatched at short notice to frustrate an imminent attack. The
oldest of the three men killed, Mohammad Ahmed Besharat, 28, identified in
Israel as a Hamas leader but said in Jenin to belong to Islamic Jihad, had been
the target of a failed Israeli assassination attempt one month earlier,
Palestinians said. Mr. Besharat was said by Israeli officials to have been
involved in terror bombings in two Israeli cities, Hadera and Netanya.

Also killed in the car was Samech Nur Ziab, 22, an officer in the Palestinian
Coast Guard who Israeli officials said was an explosives expert, and Walid Sudki
Besharat.

Some Palestinian officials contended that the raid was a premeditated Israeli
attempt to keep a truce from taking hold in order to avoid subsequent political
negotiations.

"I am not a Shin Bet man, nor a member of the Palestinian security apparatus,"
Ziyad Abu Zayyad, a Palestinian cabinet minister, said on Israeli Army radio. "I
am a political man. But I can also read what's happening on the ground, and
what's happening on the ground testifies that there's an Israeli strategic
decision to try to evade the cease-fire."

Speaking anonymously, Israeli military officers told Israeli reporters today
that the attack was carried out in accordance with a cabinet directive issued
before Mr. Sharon departed for the United States last week. That directive was
also said to have authorized the killing of a Fatah leader in Nablus, Osama
Jabara, who died June 24 in an explosion in a public telephone booth that he
regularly used. Israeli officials said Mr. Jabara had prepared bombs for use
against civilian Israeli targets.

According to Palestinian human rights organizers, 25 Palestinians have been
killed in 16 Israeli assassinations since November, including six bystanders.
Most targets were political militants known to oppose peace agreements with
Israel, or members of Palestinian security forces that Israel contends had taken
part in armed attacks during the last nine months.

Israeli human rights groups have protested what they say is an undeclared
government policy of "extrajudicial executions" of suspected terrorists.
European diplomats said today that the European Union planned to condemn the
helicopter assault.

The Israeli government has never acknowledged that it carries out pre-emptive
assassinations of Palestinians it considers security threats. But after many of
the earlier incidents, government radio and television news programs cited
unidentified officials defending what they called the "liquidations." Such was
the case today, as army officers offered biographical details about the slain
men, saying they had been identified as security threats long before and had
been killed deliberately.

"They are not interested in having people talk, in a cooling-off period, in
dialogue," said Mr. Sneh, the transportation minister. "That contradicts their
world view."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Three Palestinians killed by Israelis late Sunday were buried
yesterday in Jenin, and mourners vowed again to take revenge for their deaths.
(Agence France-Presse) Map of Israel highlighting Tulkarm: Among several
outbreaks, an Israeli was killed at Tulkarm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); SHOOTINGS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (70%);
ARMIES (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (67%); HELICOPTERS (65%); ARMED FORCES (65%);
RELIGION (64%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (60%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%); HEZBOLLAH (54%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (54%)

PERSON: ORME, WILLIAM A JR

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (93%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(94%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             856 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Criticizes Major Allies For Inaction In Slave Trade

BYLINE:  By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 12


The State Department today criticized several of the United States' closest
allies, including Saudi Arabia, Israel, Greece and South Korea, saying they had
not made sufficient efforts to stop the trafficking of slaves within their
borders.

The assessments came in the department's first annual Trafficking in Persons
Report, mandated under a law enacted last fall. It is similar to the reports on
human rights and drug trafficking. Like those, it offers the option to apply
sanctions, in this case to countries that are not, in the government's view,
making adequate efforts to fight the slave trade.

But because the law is new, the sanctions provision does not take effect until
2003. In theory, at least, that gave State Department officials the option to be
more frank than is customary, and some government officials said they had been.

"It was important that the report be a strong one, and that is what the State
Department has given us," said a statement issued by Senators Paul Wellstone, a
Minnesota Democrat, and Sam Brownback, a Kansas Republican, the authors of the
bill that called for the annual report.

Victims of trafficking, primarily women and children, are tricked or coerced
into traveling to another country on the promise of jobs like waitressing,
baby-sitting or modeling. But once they arrive, their identity papers are
seized, and they are enslaved in sweatshops, brothels, farm-labor camps or
private homes.

"It is incomprehensible that trafficking in human beings is taking place in the
21st century -- incomprehensible but true, very true," Secretary of State Colin
L. Powell said as he made the report public.

The Central Intelligence Agency estimates that at least 700,000 people are
trafficked each year, including 45,000 to 50,000 who are trafficked to the
United States.

State Department officials said the report would be used to open discussions
with the problem countries before the sanctions provision takes effect.

"This is an issue that has not been addressed vigorously in the past," said
Paula J. Dobriansky, under secretary of state for global affairs. "We would hope
that this report would provide the basis and the foundation from which to
actually improve the situation and the circumstances here and abroad."

The report says 23 countries are making little effort to stop the slave trade.
Saudi Arabia, Israel and Greece are destination countries for slave traffickers
and their victims, the report says.

Hundreds of women from Russia and its former republics are smuggled to Israel,
for example, and then forced into prostitution. But State Department officials
say the Israeli police generally ignore the problem.

South Korea is another source country; hundreds of "young female Koreans are
trafficked for sexual exploitation, mainly to the United States," the report
says. It makes no mention of the United States' effort to halt trafficking; the
State Department has no jurisdiction in domestic affairs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LABOR
TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (89%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); ANNUAL
REPORTS (77%); SMUGGLING (77%); SWEATSHOPS (77%); GARMENT WORKERS (76%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
SEX OFFENSES (71%); CHILD ABUSE (71%); PROSTITUTION (70%); JURISDICTION (63%);
FARM LABOR (52%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (50%) SLAVE LABOR;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PROSTITUTION;  WOMEN;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SAMUEL BROWNBACK (51%) BRINKLEY, JOEL

STATE: KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); ISRAEL (95%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%); SAUDI
ARABIA (94%)

REGION: SAUDI ARABIA;  ISRAEL;  GREECE;  SOUTH KOREA

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             858 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 14, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Opposition to Tribunal Worries European Supporters

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 13


The European Union, whose 15 members support a permanent International Criminal
Court, fears that the Bush administration's active opposition could undermine a
campaign to get enough ratifications over the next year to get the tribunal up
and running, diplomats say.

The court, created by a treaty adopted three years ago in Rome, must be ratified
by 60 national legislatures before it can operate. It would be the first
permanent international tribunal to deal with crimes like genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. So far, 36 of the 139 nations that signed the
treaty have ratified it.

Under the Clinton administration, the United States signed the treaty last Dec.
31, the last possible day to sign without ratifying at the same time. The Bush
administration has vowed never to send the treaty to the Senate for
ratification, and has asked the United Nations for legal advice on how to
withdraw its signature.

Diplomats have been told that the State Department is now conducting a review to
determine whether to go beyond that and work actively to reverse international
support for the court. In Washington, a State Department official said that a
"high-level policy review of the treaty" was under way within the
administration.

European diplomats say that they are resigned to American opposition to the
court, which Republicans and some leading Democrats are wary of because they
fear it could lead to capricious arrests of American officials or members of the
armed services abroad. The Clinton administration, knowing the treaty would
never pass the Senate, spent more than a year trying unsuccessfully to get other
nations to add a clause exempting all Americans from prosecution.

Richard N. Gardner, a former American ambassador in Europe and a State
Department official under Democratic administrations, calls the court "a bridge
too far" for Americans. In an interview, Mr. Gardner, now a professor of
international law at Columbia University, said it was unrealistic to lobby for
the court in the United States, "given that the leadership of the Republican
Party has migrated from the North to the South, and given that the United States
is the world's residual peacekeeper" and thus more exposed to suits. He
advocates more effort at ratification of other treaties with less opposition in
the United States.

In May, Congress passed legislation calling for punishment for nations (other
than those in NATO) that support and will use the court. The law, the American
Servicemembers' Protection Act, would make it possible for the United States to
remove an American physically from the jurisdiction of the court, to be based in
The Hague.

Now members of the European Union and other nations are stepping up efforts to
dissuade the United States from going beyond opposition to an active campaign to
wreck the nascent court through diplomatic pressure. European delegations and
individual diplomats have tried to raise the issue in Washington, said
Ambassador Pierre Schori of Sweden, which held the rotating presidency of the
European Union for the first six months of this year. Sweden ratified the treaty
last month.

Mr. Schori said in an interview this week that in talks with Washington, the
Europeans have "underlined that the European Union adopted a common position
supporting the court."

He added, "We and the other members of the European Union have more than 40,000
military personnel in active peace support missions around the globe, and our
military is taught to respect universal humanitarian law, universal human rights
and so on and we prosecute those who do not do so."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(78%); LOBBYING (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(75%); LEGISLATION (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(71%); INTERVIEWS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED
NATIONS (56%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%);
NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             860 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 15, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

July 8-14;
Pinochet Wins Crucial Case

BYLINE:  By Clifford Krauss

SECTION: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 98 words


Augusto Pinochet won a legal battle that is likely to end his three years of
arrests and captivity on human rights charges, first in Britain and then in
Chile.

An appeals court ruled that the former dictator was not mentally competent to
defend himself against charges that he covered up for a death squad held
responsible for kidnappings and executions of dissidents in 1973. Most legal
scholars believe that there is now little chance General Pinochet will ever
stand trial for his alleged involvement in the deaths and torture of thousands
during his 17-year rule.   Clifford Krauss

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Out of court, probably for good. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TORTURE (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (87%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(87%); NEWS BRIEFS (86%); APPEALS (85%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (85%); APPEALS
COURTS (85%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COUNTRY: CHILE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             863 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing New York: Manhattan: Chinese Citizen Files Human-Rights Suit

BYLINE:  By Susan Saulny (NYT) (Compiled by Anthony Ramirez)

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 112 words


A Chinese citizen is suing a Chinese government official in a federal court in
Manhattan, accusing the official of torturing him and murdering his brother and
mother in China. Lawyers for the Chinese citizen, Peng Liang, served legal
papers Tuesday night on the official, Zhao Zhifei. Under the Torture Victim
Protection Act of 1992, human rights victims, even if they are nonresident
foreigners, can file for claims in federal court as long as the defendant is
served on American soil. Mr. Peng alleges that Mr. Zhao, head of public security
in Hubei Province, had acted against him because Mr. Peng is a member of the
Falun Gong spiritual movement.
   Susan Saulny (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (90%); TORTURE (90%); CULTS & SECTS (88%); LAWYERS (88%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (84%) SUITS AND LITIGATION;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  TORTURE

PERSON: SAULNY, SUSAN; PENG LOANG; ZHAO ZHIFEI

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); CENTRAL CHINA (79%); HUBEI, CHINA (78%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Middle East: Jerusalem: Defense Prepared For Sharon

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 91 words


Israel has hired a Belgian lawyer to defend Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in a
war-crimes lawsuit filed in Brussels.

The suit accuses Israel of crimes against humanity in the Sabra and Shatila
massacre of Palestinians in 1982 by an Israeli-allied Lebanese militia. A
Belgian examining judge began an investigation of Mr. Sharon earlier this month
after finding merit in two complaints filed by Lebanese and Palestinian
survivors of the massacre. A 1983 Belgian law allows the prosecution of
foreigners for human rights violations outside Belgium.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); PRIME MINISTERS (86%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); BELGIUM (91%);
LEBANON (90%); MIDDLE EAST (74%)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             889 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 1, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Pushes to Refocus Racism Conference

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 31


State Department officials said today that they have been engaged in a strenuous
and complicated diplomatic effort to persuade other nations to omit two
contentious issues from the agenda of a coming United Nations conference on
racism -- whether Zionism is racism and whether nations should pay reparations
for slavery.

The officials said the outcome of the negotiations would determine whether the
Bush administration takes part in the conference, scheduled to open on Aug. 31
in Durban, South Africa.

"We want to go," a State Department official said today. "But not at any cost."

This week, a small corps of American diplomats is in Geneva attending sessions
with conference planners about the agenda. However, the real negotiations, one
administration official said, are expected to occur behind closed doors during
the next few days as the diplomats press their argument that the inclusion of
the two agenda items would subvert the conference and impede any progress.

"It's our policy that we can't go to this conference unless we get these matters
resolved somehow," a Bush administration official said today.

The draft agenda, which includes language calling for reparations and equating
Zionism with racism, was drawn up at several regional conferences called to
prepare for the Durban meeting. Officials said the portion concerning Israel had
emerged from a meeting of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, held in
Iran.

The question of whether the United States will send an official delegation --
and, if it does, at what level -- has engaged not only the State Department, but
several American civil rights groups, Jewish organizations and members of
Congress. It has also revived a contentious debate about whether the notion that
Zionism is racism can be a legitimate discussion topic or whether it is, as the
United States has long contended, a rhetorical device for opponents of Israel to
bludgeon Israel.

The United States first condemned the effort to equate Zionism with racism in
1975, even as the United Nations General Assembly approved a motion affirming
that notion. The United Nations repealed that resolution in 1991.

International conferences also often become forums for a variety of
international and parochial political agendas and concerns. The United States
did not attend United Nations-sponsored conferences on racism in 1978 and 1983
because it disagreed with the language of the agenda.

This time, the debate over Zionism and reparations on the agenda has the
potential to stir up several problems including exacerbating friction between
black and Jewish groups. That seemed evident today at a congressional hearing
over whether the United States should attend.

Blacks, both members of Congress and others who testified at the hearing, said
it was imperative that the United States participate in the conference to
demonstrate its concern over racism. Jewish lawmakers and representatives of
Jewish groups expressed deep concern over the inclusion of language in a draft
agenda that characterizes Israel's settlements as "crimes against humanity" and
describes Zionism "as a movement based on racial superiority."

Representative Cynthia A. McKinney, a Georgia Democrat and member of the House
International Affairs Committee, which was conducting the hearing, said the Bush
administration's reluctance to attend smacked of racism.

"I have to wonder if the Bush administration's position on the World Conference
on Racism is just politically dumb or if it is perhaps indicative some something
more malignant," she said. "Is the Bush White House just full of latent
racists?"

Representative Tom Lantos of California, also a Democratic member of the
committee, criticized Ms. McKinney's remarks about Mr. Bush and outlined his own
opposition to the conference. Mr. Lantos, a Holocaust survivor, said the United
States should not attend the conference unless the agenda was changed.

"We have a group of countries hellbent on hijacking a noble and worthwhile event
into yet another forum for Israel-bashing and for the most extreme form of
anti-Semitism to gain global notoriety," he said.

On Monday, the House overwhelmingly passed a non-binding resolution sponsored by
Mr. Lantos calling for the agenda to be changed before the United States agrees
to attend. Senators Hillary Rodham Clinton and Charles E. Schumer, Democrats of
New York, among others, have written to the White House urging that United
States insist on having the language about Israel changed.

Testifying before the committee today, William B. Wood, the acting assistant
secretary of state for international organizations, said the offensive language
about Israel was especially inflammatory.

He also said that while no one should doubt the profound regret the United
States feels over the "abomination of slavery," the administration opposes the
idea of reparations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (79%);
APPROVALS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SPONSORSHIP (72%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); POLITICS (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(65%); RELIGION (65%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  SLAVERY;  JEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE (54%)
STATE DEPARTMENT; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: LEWIS, NEIL A; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); ISRAEL (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%); SOUTH AFRICA
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             890 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Monitoring The Taliban

BYLINE:  By Barry Bearak (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 69 words


The United Nations Security Council passed a resolution calling for monitoring
teams to be placed on Afghanistan's borders to make sure that international
sanctions against the Taliban rulers are being enforced. In response, the
Taliban's foreign ministry has warned that the use of monitors would be
considered as aggression and those posted would be treated "like enemies on the
front line."
   Barry Bearak (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             891 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRIBUNAL IN HAGUE FINDS BOSNIA SERB GUILTY OF GENOCIDE

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1523 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Aug. 2


A former Bosnian Serb general was found guilty of genocide today for his role in
the systematic execution of more than 7,000 unarmed Muslim men and boys near the
Bosnian town of Srebrenica in July 1995.

Today's verdict by the international war crimes tribunal was the court's first
conviction on a charge of genocide in the wars that broke up Yugoslavia. The
massacres in the fields of Srebrenica have become known as the greatest atrocity
in Europe since World War II. The former general, Radislav Krstic, 53, was
sentenced to 46 years in prison. It was the longest sentence yet issued by this
United Nations tribunal.

Reading in French from the unanimous decision of the three tribunal judges,
Judge Almiro Rodrigues of Portugal, said the general was "guilty of the murder
of thousands of Bosnian Muslims."

He told the defendant, "In July 1995, General Krstic, you agreed to evil. This
is why the Trial Chamber convicts you today and sentences you to 46 years in
prison."

The legal definition of genocide, according to court statutes, refers to "acts
committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical,
racial or religious group."

In the dock, the general, who lost his right leg in a mine explosion and was
allowed to remain seated for the verdict, glanced down and swallowed, looking
gaunt and pained.

He was found guilty of all eight charges leveled against him, including
extermination, persecution, deportation and other crimes against humanity.

The verdict today is likely to affect the current investigation of the former
Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, who is jailed at the United Nations cell
block, just a mile from the tribunal, on war-crimes charges related only to
Kosovo. But prosecutors are seeking to include his support for the Serb military
offensives in Bosnia. Summarizing the 255-page ruling today, Judge Rodrigues
reviewed the events that occurred in Srebrenica, a United Nations enclave in
eastern Bosnia overrun by Bosnian Serb forces in July 1995 before the eyes of
300 Dutch peacekeepers. "In all, 7,000 to 8,000 men were captured by the Serbian
forces," Judge Rodrigues said. "Almost all of them were killed."

"By deciding to kill all the men of fighting age, a decision was taken to make
it impossible for the Muslim people of Srebrenica to survive," he read, slowly
and deliberately. "Stated otherwise, what was ethnic cleansing became genocide."

Judge Rodrigues was flanked by two colleagues in crimson robes: Judge Fouad Riad
from Egypt and Judge Patricia Wald from the United States.

During the 16-month trial, prosecutors set out to provide the most thorough
historical record yet of the atrocities that took place between July 12 and July
19 in 1995.

Their evidence included the corpses from mass graves, and the accounts of
survivors, reviving memories of the outrage stirred abroad by events at
Srebrenica. The indignation stirred the West both to take tougher military
action against the Bosnian Serbs and to pressure the warring parties to sign the
Dayton peace accords in December 1995.

Today's verdict is likely to have particular echoes in the Netherlands and
France. In both countries, parliamentarians and other groups are wrestling with
the question of whether their failure to act more forcefully in some way enabled
genocide.

Gen. Bernard Janvier of France, the overall United Nations commander for Bosnia
at the time, ignored repeated warnings by Dutch peacekeepers that the Bosnian
Serb military was preparing to invade Srebrenica, and vetoed, until the very
last minute, NATO air strikes requested by the peacekeepers.

Critics of the Dutch peacekeepers, whose numbers had dwindled to 310 and who
were overpowered and disarmed by the Serbs, argue that the soldiers should have
worried less about themselves and their fellow soldiers held hostage, and done
more to demand protection for the refugees they were supposed to guard. The
results of investigations in France and the Netherlands will be published this
fall.

Peacekeepers have appeared as witnesses in the starkly modern courtroom, but the
judges today focused only on the Bosnian Serb plan to choke off the United
Nations enclave, driving out and killing many of its longtime Muslim
inhabitants, and the role played by General Krstic, the commander of the 15,000
member Drina Corps. They also singled out Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
president at the time.

On March 8, 1995, the judges summary said, Dr. Karadzic laid out his battle
plan, and issued an order to separate the two United Nations protected enclaves
of Srebrenica and Zepa. His orders for the Drina Corps were "By well-thought-out
combat operations, create an unbearable situation of total insecurity with no
hope of further survival or life for the inhabitants of Srebrenica and Zepa."

The ruling showed how the plan was meticulously carried out and how General
Krstic was involved. He was named commander as the corps burst into Srebrenica.
The judges said that while he may not have ordered the assault, he played a
central role in the killings and deportations that followed.

Many of the horrors of the fatal days from July 12 to July 19 that year have
been known and described in articles, books and documentary films. But proving
the crimes in court has been long and complicated.

Witnesses at first were afraid to cooperate; there was no paper trail of orders,
and for a long time Bosnian Serbs did not allow work on mass graves needed to
provide evidence. But as NATO troops moved into Bosnia the climate gradually
changed. Investigators, armed with court orders from The Hague and backed by
NATO troops, scoured through Bosnian Serb military archives and seized thousands
of documents.

"The Serbs went to great lengths to hide the evidence of the crimes," said
Jean-Rene Ruez, who led the investigation. "But they did a sloppy job. They
moved bodies from mass graves, but left behind many. They erased records and
cleaned out archives. Binders from 1995 were missing. But they left some things.
They did not remember to destroy the engineering logs showing how they used
heavy equipment to dig the graves. We found timetables of the military police
guarding prisoners."

Prosecutors said that the Krstic trial is the first international trial where
forensic evidence has played such a crucial role. Such evidence was not produced
during the trials in Tokyo and Nuremberg following World War II. It has been
used, but to a lesser extent, during the trials dealing with the 1994 massacres
in Rwanda. In Bosnia, dozens of international experts have worked for months,
digging up 2,028 bodies and finding another 2,500, spread over more than two
dozen sites.

Unlike the Rwanda tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania, this court has little experience
trying genocide. Earlier charges of genocide against two Bosnian Serbs were not
upheld. "Judges have clearly sought to avoid ruling on genocide in the two cases
that involved low-ranking people," said an expert at the court.

The Rwanda tribunal has convicted eight people, all of them on charges including
genocide.

The two lawyers defending General Krstic said their client, who had pleaded not
guilty to all charges, would appeal both the verdict and the sentence. Nenad
Petrusic, the chief defense counsel, said that he and his client had not talked
much about the sentence. "We had expected an acquittal," he said abruptly.

The appeals process at the tribunal typically takes many months and General
Krstic is therefore expected to remain at the United Nations cell block where he
has been since his arrival in December 1998.

Some lawyers and human rights workers who follow the court said they were
shocked at what they called a short sentence. They compared it to the longest
sentence so far, that of Gen. Tihomir Blaskic, a Bosnian Croat who was sent to
prison for 45 years for crimes against humanity and war crimes.

"So genocide is worth only one extra year," said Avril McDonald, a lawyer at the
Asser Institute for International Law in The Hague. "I'm appalled. To me
genocide equals life in jail."

Mark Harmon, the chief prosecutor and an American from San Francisco, said he
was satisfied because the judges upheld all the prosecution's charges. "I am
gratified that genocide was recognized, especially in this case," said Mr.
Harmon after the proceedings. "The perpetrators knew that in a patriarchal
society, such as Srebrenica, the destruction of the male population would result
in the destruction of the whole community."

Although he had demanded a life sentence, he said, he was not disappointed.
"Forty-six years is a substantial sentence for a man of Krstic's age," he said
"The essence is there. I don't want to quibble about figures."

Today's ruling will weigh heavily in the prosecution of other Bosnian Serbs
indicted for genocide, two of whom are being held in The Hague. The other two,
Dr. Karadzic and Gen. Ratko Mladic, his military commander, are fugitives.

In Sarajevo, military officials said today that three Muslim officers who served
in Bosnia's army in the civil war had been arrested on war crimes charges and
would be handed over to the tribunal in The Hague.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Radislav Krstic, a Bosnian Serb general, entering the courtroom
yesterday where he was found guilty of genocide for killings in Bosnia in 1995.
(Pool photo by Ed Oudenaarden)(pg. A1); A forensic expert working in Tuzla last
month with the remains of more than 3,500 Bosnian Muslim victims of the massacre
in Srebrenica in 1995. A Bosnian Serb general, Radislav Krstic, has been
convicted of genocide. (Reuters)(pg. A8) Map of Serbia highlighting Srebrenica:
More than 7,000 Muslims were massacred at Srebrenica in 1995. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); PRISONS (89%); MEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SENTENCING (78%); RELIGION (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HISTORY
(72%); PEACEKEEPING (72%); WORLD WAR II (72%); DEPORTATION (72%); MURDER (57%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KRSTIC, RADISLAV; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%);
PORTUGAL (77%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);  SERBIA;  HAGUE
(NETHERLANDS);  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             895 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 4, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 57 words


Officials said a law establishing a special tribunal to try surviving leaders of
the Khmer Rouge was expected to be approved next week by the Constitutional
Council and sent to King Norodom Sihanouk for signing. The law would then go to
the United Nations for negotiations with the government over details of the
process.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); APPROVALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); POLITICS (84%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; NORODOM SIHANOUK (KING)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             899 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 6, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghanistan Closes a Christian Relief Office

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 265 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Aug. 5


The Taliban, who control most of Afghanistan, have closed the office of a United
States-based relief organization and arrested 24 of its workers, accusing them
of propagating Christianity, a Taliban-run news agency reported today.

The group, Shelter Now International, is a Christian agency based in Oshkosh,
Wis., that provides relief services.

It has been providing food, tents and blankets to impoverished Afghans for
several years.

Its office was sealed today after a raid by Taliban enforcement officers from
the Ministry for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, witnesses
said. The officers reportedly seized a Bible, two computers and Christian
literature translated into the local Dari language, as well as cassettes and
musical instruments.

The Taliban, members of a religious militia that espouses a harsh brand of
fundamentalist Islam, have accused Shelter Now of spreading Christianity and of
trying to convert Muslims, according to the news agency, Bakhtar.

In the portion of Afghanistan under Taliban control it is a crime punishable by
death to propagate any religion other than Islam or to convert a Muslim to
another religion.

Eight of the people arrested were foreigners, including a German and an
Australian. The nationalities of the other foreign workers, all women, were not
immediately known.

Shelter Now faced similar accusations from Afghans while working in refugee
camps in neighboring Pakistan. The organization has always denied accusations
that it handed out Bibles. The group started as a response to the Soviet
military campaign in Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (95%); TALIBAN (93%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (91%); ARRESTS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); MUSIC (54%); MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS (54%) CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); SHELTER NOW INTERNATIONAL

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: WISCONSIN, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             915 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 23, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Religious Arrests Cast a Pall Over Afghanistan Aid Efforts

BYLINE:  By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1691 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Aug. 22


The evidence considered most damning includes Bibles translated into Farsi and
Pashto, dozens of video and audio tapes about the life of Jesus and a book
entitled "Sharing Your Faith With a Muslim."

Two weeks ago, 24 aid workers -- 2 Americans, 2 Australians, 4 Germans and 16
Afghans -- were arrested here in this nation's war-ravaged and hunger-racked
capital. Some were accused of preaching the Christian Gospel. Others were
accused of listening too well.

Death may be the punishment for these crimes -- or at least that is what
officials from the ruling Taliban militia have announced. In Afghanistan, laws
are in constant flux as austere mullahs fine-tune their ideas for creating the
world's purest Islamic state.

"These foreigners were given visas as aid workers, not missionaries," said Abdul
Ghafoor Afghani, the Taliban's chief of protocol. "In your country, if I am
given a diplomat's visa and I am caught spying, I would not be spared, yes? This
is the same."

"We have taken some confessions," he said. "The two American women were caught,
as you say, red-handed, in an Afghan's house, where they know they were not to
go. They were trying to show a video about Jesus, from his birth to his, what is
the word, I think it is crucifixion."

In its fourth year of remorseless drought, in its 22nd year of relentless war,
Afghanistan may well be the world's neediest country. The United Nations and
hundreds of relief groups provide help that now amounts to more than $300
million a year. But those organizations and the Taliban are often incompatible
caretakers, steeped in cultural conflicts and mutual distrust. One dispute
follows another, and it seems that when the aid agencies are not threatening to
pack it in, the mullahs are threatening to throw them out.

The Taliban are uncomfortable with much of what goes on behind the high walls of
the aid workers' compounds: the mingling of unmarried men and women, the beat of
rock 'n' roll, the ending of a hard day with a stiff drink. The unseen is often
tolerated, though some activities worry the mullahs more than others.
Repeatedly, the Taliban have warned against turning Afghan believers into Afghan
apostates.

"These laws were well-known to everyone," said Fayaz Shah, head of the United
Nations World Food Program in Kabul. "It's like walking in a minefield, and when
one blows, you yell, 'Why did this happen?' But you should know. You were in a
minefield."

The arrested aid workers belong to Shelter Now, a German-based group. For
months, its Kabul staff had been under the surveillance of the Taliban's
whip-wielding religious police from the Department for the Promotion of Virtue
and the Prevention of Vice. An intensive investigation has been opened, and the
authorities have announced the possibility of "a larger conspiracy."

A prime suspect is the World Food Program itself, Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed
Mutawakil said on Tuesday. He did not specify how a reliable donor of wheat
might be linked to the conversion of Muslims, but the mere mention of such
misgivings is a grave matter. The program is the sole source of nourishment for
three million Afghans, about 15 percent of the population. Those woebegone
people survive on little more than flatbread and weak tea.

The potential of more arrests has left the aid agencies in fear. People say the
Shelter Now episode could eventually lead to a huge withdrawal -- or expulsion
-- of the agencies. That would be catastrophic for the needy.

That dreadful prospect complicates the moral judgments of aid workers who would
ordinarily ache with sympathy for their jailed colleagues. As it is,
commiseration often is coupled with anger. Many people here presume that the
arrested foreigners were guilty of reckless proselytizing; however
well-intentioned the preaching, that forbidden endeavor to save a few dozen
souls has imperiled thousands of lives.

"Why did they break the law, especially this law?" asked an American who
insisted on anonymity. "Worse yet, they dragged their Afghan workers into this.
After some political games, the foreigners will probably be kicked out of the
country as their punishment. But the Afghans, I am afraid they are going to be
killed."

Peter Schwittek, who runs an aid group that operates schools in mosques, said he
once spoke about proselytizing with George Taubmann, a fellow German who heads
Shelter Now in Kabul. "If you discuss these things with Mr. Taubmann, he tells
you, 'No, we never formally evangelize, but if our staff feels compelled to do
so, O.K., but it's not a policy of our agency.' "

The first to be arrested were the two American women, taken away on Aug. 3.
Their names are Dana Curry and Heather Mercer, and they are said to be in their
mid-20's. Anxious parents have arrived in Pakistan, hoping to get visas to
Kabul. Still ahead will be heart-rending details about young and adventurous
zealots aspiring to do good deeds.

On Aug. 5, Mr. Taubmann himself was arrested along with dozens of others,
including a large assemblage of Afghan children who were later released.

"Some of the Shelter Now people have claimed that all their Christian materials
were for personal use," said Mr. Afghani, the chief of protocol, "but I do not
believe one needs thousands of audio cassettes to make a study of the Pashto
language."

"Of the Afghans, some are said to have been teachers of the others, and to do
that I would think they must be considered converts who by Shariat law face
execution," he said.

Though the Taliban control nearly all of the country, most of the world declines
to recognize them as a legitimate government. In return, the Taliban have now
refused the customary right of consular access to the imprisoned foreigners.

On Tuesday, diplomats from the United States, Australia and Germany left Kabul
in frustration after a week of fruitless attempts to see their countrymen. They
were allowed only to pass on supplies from the aid workers' families:
toiletries, writing materials, Oreo cookies, Pringles potato chips and a variety
pack of Nature Valley crunchy granola bars.

"There doesn't appear to be a well-defined legal system here, at least for this
case," said David T. Donahue, the exasperated American envoy. "We've been told
that once the investigation is complete, it will be turned over to Mullah Omar,
the supreme leader."

If the reclusive, one-eyed Mullah Muhammad Omar is indeed the last word, he
might consult his own Edict No. 14, a July 31 decree concerning the behavior of
foreign nationals. It regards "inviting Afghans to any religion apart from
Islam" as a less serious offense than "taking photographs of living creatures"
or "eating the meat of the pig." Punishment is 3 to 10 days in prison and then
expulsion.

But the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan is a work in progress, not yet five years
old. The rules for behavior are singularly constraining, and yet there always
seems more to add. In March, even small boys were commanded to wear turbans to
school. In May, two giant statues of Buddha -- an ancient heritage -- were
destroyed because they depicted the human form. In June, spectators at soccer
matches were ordered to restrict their cheers to the chant "God is great!"

By and large, the Taliban leadership hails from refugee camps, religious schools
and villages, and their education has focused on the ideology of jihad and the
wisdom of the Koran. For them, governance has been a confounding puzzle.

But now as they grow more accustomed to the reins, they also more resent the
independence of the aid groups in their midst. In the past, much of this
criticism involved lifestyle. The Taliban thought the aid workers were
spendthrifts with donated money, drawing high salaries, driving expensive
vehicles, living in large houses.

These days, the Taliban seem as intent on overseeing budgets and planning as
behavior. With millions being spent, they want to sign off on projects and look
at the books. In a recent interview, Mullah Muhammad Hassan, the powerful
governor of Kandahar Province, rebuked the United Nations for squandering money.

"The U.N. is paying $2,156 per tube well, and I can have them dug for $500," he
said, rooting through his pockets for the scraps of paper that held his
arithmetic.

In May, a beautiful and modern surgical hospital in Kabul closed within weeks of
its opening. The builders, the Italian aid group Emergency, shut down to protest
a raid by the religious police, who beat up some staff members after finding men
and women lunching in the same room. But what has kept the hospital closed since
then is a disagreement about whether the Afghan employees must be hired through
the Ministry of Public Health.

"This is our country and we want things run with our consultation," said Mullah
Muhammad Abbas Stanekzai, the deputy minister of health.

Kabul is a city of two million people, almost all destitute. In a civil war from
1989 to 1996, as many as seven armies blasted away at one another with artillery
and rockets. Now much of the city looks like the detritus of an ancient ruin. At
daybreak, the place seems ghostly until squatters lift themselves from the
wreckage they use as nightly shelter.

These are people ordinarily grateful to the aid groups and slow to take the
Taliban's side in conflicts. But they overwhelmingly support the arrest of the
Christians and the jailing of any murtads, Muslims who have deserted their
faith. If the price of bread and blankets is denial of the Holy Prophet, they
say they would prefer to defiantly perish.

"These people supposedly came here to help the Afghan people, and instead they
have used their position to do the dishonorable," said Ahmed, a young man with a
beard already lengthy enough for a Biblical epic. "I think these people should
die."

A 27-year-old soldier was equally emphatic about his deep beliefs. There is only
one religion, he said. God sent Islam to refine the teachings of all other
faiths. It is eternity's final word.

He then considered the gloriousness of this knowledge and said he wished to
share it with all mankind. "Converting someone to Islam is the greatest thing a
person can do," he said. "Such an act is a way to go straight to Heaven."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Materials seized from Christian aid workers were displayed for
the news media in Kabul. The Taliban authorities closed the office of the aid
agency, Shelter Now, at left. (Photographs by Associated Press)(pg. A11) Map of
Afghanistan highlighting Kabul: Twenty-four aid workers were arrested in Kabul
two weeks ago. (pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
FOOD CHARITIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); DISASTER RELIEF (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (77%); FREEDOM
OF RELIGION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ESPIONAGE (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); WOMEN (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (55%) FOREIGN
AID;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  FREEDOM OF
RELIGION;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (59%) SHELTER NOW
INTERNATIONAL; WORLD FOOD PROGRAM (UN)

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY; AFGHANI, ABDUL GHAFOOR; MUTAWAKIL, WAKIL AHMED (MIN)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             923 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 2, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Army Rebuilds and Challenges Rebels

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1441 words

DATELINE: TAME, Colombia


Ghostly in the greenish pall of the helicopter's instrument panel, the squad of
soldiers crouched in the tight cabin as the Black Hawk lowered them onto a
darkened field in Colombia's oil-rich Arauca Province.

Hundreds of other troops had already secured roads, while helicopters moved
still more squads across the rice paddies of eastern Colombia. In a nearby war
room, officers charted progress on maps marked "Secret," a banner reminding them
of the mission: "Strike a convincing blow against the enemy."

Of late, a revived Colombian military has done just that, checking rebel
offensives and winning several skirmishes.

Late last year, the army scattered a large guerrilla column in the north, while
another operation rooted out rebels long entrenched just south of the capital.
In April, an operation in eastern Vichada Province led to the capture of a major
Brazilian trafficker. And in the last two weeks, the army has pounded a
2,000-strong rebel force in Guaviare Province.

The army is not about to win its war against Colombia's most powerful rebel
group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC. Colombian and
American military analysts also say the 125,000-member army still cannot hold
large swaths of territory.

But the recent operation in Arauca reflected a new level of organization for a
military that was long known for being poorly financed, inept and corrupt.
Today, instead of small jungle patrols and isolated garrisons, the army deploys
large numbers of troops in well-orchestrated offensives less vulnerable to the
disastrous losses suffered against leftist rebels not so long ago.

This operation moved 2,000 troops of the elite Rapid Deployment Force, several
transport aircraft and helicopter gunships into rebel-dominated territory.
Success was moderate, but the operation itself showed a new level of mobility
and planning.

"Here, if you make a mistake, they will wipe out a battalion," said Col. Jose
Tafur, who helped oversee an offensive that swept through this region from June
to mid-August. "So we operate on a brigade level, with a minimum of 1,000 men,
so we do not lose anything."

In the last two years, under former Defense Minister Luis Fernando Ramirez and a
new military leadership, the Colombian Army has added tens of thousands of
combat soldiers, reorganized its officer corps, instituted a merit-based
promotion system and improved coordination with other armed branches. The
reforms are widely viewed as the most significant in decades, offering a new
challenge to a powerful rebel group that grew from 8,000 fighters a decade ago
to 17,000 today.

"Carrying out operations is now possible, " said Gustavo Bell, who was named
defense minister in May.  "Strategic areas have been retaken that until just a
few years ago were considered bastions or mobility corridors for guerrillas."

The changes come as many analysts, among them moderates both here and in the
United States, argue that the army should be fortified to strengthen the
government's hand in peace talks with the rebels. Those talks, the centerpiece
of President Andres Pastrana's three-year-old administration, have faltered.

"Putting the military in a stronger position will likely change the calculation
of the FARC and force them to negotiate in good faith," said Michael Shifter of
the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based group.

However, the counterinsurgency efforts remain controversial in Washington and
Europe.

The United States provided Colombia with $860 million last year, most of it to
pay for 69 transport helicopters and training for a 3,000-member army brigade to
fight the drug trafficking that is an important source of income for the rebels.
But Washington, for now, has steered clear -- at least publicly -- of supporting
counterguerrilla efforts. "The political stomach for going into the
counterinsurgency business is zero," said Anne Patterson, the American
ambassador.

Critics, however, say the American aid does indirectly contribute to the army's
counterinsurgency efforts, since coca fields and drug processing laboratories
are often protected by the rebels. In addition, $5 million in American aid went
to create an intelligence center for the police and military and $55 million
went to classified intelligence programs, said George Vickers, director of the
Washington Office on Latin America, a research organization.

The buildup also worries human rights groups and some members of Congress, who
say the army needs to do more to punish rights violators and break ties with
right-wing gunmen responsible for killing thousands of people. If not, the
paramilitary groups could continue to grow alongside the army, said Jose Miguel
Vivanco, director of the Americas Division for Human Rights Watch.

The military's problems were long compounded by poor organization and spotty
training that analysts say led to a string of humiliating battlefield defeats,
raising concern in Washington that Colombia's government could fall. Morale was
in a free fall.

"The dead, we suffered over them, cried over them," recalled Maj. Rubiel Perez,
a 15-year veteran of many battles. "There were people who were responsible, for
lack of intelligence, lack of planning, lack of organization."

Even today, the military faces severe problems. A formidable foe can still
launch withering attacks, like an assault by 500 rebels on an army base in the
south in June. Thirty soldiers were killed, highlighting intelligence-gathering
deficiencies, said two American military analysts familiar with after-battle
reports.

The army is also simply too small to cover the country, which is twice the size
of France. Until recently, Colombia's combat force was not much larger than El
Salvador's during that country's civil war. Yet Colombia is 50 times as large.

And even when the army has carried out successful offensives, it has often been
unable to set up a permanent presence, a weakness magnified by the state's own
absence in much of Colombia, said Richard Millett, an American analyst who has
written about Colombia's army. "The military can't substitute for the presence
of the state," he said.

That was plainly evident in the recent operation in Arauca, which swept through
the center of the province. Though army brass called the operation a success,
only 14 rebels have been killed in two months of fighting.

In interviews, soldiers and commanders alike acknowledged that after the
military withdraws, the rebels might simply return -- in effect changing
nothing.

"The troops who come in cannot cover the whole area," said Col. Alfredo
Bocanegra, commander of the Special Forces Brigade, which operated here.

Residents in several villages throughout Arauca also raised questions about the
army's tactics. Some said soldiers treated them brusquely or threatened them,
telling them the "head-cutters," meaning paramilitary gunmen, would be
following.

"They said collaborate with us, or else there will be consequences," said Jesus,
32, a villager in Puerto Nidia, who spoke on condition that his last name be
withheld. "They see the whole population as guerrillas."

In Matecoco, villagers said soldiers had executed two wounded rebels who
surrendered after a firefight. A young peasant woman said the men had been shot
by a soldier who said his brother was killed in combat with the rebels.

Academics say the army has never really had the support it needed because of the
ruling class's historic distrust of the military. Indeed, the percentage of the
budget that went to the military last year -- 7.5 -- was just below the 1990
level, though the crisis is more serious. Still, financing has risen from $1.5
billion in 1995 to more than $1.9 billion this year. And Defense Ministry
documents show the armed forces are hoping for more than $2.2 billion next year.

The army eventually plans to buy 25 helicopters, 13 of which will be transports.
These are the key for a 6,000-member Rapid Deployment Force that for years
operated with little equipment or coordination.

Perhaps most significant, the army will have 55,000 enlistees by December, up
from 23,000 in 1998, while the number of draftees eligible to fight increased
from 57,000 to 103,000 in three years. In all, the army is poised to grow to
nearly 160,000 combat troops by 2004.

Combat soldiers interviewed in this region -- soldiers who no longer go on
jungle patrols or staff isolated garrisons -- said that they now feel more
confident.

"Now, we have a military objective, the enemy," said Marco Rincon, 25, a soldier
with the Rapid Deployment Force. "The change is total. They tell you there is an
operation, and you go. There is a goal, and you get it done."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Soldiers in training at Tolemeida, Colombia. Army reforms are
widely seen as the most significant in decades. (Stephen Ferry/FIJ-Liaison, for
The New York Times) Map of Colombia highlighting Tame: Colombian troops are
doing better against rebels in places like Tame.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HELICOPTERS (89%); DEFENSE
& MILITARY POLICY (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LIBERALISM (76%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (74%); EMPLOYEE PROMOTIONS (60%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; RAMIREZ, LUIS FERNANDO; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             924 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 2, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Macedonians Break Off Debate on Peace Plan

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 435 words

DATELINE: SKOPJE, Macedonia, Sept. 1


Parliament halted crucial debate today on a Western-sponsored peace plan to
protest incidents of harassment against displaced Macedonians.

Lawmakers began discussing the peace plan on Friday after riot police ousted the
Macedonian nationalist protesters who had sealed off the building complaining of
"this sellout to Albanian terrorists."

Ethnic Albanian rebels holding the northern hills have pledged to disband if
Parliament overhauls the Constitution to improve minority Albanian rights to
education, public service, police jobs and official use of their language.

NATO said today that the rebels' National Liberation Army has already turned in
1,210 of 3,300 weapons to an alliance force just a week into its 30-day mission
overseeing voluntary rebel disarmament.

President Boris Trajkovski, in a speech opening the session, said that
Parliament had no choice but to ratify the accord to avert civil war.

But Stojan Andov, the speaker of Parliament and a nationalist hard-liner,
declared today that debate would not resume until ethnic Albanians stopped
"terrorizing" the Macedonians behind guerrilla lines.

He said Macedonians trying to revisit or move back into homes along the main
road from Tetovo were the prey of rebel militants. "Yesterday Parliament showed
it is ready to debate and reach a decision," Mr. Andov said at a news
conference. "But that cannot happen while there is terror against civilians."

"We can finish this session in two to three days if all goes well," he said,
referring to what had been expected to be a vote on Tuesday for a constitutional
revision to be submitted for ratification as soon as NATO declares the rebel
army disarmed.

Mr. Andov rejected criticism that he was playing nationalist games to sabotage
reforms. "This is not to block -- this is to unblock the process," he said.
"This is pressure to create conditions for peace, for the process of
constitutional change to begin."

The extent of the problems Mr. Andov cited was not clear.

The state news agency MIA said a convoy of six buses and private cars that went
to rebel-dominated territory north of Tetovo on Friday had been trapped there by
"Albanian terrorists and groups of women and children sitting on the roads."

Five hundred yards away, Macedonian women and children maintained their own
blockade demanding the release of relatives said to have been abducted from
Tetovo.

Harald Schenker, spokesman for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, an observer mission in Macedonia, said the group was working with
Macedonian officials to lift the blockades to encourage Parliament to resume
debate.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(90%); CHILDREN (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT
(75%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%); PRESS CONFERENCES (65%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)

PERSON: TRAJKOVSKI, BORIS (PRES); ANDOV, STOJAN

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (97%); ALBANIA (96%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC)

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             929 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Exit at Durban

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 163 words


To the Editor:

The United States government's decision to withdraw from the United Nations
conference on racism (front page, Sept. 4) is one more example of its abdication
of responsibility for ending racism in the United States and respecting the
human rights of all peoples.

Racism in the United States isn't just the isolated acts of individuals; it is
systemic and structural.

To live up to its obligation to help eradicate racism, the United States
government must establish a permanent interagency council on race that would
ensure that all parts of the United States government are aware of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and that they take steps to make it real.

By walking out of the Durban conference, the United States turned its back on
democracy and its people.

KRISHANTI DHARMARAJ
Durban, South Africa, Sept. 4, 2001

The writer is executive director, Women's Institute for Leadership Development
for Human Rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (94%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); EXECUTIVES
(65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST
RACISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: DHARMARAJ, KRISHANTI

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (91%)

REGION: DURBAN (SOUTH AFRICA);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             932 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Racism Talks Still Seek to End Impasses on Israel and Slavery

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Sept. 7


Negotiators at the United Nations conference on racism remained deadlocked
tonight over the issues of the Middle East and slavery despite a new offer from
European diplomats that edged ever so slightly toward an apology for their
countries' past involvement in slavery and colonialism.

Although the conference was to have ended today, diplomats vowed to continue
negotiating through the night in an attempt to reach consensus on the final
declarations.

The European Union agreed to call on nations to take actions "restoring the
dignity" of the descendants of slaves, noting that some countries had already
done so by "expressing remorse or presenting apologies."

But the European diplomats would not agree to language condemning slavery and
the slave trade as a "crime against humanity," rejecting a key demand of African
nations. They also refused to condemn Israel by name for its treatment of the
Palestinians, rejecting a key demand of Arab nations.

And after hours of haggling, the leader of the European delegation here, Louis
Michel, finally conceded tonight that his negotiators had been unable to broker
a deal.

"There is still a chance to make a success," Mr. Michel, the Belgian foreign
minister, said at a news conference. "I can also say to you that it will be very
difficult. The European Union will make all the effort to make this a success.
But we'll not be, of course, prisoners of principles that are not our
principles."

His statement came toward the end of a day when hopes soared and sank as rumors
swirled about possible bids to break the impasse. The European offer came this
afternoon, when Mr. Michel presented African diplomats with new language for the
proposed conference declaration.

The Europeans have refused to apologize explicitly for slavery and colonialism,
and said describing slavery and the slave trade as a "crime against humanity"
might leave them open to lawsuits.

In today's proposal, the Europeans said they would "acknowledge and profoundly
regret the massive human suffering and the tragic plight of millions" harmed by
slavery and colonialism. And they used the word "apologies" in an effort to
mollify some African leaders.

"The World Conference further notes that some have taken the initiative of
regretting or expressing remorse or presenting apologies, and calls on all those
who have not yet contributed to restoring the dignity of the victims to find
appropriate ways to do so, and to this end we appreciate those countries that
have done so," the European Union proposal states.

A senior South African official said the language concerning an apology would be
acceptable as long as Europe agreed to condemn slavery as a crime against
humanity. But it soon became clear today that neither the Europeans nor the
Africans were willing to budge on that point.

"They cannot deny the slave trade was a crime against humanity," Patrick
Chinamasa, Zimbabwe's justice minister, said as he stepped out of the
negotiating room tonight. He added that the question of reparations was also
still a major problem.

"They are more worried about their wallets than moral issues," he said.

On the Middle East question, the Europeans have agreed to a South African
proposal that expresses concern about "the plight of the Palestinian people
under foreign occupation," but eliminates any description of Israel as a racist
state. The European statement also recognizes the rights of refugees to return
to their homes and properties, an idea that is strenuously rejected by Israel.

But Arab officials have rejected that proposal, saying they want Israel to be
condemned as a racist state.

"They obviously want something stronger, but I don't think it's possible to get
something stronger," a European diplomat said.

The prospects for a breakthrough seemed so bleak at times today that even Mary
Robinson, the United Nations commissioner for human rights and the conference's
secretary general, was publicly downcast.

"I don't expect that we will be very excited about the language that might be
adopted," Mrs. Robinson said in a meeting with advocacy groups. "The achievement
will be to get an agreement."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
(90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%);
LITIGATION (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST
RACISM;  PALESTINIANS;  SLAVERY;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (84%) UNITED NATIONS;
EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

COUNTRY: EUROPE (98%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); ISRAEL (94%); AFRICA
(93%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SOUTH AFRICA
(92%); ZIMBABWE (79%); BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  MIDDLE EAST;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             933 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Race Talks Finally Reach Accord On Slavery and Palestinian Plight

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Sept. 8


After nine days of tumultuous negotiations, nations from around the world agreed
today to condemn the slave trade that wrenched millions of Africans from this
continent to the Americas and to voice concern for the "plight of the
Palestinians under foreign occupation."

The declaration was almost undone at the last minute by the renewed insistence
of Arab states and their supporters to single out Israel by name as a racist
state. But the final document did not do so, and it was toned down considerably
from language that had prompted the United States and Israel to walk out earlier
this week.

The meeting, the United Nations conference on racism, was intended to celebrate
tolerance and diversity, but by week's end it risked becoming an international
symbol of divisiveness and intolerance as Arabs and Western nations clashed
repeatedly over whether to criticize Israel's treatment of the Palestinians.

Even today, as delegates labored to complete the conference documents, renewed
mudslinging threatened to further derail a meeting that was already a day behind
schedule.

Negotiators had worked all through the night to come up with the document that
also condemns discrimination against ethnic minorities, refugees, women, Gypsies
and others. The final language was brokered by European diplomats, many of them
from former slaving nations, who shouldered the guilt of their grandfathers to
find language that might restore dignity to the descendants of the enslaved.

The declaration says that slavery and the slave trade "are a crime against
humanity and should always have been so." It says states now have a moral
obligation to halt and reverse the lasting consequences of slavery, apartheid
and genocide and notes that some government have "taken the initiative to
apologize and have paid reparation where appropriate."

The wording fell far short of what had been sought by some Africans, who had
demanded an explicit apology and specific promises of compensation from Europe.

The European delegation refused to apologize explicitly, fearing that they might
open themselves up to lawsuits. They refused to endorse unconditional debt
cancellation and foreign aid.

Still, diplomats from Europe, Africa, Latin America and black Americans
attending the meeting here described the document as an important, if imperfect,
atonement for an ugly and neglected chapter of history.

"It is not important to know if we are expressing regret, remorse or apology,"
said Louis Michel, the Belgian foreign minister and leader of the European
delegation. "What is important is the recognition of an injustice that we cannot
accept."

Amina Mohamed, Kenya's ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, said she and
other African diplomats welcomed the declaration, while acknowledging its
limitations.

She said it was necessary to acknowledge the trade in human beings that extended
from the 1500's to the mid-1800's, when Europeans shipped about 12 million black
slaves from Africa to the New World.

"We have an agreement on a document that is far from satisfactory, that is
terribly imperfect, but provides a basis to build on," said Ms. Mohamed, who
helped negotiate the agreement. "I think that we owe it to the memory of all
those who perished to have the international community declare slavery and the
slave trade a crime against humanity."

But even after the declaration and the plan of action were adopted this
afternoon, many delegates left the convention center in this port city as
divided as when they arrived.

In the middle of today's meeting, Arab delegates and their supporters renewed
their insistence on condemning Israel as a racist state. And European and
Canadian officials warned that they too might abandon the process if such
language was ultimately included in the conference declaration.

From Jerusalem, Israel's foreign minister, Shimon Peres, called the final
document a "bitter failure" for the Arab League. "The language that was approved
in Durban in our absence," the foreign minister said, "is not the best and we
opposed it, but it is completely different from the venomous decisions the
extremist countries wanted passed."

Earlier in the day, Arab and Muslim officials had agreed to abandon their
criticisms of Israel and to accept a declaration that recognized "the plight of
the Palestinians under foreign occupation" as well as "the right to security for
all states in the region, including Israel." The agreement also recognized "the
rights of refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in dignity and safety."

But in the middle of the meeting this morning, delegates from Pakistan and Syria
unexpectedly insisted on adding new language that would assail Israel as a
racist, foreign occupying power.

The move stunned officials from across the world, who not long before had burst
into applause when South Africa's foreign minister, Dr. Nkosazana Zuma,
announced that all the contentious issues that had roiled the meeting this week
had been resolved.

The delegates then huddled and conferred and shook their heads in disbelief, as
Dr. Zuma pleaded with Arab and Muslim delegates to find a way to accept their
original agreement. They ultimately agreed, but they were clearly not satisfied
with the final document.

"It fails to condemn the discriminatory policies and practices of Israel, the
occupying power," officials from the Organization of Islamic Countries said.

Meanwhile, many Jewish groups left feeling that the meeting had been irrevocably
tainted in a week when Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, had assailed the
"supremacist-mentality" of Israel and some Arab groups had distributed offensive
literature, including posters of Jews with big noses and bloody fangs.

"Sadly, hate -- the hatred of Jews -- was all too evident at this global
conference in the new South Africa in which so many placed their hopes," said
Felice D. Gaer, director of the Jacob Blaustein Center for the Advancement of
Human Rights in New York. "I came hoping to strategize about ending
discrimination and intolerance. I leave wondering if those strategies will ever
be heard."

It was concern about such criticisms of Israel that persuaded the Bush
administration not to send Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to the conference.
The United States also objected to an apology for slavery and any mention of
reparations, fearful of lawsuits from black Americans.

But African-Americans here said the agreement would inspire pride among blacks
and lend momentum to efforts for reparations in the form of scholarship funds
and individual compensation for the descendants of slaves.

Wade Henderson, the executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights in Washington, said: "For African descendants, I think the agreement
offers a genuine breakthrough. By recognizing slavery as a crime against
humanity, the document sets the stage for legislative and legal action to
address historic inequities."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Durban, Mary Robinson of the United Nations and South
Africa's foreign minister, Dr. Nkosazana Zuma. (Associated Press)(pg. 16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); SLAVERY (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); REFUGEES (70%); ETHNICITY (69%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (67%); LITIGATION (66%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;
ANTI-SEMITISM;  SLAVERY;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;
REPARATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); AFRICA (94%); ISRAEL (94%);
EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);
KENYA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  AFRICA;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             934 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Fight Crime With Torture and Executions

BYLINE:  By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2155 words

DATELINE: HEFEI, China


Liu Minghe paused in a hospital room here to let a nurse take his blood
pressure, which had surged dangerously in the few minutes since he began talking
about how he had won his freedom from China's death row.

After she left, he begged off recounting in greater detail the torture that he
said had led him to confess to a murder he did not commit.

"Let's just say it was 'forced interrogation and confession under duress,' " Mr.
Liu said, his speech slurring slightly because he is missing several of his
lower teeth, which he said had been knocked out during his five-year
incarceration.

Mr. Liu has been recuperating in a hospital in Hefei, 560 miles south of
Beijing, since winning his release last month after having been sentenced to die
in 1996 in one of China's "strike hard" campaigns, a frenzied national effort to
purge the land of lawbreakers.

He managed to overturn his conviction on the grounds of insufficient evidence,
thanks largely to his former Communist Party membership, his family's relatively
high social position, and money. But many other people who are wrongly convicted
and condemned to die in China may not be so lucky.

China routinely executes more people than all other countries combined. This
year, though, has been far from routine. Without much notice at home or abroad,
the government has begun sending unknown thousands of people to execution
grounds, often after they have been tortured into confessing crimes that to
foreigners seem minor.

Today China is in the midst of its third great wave of executions in the last
quarter century, a campaign in which as many as 191 people have been executed in
a single day, according to the state news media. Since President Jiang Zemin
announced the crackdown in April, at least 3,000 people have been executed, and
double or even triple that number have been sentenced to death. The pace of
executions shows no sign of abating.

The wrongful conviction of Mr. Liu, and others like him, suggests that by the
time the campaign ends in 2003 dozens -- if not hundreds -- of innocent people
will have died in the capital punishment spree.

These periodic nationwide crackdowns, in response to rising crime and concerns
about weakening social order, place huge pressures on the local police to solve
crimes quickly, which they often do by extorting confessions through torture. In
Hunan Province, newspapers recently reported that the police solved 3,000 cases
in two days in April. Police in Sichuan Province reported that they had solved
6,704 cases, including 691 murders, robberies or bombings, in six days that same
month.

The campaigns also pressure the courts to try the accused quickly, record the
maximum possible number of convictions and show little mercy in sentencing.

Convictions are sometimes handed down within days of arrests. Appeals are
processed briskly and executions are normally carried out within an hour after a
sentence is confirmed. Usually, just a few months pass between an arrest and
execution, occasionally only weeks.

The monthly tally of death sentences has become a kind of grim score card
showing how each province is doing. But the real numbers remain a closely
guarded secret. They are believed to be far higher than the confirmed tally,
which has been compiled from press reports by people like Catherine Baber, a
researcher at Amnesty International based in Hong Kong, or a Western diplomat in
Beijing who does not want to be named.

Many, if not most, executions are not reported in the press at all. And many of
the reports that are published simply say that a "group" of people were executed
on a given day. A group can include anywhere from a few people to dozens.
Amnesty International usually counts each group as just two.

Neither Ms. Baber nor the diplomat will venture to guess what the true number of
executions might be. But both agree that this year's total will probably surpass
5,000. Some observers say the number could reach as high as 10,000.

It is also impossible to say how many of the people executed might be innocent.

Signs of Wrongful Justice

Certainly, many of them have been ordered to die for crimes, like bribery, that
would earn them only brief jail terms in the West. But several wrongful
convictions, like Mr. Liu's, have recently come to light, suggesting that many
among the condemned are not guilty at all.

Mr. Liu, 63, married and a former associate professor at a technical institute
in Wuhu, Anhui Province, was arrested during China's last great sweep in 1996,
for the murder of Tao Ziyu, who was reputed to be his lover.

Her body was found floating shoeless in a shallow lotus pond not far from his
campus residence. She had been strangled by someone's left hand, the police
concluded.

An elderly woman reported seeing a woman arguing with a man near the pond
shortly after Ms. Tao was last seen alive, visiting a friend who lived nearby.
Mr. Liu, who is right handed, protested his innocence and said he could account
for his whereabouts at the time.

But just before the end of the three-month period that police are allowed to
hold suspects, Mr. Liu says they plunged him into brutal, round-the-clock
interrogations.

His wife says he was handcuffed to a window so he had to either stand or hang
from his wrists. She says he was only allowed to eat a few bites of food by
lowering his head to a bowl. A document submitted to the court by his lawyers
said that Mr. Liu had not been allowed to drink or close his eyes during the
interrogation.

The police told him the questioning would continue for 10 days and that if he
did not confess he would probably be executed, and offered him a lighter
sentence if he did, according to his lawyers.

On the third day, Mr. Liu broke. In the videotaped confession, which his wife
has seen, interrogators did most of the talking while a dispirited Mr. Liu
answered "yes" to the scenario they presented.

Suspects in China are not allowed legal counsel, or any contact with the outside
world while under interrogation. Mr. Liu's wife says her husband disavowed the
confession as soon as he was allowed to see a lawyer.

"I couldn't bear it," she said he told the lawyer. "If I didn't confess, I would
have died."

Despite the lack of physical evidence and Mr. Liu's alibis, the Wuhu
Intermediate People's Court found him guilty of murdering Ms. Tao based on his
videotaped confession. On Dec. 30, 1996, he was sentenced to death.

Mr. Liu appealed his conviction and his family enlisted the help of a legal
expert from Beijing who focused on, among other inconsistencies in the
prosecution's case, Mr. Liu's alibi and the coroner's estimated time of Ms.
Tao's death.

A higher provincial court sent Mr. Liu's case back for a retrial in Wuhu, which
found Mr. Liu guilty a second time but reduced his sentence to life in prison.

Retrials Without Limit

There is no limit in China to how many times a case can be retried, and Mr. Liu
appealed his case twice more before the provincial court overturned his
conviction. Before he was finally released on Aug. 8, his wife had nearly lapsed
into despair. "I have no tears left to cry," Ms. Wang said in an interview in
July, squatting in her small living room, her knees bearing thick, plum-size
scabs left from kneeling outside the courthouse to plead for her husband's life.

During the five years he was jailed, Mr. Liu says he was held in a series of
200-square-foot rooms crammed with as many as 26 people. He slept on boards or
on the floor. He was rarely allowed outside and given few opportunities to
exercise. For 16 months both his hands and feet were shackled, he says. He saw
about 30 people sent to their deaths.

"My four limbs could barely move," he said last week, sitting in the hospital
room, his white hair recently died black in an attempt to erase the wasted
years. He said he collapsed shortly after he was released from prison and has
since been hospitalized with severe diabetes and high blood pressure.

Mr. Liu might be dead today had not his longtime Communist Party membership and
social position encouraged the provincial court to look more carefully at his
case, his family and lawyers say. Money also helped. Mr. Liu's family has spent
more than $36,000 on his defense, an enormous sum here.

But the vast majority of people executed in China have neither position nor
money and their cases often get less scrutiny than Mr. Liu's, defendants'
lawyers say.

Part of the problem is that Chinese prosecutors rely less on physical evidence
than confessions to win convictions. According to a recent state press report, a
government investigation found 221 cases of confessions extorted in six
provinces during a two-year period ending in 1999. In 21 of those cases, the
prisoners were tortured to death.

Even if the prisoner shows signs of abuse, prosecutors rarely question how the
confessions were obtained.

Du Peiwu, a policeman in Yunnan Province, was released from death row last
November after a group of car thieves confessed to shooting his wife and another
police officer in April 1998, crimes for which Mr. Du had been convicted despite
a clear alibi and lack of physical evidence linking him to the murders.

During his trial, he dramatically stripped off an outer layer of clothes to
reveal the tattered garments in which he said he had been beaten, hung by his
handcuffed wrists and shocked with a cattle prod to force his confession. The
judges ignored his claim, according to press reports after he was freed.

Though forced confessions are technically illegal, the country's Public Security
Ministry -- whose local bureaus are charged with investigating crimes -- rewards
officers who extract confessions, while usually only lightly punishing those
whose abuse goes too far.

The two policemen who tortured Mr. Du into confessing were sentenced last month
to suspended one-year and one-and-a-half year sentences respectively.

Compounding the problem is an untrained and politically beholden judiciary.

Judges in China are not required to have any legal training, and few do. Most
hold their positions because they have close connections with local government
officials, who are eager for quick convictions.

"Veterinarians, drivers, anybody can get that job if they have good relations,"
said He Xing, a lawyer who teaches at the North China University of Law in
Shijiazhuang, capital of Hebei Province.

People have been executed in recent months for everything from tax fraud to drug
trafficking to stealing diesel fuel.

In China's far western province of Xinjiang, where a small but persistent
separatist movement percolates among the mainly Muslim population, people have
been shot for "separatism," according to local newspaper reports.

Similarly intense spates of executions have played a grisly role in China's
political upheavals over the last half century. In the first few years after the
Communist Party came to power, as many as five million people were put to death,
most after summary trials by makeshift tribunals.

A Third Wave of Executions

This year is the third surge in executions since the end of the 1966-1976
Cultural Revolution.

The first came in 1983 when Deng Xiaoping announced the first "strike hard"
campaign. Large white posters bearing the names and crimes of the condemned were
pasted in public places across the country. Western observers estimated that
more than 10,000 people died that year. The second "strike hard" campaign, the
one that swept up Mr. Liu, began in 1996.

These periodic crackdowns and the widespread use of execution have received
broad popular support in China, despite the likelihood of wrongful convictions.

A 1995 academic survey of 2,661 people found that fewer than 1 percent were in
favor of abolishing the death penalty, while more than 90 percent thought there
should be more.

Their opinions are colored, however, by underreporting of executions in the
press and the government's secrecy about the annual total.

With increasing frequency, prisoners are formally arrested or sentenced at
public rallies. Nearly two million people attended such rallies in Shaanxi
Province in April and May. On June 25, more than 5,000 people attended a rally
in Hubei Province, at which 13 people were sentenced to death, 8 of whom were
executed immediately.

The condemned are normally paraded through town on the beds of open trucks,
before being driven to the execution ground, often trailed by a caravan of
onlookers.

Usually at an open field outside of town, the prisoners are made to kneel and
are then shot at point blank range in the back of the head. Their organs are
sometimes removed on the spot by medical staff and rushed to nearby hospitals
for transplant operations.

The condemned are not allowed to see their families before they die. Once they
are picked up for questioning, they never speak to a loved one again.

Often, the family does not even learn of the final sentence until the execution
is over and they are notified to collect the prisoner's ashes from a crematory.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In China's latest harsh crackdown on crime, unknown thousands
of prisoners have been executed this year, in a judicial process where lawyers
are rare and torture common. These prisoners awaited sentencing in Beijing.
(Agence France-Presse)(pg. 1); During China's latest "strike hard" campaign
against crime, sentences are swift and mercy is rare. Suspects await trial in
Guangzhou, in the south.; Local officials are being pressed for fast
convictions. Handcuffed men parade along a street before their trial in Xuyi
County, Jiangsu Province. (Reuters)(pg. 8) Map of China highlighting Hefei: In
Hefei, a ranking party member was sentenced to die, then spared. (pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); TORTURE (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS
(89%); MURDER (89%); SENTENCING (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TRENDS (75%); EVIDENCE (72%); BOMBINGS
(72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (68%); POLICE FORCES (64%) CRIME AND CRIMINALS;
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SMITH, CRAIG S; JIANG ZEMIN (PRES); LIU MINGIE

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%); GUANGZHOU, GUANGDONG, CHINA (73%)

STATE: ANHUI, CHINA (92%); EAST CHINA (91%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); JIANGSU, CHINA (79%); CENTRAL CHINA (79%); SICHUAN, CHINA
(79%); HUNAN, CHINA (79%); SOUTH CHINA (78%); GUANGDONG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%)

REGION: CHINA;  HEFEI (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             937 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 10, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Another Strange Kabul Problem: Finding a Lawyer

BYLINE:  By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 858 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Sept. 9


In Afghanistan, finding a lawyer is not as easy as opening the Yellow Pages and
letting your fingers do the walking.

For one thing, there are no telephone directories because there are hardly any
phones. For another, there are hardly any lawyers.

Twenty-two years of war have left the telecommunications system a wreck, much as
an exodus of five million Afghans has drained the nation of its professional
class, including its lawyers.

This lack of lawyers is a problem for the eight foreigners charged by the ruling
Taliban with preaching Christianity.

In court on Saturday, the chief justice of the supreme court informed the
accused -- two Americans, two Australians and four Germans -- that the rules of
Islamic law allowed them the choice of defending themselves or hiring a lawyer.

But who would be the right lawyer in a Taliban court of Shariah, or Islamic law?

The chief justice said there was complete freedom in making a selection. The
eight could hire Afghans or non-Afghans, Muslims or non-Muslims.

But common sense might seem to narrow the options. A panel of 18 religious
scholars and legal experts took up half the space in the small chamber. Those
turbaned judges were alternately stroking their long beards and nimbly fingering
their prayer beads. This would not be a good setting for Johnny Cochrane.

"You'd like a lawyer who could say, 'Been there, done that,' but the Taliban
have a unique way of looking at justice, and I don't think that person exists,"
said David T. Donahue, an American consular officer who has come here from the
embassy in Pakistan.

Today, Mr. Donahue sat on the broad lawn of the United Nations guest quarters in
Kabul. Along with him were his counterparts from Australia and Germany as well
the father of one of the accused Americans and the mother of the other. They
puzzled over what to do.

"Since it'd be hard to find someone here, the next idea is to get someone
schooled in Islamic law from another country who speaks Dari or at least
Pashto," said Mr. Donahue, referring to the languages that will be used in
court.

That would seem to indicate a lawyer from next-door Pakistan, one of only three
countries that recognize the Taliban as a legitimate government. American
embassies maintain lists of properly accredited lawyers, but consular officers
are not permitted to recommend a particular one. Clearly, this is a special
case, however. The envoys would like to offer informed advice, if only they
could find informed advice to give.

"We need to be careful because we keep applying our Western standards," said
Alistair Adams, the Australian. "I mean, we know nothing about what will
transpire. Will a lawyer get access to court files? Will he be allowed to ask
questions of witnesses? We don't know."

The afternoon was balmy, the air sweet. The conversation occasionally led into a
joke, though the subject always returned to the dreary. John Mercer of Vienna,
Va., the father of 24-year-old Heather Mercer, and Nancy Cassell of Thompson's
Station, Tenn., the mother of 29-year-old Dayna Curry, were cautious about
offending the Taliban.

"All I want is my daughter back at my side," Mr. Mercer said.

The eight Christians are all aid workers with the German-based charity Shelter
Now. The Taliban's religious police arrested them five weeks ago, at the same
time confiscating Bibles in local languages and "hundreds" of tape cassettes
about the life of Jesus. Sixteen Afghans have also been charged; the Taliban
plan to try them later.

The accused foreigners have been allowed few visitors. The parents have seen
their children three times, but the envoys have been permitted only a single
meeting.

"It's just so key that we get to see them," said Mr. Donahue, obviously
exasperated. "We don't want to draw out this process, but we need to discuss
important questions with our detainees so they can make intelligent decisions."

The trial has already begun, according to the chief justice, Mullah Noor
Muhammad Saqib. Today was its fifth day, though the defendants have appeared
only once. The judges have been sifting through boxes of evidence as well as
determining the format for a second phase of the proceedings, when the accused
will be allowed to appear with their lawyers.

Mullah Saqib has promised a fair trial based on laws taken from the Koran and
other Islamic holy books. That avowed justness may not have precluded an early
decision on his part, however. On Friday, in a sermon at Kabul's largest mosque,
the chief justice said the evidence so far revealed "the height of evil."

"We're used to a neutral judiciary, with two parties on either side putting
their case forward," Mr. Donahue said. "The chief justice has talked about
judicial independence, but I'm not sure that the judiciary here doesn't act as
the prosecution."

He and Mr. Adams pondered something Mullah Saqib told the accused Christians on
Saturday. He said: "We're going to produce evidence and proof that will convince
the world and you people. You will be satisfied with the proof against you."

That statement perplexed them, and as they repeated it, they wondered again: how
would they find a lawyer to explain what it meant?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Western diplomats waited last week while a Taliban official
sought permission for them to attend the trial of eight foreign aid workers who
are charged with preaching Christianity. The diplomats are, from left, Alistair
Adams of Australia, David T. Donahue of the United States and Helmut Landes of
Germany. (Agence France-Presse) Map of Afghanistan highlighting Kabul: Kabul has
been drained of its professional class, including lawyers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); LAWYERS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); TALIBAN (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); ACCREDITATION (76%); SUPREME
COURTS (73%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) CHRISTIANS AND
CHRISTIANITY;  LEGAL PROFESSION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: SHELTER NOW INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); GERMANY (87%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             939 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 12, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Italy and Rest of Europe Differ on Rome Leader

BYLINE:  By MELINDA HENNEBERGER

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1421 words

DATELINE: ROME, Sept. 11


One of the first laws proposed after Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi took
office would change how certain white collar crimes are prosecuted in a way
almost certain to benefit the country's most famous defendant: Mr. Berlusconi.

Of course, the prime minister, Italy's richest man, who has three accounting
fraud cases pending against him, has never exactly been paralyzed by a
preoccupation with appearances.

He owns much of the news media that cover his government, as well as the polling
company that shows him with an unprecedented 70 percent approval rating. One of
his lawyers is the member of Parliament who, as he puts it, "explained" the
corporate crime legislation, expected to become law, to the parliamentary
committee.

In the three months since Mr. Berlusconi took office, his effect on Italian
political life has been outsized. He has not only quieted the uproar that
followed police brutality during the Group of 8 meetings in Genoa, but has also
used the violence and isolated incidents of terrorism in Italy recently to
marshal support for his tough law-and-order agenda.

Tonight, his minister of reforms, Umberto Bossi, of the rightist Northern
League, suggested that the terrorist attacks on the United States had proven the
Berlusconi government right in its more authoritarian line. "One could sense
that terrorism was coming back," he said.

Mr. Berlusconi has also signaled his intention to engineer a series of
fundamental legal and social changes -- adding criminal penalties for illegal
immigration for the first time, for instance, and financing private schools in a
way that is now unconstitutional.

In a Europe governed mainly by the center-left, Mr. Berlusconi's moves have
caused a stir. There is suspicion of his methods, and there is concern about his
mingling of political and business interests.

"He's very authoritarian, and that's creating a lot of problems for Italy," said
Gert Weisskirchen, foreign policy spokesman for legislators from the Social
Democratic Party of Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany.

"The whole European style of democracy demands a clear separation of political
power from the power of the media, but he's thrown out that rule, and put the
whole framework of Italian democracy in danger."

James Walston, a professor of political science at the American University of
Rome, said, "The rest of Europe is extremely worried, but not quite sure how to
respond and hesitant to criticize too forcefully after their experience with
Haider," the far-right Austrian Jorg Haider.

Last year the European Union imposed sanctions on Austria after Mr. Haider's
party joined the government, but the effort backfired, uniting humiliated
Austrians against what they saw as their meddling neighbors.

Italians are already hunkering down in the face of foreign criticism.

Such references as a recent one in the British daily The Guardian, calling Mr.
Berlusconi and his ministers "Italy's telegenic ancient mariner and his
'post-Fascist' crew," are being written off as anti-Italian. "People using that
language are the victim of some prejudice," said Marcello Pera, the well-spoken
president of the Senate, who is a member of Mr. Berlusconi's party, Forza
Italia.

Mr. Pera said Italians were willing to wait and see what the government actually
does rather than being upset by rumors and slurs.

Mr. Berlusconi, meanwhile, is working mostly from off stage, leaving his
deputies to float various proposals and sometimes to take the blame for them. He
himself appears in public only rarely, exuding confidence and repeatedly
referring to himself as Italy's paterfamilias.

Alessandra Mussolini, the granddaughter of the former Fascist dictator, who is
outspoken on women's issues, says nobody minds.

"You know, people want the father," she said. "Yes! So Berlusconi is doing
well."

Elsewhere in Europe, Mr. Berlusconi's apparently casual view of civil liberties
has been seen as another unhappy reminder of why even Mr. Bossi, the formerly
separatist Northern League leader, referred to Mr. Berlusconi as "Berluskaiser"
back in 1994, the last time they were political partners.

But the prime minister seems to be relishing the opportunity to take a tough
line. Last week, he announced that it was his duty, "as a good father of the
family," to protect "holy" Rome from unruly demonstrators during a coming
conference on global hunger.

This plan to move a planned world food summit meeting outside Rome reneged on a
longstanding commitment to the Food and Agriculture Organization in Rome. But it
was barely criticized inside Italy after Mr. Berlusconi said he would not allow
a repetition of the anti-globalization protests in Genoa in July. He said he
made the decision only after considering public opinion -- as measured by a
survey conducted by his own polling company.

Later, one of Mr. Berlusconi's ministers explained that the plan was not only to
move the meeting, but also to ban all demonstrations in the city while the
meeting was going on.

Yet in Italy, the only forceful condemnation of the plan came from another
member of Mr. Berlusconi's center-right coalition, who pointed out that the
government could not suspend Italy's constitutional right to protest -- a
scolding that ended the matter.

Much of the Italian public, though, remains not only outrage-free but openly
admiring of even Mr. Berlusconi's conflicts of interest, which strike a lot of
people as both irrelevant to them and a tribute to their top man's acumen.

Even the left, battered in the election in May, seems remarkably favorable to
the new government.

In an interview, Francesco Rutelli, the opposition leader who lost to Mr.
Berlusconi in the election, leaned back, crossed his foot -- sockless in a pair
of blue suede loafers -- over his knee, and said he had seen nothing that
concerned him.

"I don't think there's any authoritarian trend," he said.

"There are some worries, but if you ask people in a riot if they're in favor of
the police or thugs, they'll say the police. And people do see immigrants as a
bigger threat now."

Perhaps having lived through real authoritarianism, older Italians are less
inclined than other Europeans to throw that word around. Certainly, they are
used to living and thriving with a variety of governments and even, for long
spells, no government.

Still, not everyone in the opposition is relaxed.

"He already has half the TV market, some print, plus book publishing houses,
which makes it hard for us to speak to public opinion," said the former prime
minister Massimo D'Alema. "If the mayor awarded himself the city's garbage
collecting contract, he'd be arrested, but here we have all the political power,
the economic power and the media power held by one person for the first time in
a Western democracy."

Mr. D'Alema is also worried about the law on corporate crimes, passed by the
lower house of Parliament but not yet by the Senate, which seems to benefit Mr.
Berlusconi. It lowers the penalties for accounting fraud and raises the bar for
prosecutors by forcing them to prove not only wrongdoing but also damage.

Even Gaetano Pecorella, Mr. Berlusconi's lawyer and the legislator who explained
the proposed legislation in parliamentary committee, said it would probably help
his client.

"The opposition has argued that this law was passed in order to favor
Berlusconi," Mr. Pecorella said in a phone interview.

"This is, of course, not why the law was passed by Parliament," he said, "but it
is true that a judge could, according to the new law, decide that since there is
no clear damage done, these cases could be closed."

Mr. Berlusconi has also used the handful of bombs that have gone off around the
country since the Genoa meeting to consolidate his political position. None of
the bombs caused serious injury. After today's terrorist attacks in the United
States, the government position is that it was ahead of the curve.

In a recent interview, Carlo Taormina, the under secretary of the interior and
yet another Berlusconi lawyer -- better known for defending the former SS
captain Erich Priebke for his role in the slaughter of hundreds of civilians
outside Rome in 1944 -- said he saw the possible resurgence of terrorism in
Italy as a real threat.

He said that "in the last years the climate has been somewhat lax" in monitoring
potential terrorists, adding, "Organizations protesting against the state were
not sufficiently controlled." He described the Genoa episode as "a call to arms"
for terrorists, and added, "That's understood by the police and the security
force."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, elected in May, is being
criticized by some Europeans for his business dealings, for his ownership of
much of Italy's news media and for what is considered his authoritarian style.
(Agence France-Presse)(pg. B1); An antiglobalization protester tried to ward off
club-swinging riot policemen in Genoa in July. Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi
has quieted the uproar that followed the police crackdown, and one of his
cabinet ministers defended it yesterday, saying, "One could sense that terrorism
was coming back." (Reuters)(pg. B8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); CORPORATE WRONGDOING (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
POLITICS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); ETHICS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES
(78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%); ACCOUNTING (72%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (71%); IMMIGRATION (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (50%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  FRAUDS AND SWINDLING;  ETHICS;  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (56%)

PERSON: SILVIO BERLUSCONI (92%); GERHARD SCHRODER (50%) HENNEBERGER, MELINDA;
BERLUSCONI, SILVIO (PRIME MIN)

COUNTRY: ITALY (99%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); AUSTRIA (90%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: ITALY;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             940 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: THE MIDEAST;
Arabs Voice Somber Tones And Speculate On a Reprisal

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Sept. 13


Reports of the scale of the carnage in the United States sobered reactions
across the Middle East today. Although some Arabs said they hoped that the toll
would provoke a hard assessment by the United States of its policies in the
region, others braced for possible retaliation.

"The initial reaction was, 'Now they feel what we go through,' but that was
before people understood the enormity of this," said Dr. Mustafa B. Hamarneh,
director of the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan.

There were also widespread calls for the United States to examine closely what
inspires fringe elements to undertake such diabolical acts against American
targets.

The general consensus was that unquestioned backing for Israel against
Palestinians and uncritical support for autocratic Arab governments would
continue to inspire new attacks against the United States.

"Terrorism will not disappear if one terrorist or 10 terrorists are arrested,"
Jihad al-Khazzen wrote in his column in Al Hayat, an Arabic daily in London.
"Terrorism will only disappear when the reasons are cured. Again and over and
over again, there is no excuse for terrorists and their crimes. But the American
policy, which denies the principles of justice, human rights, democracy and
self-determination, which were once American slogans, helps terrorists to
exist."

The United States should at least pause to consider what inspires such hatred in
a region where it was once beloved, other commentators said.

"The strike is painful," Faisal Salman wrote in a Lebanese daily, Al Safir. "But
it may push the American people to ask, 'Why are the terrorists targeting us?' "

Many doubted such a change would occur soon, given that the United States has
been attacked before and would probably avoid revamping its Middle East policy
in a way that might indicate weakness.

"The long series of attacks and hostility against American interests in the past
did not have any impact on American policy," Imad Fawzi Shueibi, a professor of
political sociology at Damascus University, said. "So this is not expected to
change."

The specter of fallen buildings prompted expressions of sympathy from people
often at odds with the United States. The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, the most
established fundamentalist group here, called the attack inhumane.

Many Arabs had been hoping that some last-minute disclosure would link the
attacks to anarchist groups in the United States. But with increasing signs that
indicated Middle East ties, specifically to the violent Muslim fundamentalist
organization founded by Osama bin Laden, there was an expectation that the
United States would seek revenge.

Many people said they expected Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to undertake
the coalition-building that led up to the Persian Gulf war. This time, people
said, they anticipate that it will be directed against Mr. bin Laden and the
Taliban government in Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); FOREIGN POLICY (89%); FUNDAMENTALISM (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); SOCIOLOGY (75%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%);
HIJACKING (73%); TALIBAN (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%); DESERT
STORM (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED AIRLINES; AMERICAN AIRLINES

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (87%) ;MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%);
LONDON, ENGLAND (76%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MIDDLE EAST (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); ISRAEL (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); JORDAN (79%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%);
LEBANON (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             941 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Congo: Death Sentences In Coup Plot

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 112 words


Seven soldiers have been sentenced to death for plotting a coup and trying to
kill Laurent D. Kabila, the late president, state radio reported.

The charges relate to an attempt to kill Mr. Kabila last October; none of the
defendants were accused of involvement in the assassination of the president in
January by his bodyguards. Of the other 59 soldiers and 14 civilians tried in
the case, 40 were acquitted and the rest given prison terms ranging from 5 to 25
years. The leading human rights group in the country said the accused had been
tortured while in prison and that the proceedings before a military court were a
"flagrant violation of the right to a fair trial."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (91%); COUPS (91%); ASSASSINATION (91%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
MILITARY COURTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%); TORTURE (88%);
ACQUITTAL (85%) ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS

PERSON: KABILA, LAURENT

COUNTRY: AFRICA (90%)

REGION: CONGO

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             942 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The Day Before Tuesday

BYLINE:  By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1441 words


Being human, you first think of those you love. Then, if you are lucky enough to
find them safe, you grieve for those who are lost -- their faces still smiling
out expectantly from downtown's new quilt of mass death, the vast patchwork of
fliers headlined MISSING.

Then you grieve for the city whose once indelible profile was mutilated, just
like that, on one beautiful September morning.

After that you think of your country, and another kind of shock sets in.
Something has been lost there too, but not all of what's gone may be a cause for
mourning.

We live in a different America today than we did only the day before Tuesday.
Yes, as it's incanted hourly, we have lost our untroubled freedom of movement
that we consider a birthright. We have lost our illusion of impregnability. But
beneath those visceral imperatives an entire culture has been transformed. This
week's nightmare, it's now clear, has awakened us from a frivolous if not
decadent decadelong dream, even as it dumps us into an uncertain future we had
never bargained for.

The dream was simple -- that we could have it all without having to pay any
price, and that national suffering of almost any kind could be domesticated into
an experience of virtual terror akin to a theme park ride. The first part of
that dream had already started to collapse with the fall of the stock market,
the rise in unemployment and the evaporation of the surplus, well before
terrorists achieved the literal annihilation of the most commanding edifice of
American capitalism.

But the dream's second part was still going strong right until Tuesday. The
previously planned cover that People magazine scrapped that afternoon to make
way for the thousands dead was yet another story about shark attacks. Never mind
that the rate of shark attacks has been routine this year, and that sharks are a
statistically minuscule cause of mortality at any time. (There have been at most
two deaths in any year since 1990.) The great shark scare of 2001 -- already
speeding to the dustbin of history, along with such other summer ephemera as
Gary Condit, Robert Blake and Lizzie Grubman -- was typical of an age in which
we inflated troublesome but passing crises into catastrophes that provided the
illusion of a national test of character, or some kind of moral equivalent of
war, but in fact were for most of us merely invitations to indulge in cost-free
hyperventilation.

From the rampaging fears over school shootings following Columbine (at a time
when U.S. juvenile homicide rates were falling to a 33-year low) to the
protracted bellicosity surrounding Elian Gonzalez to the California blackout
that didn't happen at the start of this summer, we've been looking for a Pearl
Harbor. But always a Pearl Harbor of few casualties -- always a Pearl Harbor
that could readily be brought to "closure."

In our pop culture, this same impulse for vicarious, finite warfare could be
seen in the rise of TV reality programs like "Survivor," "Fear Factor" and
"Lost" in which we thrill to the spectacle of contestants competing in war games
-- always with the understanding that no one is really going to get hurt in a
prime-time slice of "reality" that must move the sponsors' products. On the day
before Tuesday, after all, "survival," "fear" and "lost" had different meanings
than they did the day after.

Our desire for vicarious battle, the one commodity a stock market bubble
couldn't buy, also explains the fetishization of World War II. This week
everyone has been comparing Tuesday's events to Pearl Harbor, but only two
months ago Pearl Harbor had been sanitized as "Pearl Harbor." In that Hollywood
version of the attack, seen by countless teenagers who may now have to fight an
actual war, the enemy seems polite, the violence looks like the digitalized
carnage of video games, and a harrowing American defeat gets an upbeat "victory"
coda that minimizes and vastly shortens the ensuing years of hardship, loss and
heroism that were required for the Allies to win a war.

At the high end of what I suspect is the now-defunct World War II craze is HBO's
brand new series, "Band of Brothers," whose relentlessly publicized premiere
preceded this week's tragedy. "There was a time when the world asked ordinary
men to do extraordinary things," went the ad copy, which took pains to remind us
that the miniseries was "based on the true story." In a way, the pitch enshrines
the complacency of the day before Tuesday, with its assumption that the prospect
of civilians having to make any kind of extraordinary effort for a national good
was as far in the past as the knights of the Round Table.

That fat, daydreaming America is gone now, way gone -- as spent as the
tax-rebate checks, as forgotten as the 2000 campaign's debate over
prescription-drug plans, as bankrupt as our dot-com fantasies of instant
millions, as vaporized as the faith that high-tech surveillance and weaponry
would keep us safe. The America that saw Disney's "Pearl Harbor" is as far
removed from the America that was attacked on Tuesday as the America that
listened to Orson Welles's "War of the Worlds" was from the America attacked at
Pearl Harbor. "Instead of the next big thing being some new technological
innovation or medical breakthrough," wrote David Rieff of our post-Tuesday
nation in The Los Angeles Times this week, "the next big thing is likely to be
fear."

For the America that is gone, the America that could have it all and feel no
pain beyond that on cable TV, George W. Bush was the perfect president. We could
have a big tax cut (or at least some of us could) along with increases in
spending for better schools and defense -- and all without having to dip into
the Social Security stash. We could lick our energy crisis -- does anyone still
remember the energy crisis? -- while still guzzling gas. Faith-based
institutions would take care of the poor and unfortunate. No serviceman would
have to spend any more time in harm's way than Mr. Bush (or most political
leaders of his generation, regardless of party) did during Vietnam.

Since Tuesday, there has been a towering leader in view -- Rudolph Giuliani --
and, in a lucid and rational Colin Powell, potentially another. The big-three
network anchors have upheld pre-Drudge journalistic standards, offering
reportage rather than blather and rumor, doing their part to steady a country
that still gathers at the tube, not the computer screen, at a time like this. In
all this we've been blessed, for there were 48 hours during which the president
was scarcely visible or articulate.

The country is rooting for Mr. Bush, as it must. We need him to become the
president of the America we have now. This means in part a U-turn in style --
more face time with his fellow citizens, less scripted rhetoric from the
alliterative phrasemakers who stick pretty words in his mouth (as they did
Tuesday night) that sound as if they were written by the same glib stylists who
gave him "home to the heartland" and "communities of character."

But style is the easy part. What's more pressing are changes in content. Many of
his administration's previous policies are either irrelevant or contrary to a
war-bound nation's interests. Education and tax cuts are no longer our top
priority. The unilateralism the administration has practiced in walking away
from the Kyoto accord on global warming and the ABM treaty is anathema to the
building of an international coalition to fight a war. Decisions that are "the
most profound of our time" (as his handlers described his stem-cell verdict) can
no longer be dragged out with weeks of self-aggrandizing spin.

But most of all, Mr. Bush will have to prepare the nation for something many
living Americans, him included, have never had to muster -- sacrifice. In his
pronouncements thus far, the president has expressed sorrow and vowed to "whip"
evil, but surely he will soon have to prepare Americans to give up far more in
wartime than curbside check-in at the airport. Anyone who lives in New York has
seen this week how many Americans are prepared to do this. That's the example
our mayor and governor set, and it's the example thousands of New Yorkers have
followed with open hearts.

Though polls show that we overwhelmingly support the idea of going to war, they
don't indicate whether we understand that idea. The killers who attacked us on
Tuesday had an all too ruthless eye for appraising how little we knew on Monday.
We have no choice now but, as a horror-struck Hamlet said after being visited by
the ghost, to "wipe away all trivial fond records" from the table of memory, and
hope that our learning curve will be steep.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%);
SHOOTINGS (72%); HOMICIDE (72%); HIJACKING (70%); TRENDS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(65%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (64%); CRIME RATES (62%); SCHOOL VIOLENCE (62%);
VIOLENT CRIME STATISTICS (61%); AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (50%) TERRORISM;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  UNITED STATES POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS

PERSON: FRANK RICH (52%) RICH, FRANK

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             943 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sept. 9-15;
Approval on U.N. Post

BYLINE:  By Stephen Kinzer

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 120 words


Thanks to the climate of solidarity in Washington, President Bush's nominee for
ambassador to the United Nations, John Negroponte, sailed through a confirmation
hearing with a vote of 14-3, and seems certain of quick confirmation by the full
Senate.  But some senators suggested that Mr.

Negroponte sought to minimize human rights abuses in Honduras, where he was
ambassador in the 80's. During that time, scores of people were abducted,
tortured and killed by military and police units. "I did not believe then, nor
do I believe now, that these abuses were part of a deliberate government
policy," he said at the hearing. "To this day I do not believe that death squads
were operating in Honduras."   Stephen Kinzer

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); TORTURE (87%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); PUBLIC POLICY (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (68%); POLICE FORCES
(53%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (88%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             944 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Nigeria: Former Ruler Won't Talk

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 98 words


The country's former military ruler, Abdulsalami Abubakar, defied a summons
ordering him to appear at a panel investigating three decades of human rights
abuses.

General Abubakar, who ran Africa's most populous country for 11 months in 1998
and 1999, had been called to answer questions about the death in police custody
under his rule of the leading opposition politician, Moshood Abiola. Mr. Abiola
appeared to have won the 1993 presidential elections but the military annulled
the election and put him in jail. He died in July 1998, less than a month after
General Abubakar took power.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RULE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); ELECTIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (83%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (83%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: AFRICA (94%); NIGERIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             945 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE COURTS;
Government Has Power to Curb Some Freedoms

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 866 words


The Constitution does not give the government sweeping emergency powers to limit
civil liberties. But legal experts say the courts have effectively ceded to the
government vast powers to limit many freedoms when the nation's security was
threatened in the past.

As a result, the debates in Washington and state legislatures about limiting
civil liberties to battle terrorism could be decisive because many of the new
limits may never receive rigorous court review.

"The courts have always interpreted the limits on government action much
differently during times of national crisis," said Michael C. Dorf, a professor
of constitutional law at Columbia Law School. "So as a matter of practical fact,
the government has emergency powers."

Attorney General John Ashcroft is pressing Congress for a series of new
anti-terrorism laws, including measures that would expand electronic
surveillance and the search powers of law enforcement officials. In New York,
Attorney General Eliot L. Spitzer has called for a law expanding wiretap
authority, and the State Senate passed such a bill on Monday. Other states are
expected to consider similar measures.

While courts will retain the power to hear challenges to any restrictions on
civil liberties that are part of the new laws, lawyers say the president's
martial language and popular sentiment will prompt judges to defer to government
officials in their reviews of such measures as expanding wiretapping efforts.

History is full of examples of the courts approving limits on civil liberties
when the country was perceived to be in danger.

"The greater the threat, the greater the leeway the courts will give
government," said Peter H. Schuck, a professor at Yale Law School.

In one case that arose in World War I, a group of Socialists were arrested for
distributing pamphlets that urged peaceful opposition to the draft. The
demonstrators were tried and convicted under the Espionage Act, which included
provisions barring efforts to obstruct enlistment in the armed forces.

The arrests were upheld by the Supreme Court in 1919, which issued a landmark
opinion by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., who was often a champion of First
Amendment freedoms. During war, he wrote, statements that might be protected in
ordinary times could be barred.

"The most stringent protection of free speech," Justice Holmes wrote, "would not
protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic."

In an atmosphere of cold war anxieties in 1951, the Supreme Court approved the
conviction of leaders of the Communist Party for advocating the overthrow of the
government.

The opinion concluded that the need to bar even threats of violence against the
country was "a substantial enough interest" to limit First Amendment freedoms.

Some precedents approving limits on civil liberties are now widely viewed to
have been constitutional errors that would not be repeated today. Many legal
experts say the Supreme Court's approval of the internment of Japanese-Americans
during World War II has been discredited. They say courts would now strike down
any such categorical measures against Arab-Americans that might be contemplated.

But some lawyers say the more extreme court decisions of the past show how
easily judges can be swept up in a warlike mood. "Those cases are now seen as
mistakes," said David Cole, a professor at the Georgetown University Law Center.
"But we repeat our mistakes rather than learn from them."

Some constitutional experts say the public in recent decades has come to view
many civil liberties -- like the right to exchange political views -- as central
to American life.

For that reason, some experts say courts might now be more willing to be
critical of the government than they have in the past.

Erwin Chemerinsky, a constitutional law expert at the University of Southern
California, said the Supreme Court's decision in the 1971 Pentagon Papers case
showed that modern courts could be independent of government officials. In that
case the court refused the government's request to block publication of secret
revelations about the Vietnam war for reasons of national security.

Justice Potter Stewart wrote that publication could be stopped only if it would
"surely result in direct, immediate and irreparable damage to our nation or its
people."

That test might be met by some of the measures now being considered, like
intercepting computer communications among suspected terrorists. But Mr.
Chemerinsky said he thought the courts would not rubber-stamp more extreme
measures. Wholesale strip searches at airports, he said, would probably fail in
the current Supreme Court.

"This court is institutionally deferential," Mr. Chemerinsky said, "but I don't
think this is a court that will say, 'Anything goes.' "

But other constitutional law experts said the current justices would be
influenced by the atmosphere of war.

Randolph M. McLaughlin of Pace University Law School in White Plains said the
debate in the coming weeks about what measures were necessary to protect the
country might be the last meaningful debate on the issue.

"This Supreme Court," Mr. McLaughlin said, "will ratify the laws that are passed
during this period."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WIRETAPPING
(90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW
SCHOOLS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPROVALS (89%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); AGENCY
RULEMAKING (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); ESPIONAGE (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(77%); COLD WAR (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); HIJACKING
(76%); POLITICS (75%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); WORLD WAR I (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(71%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%); MISSING PERSONS (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%);
ARRESTS (63%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (58%); ASIAN AMERICANS (53%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  PRIVACY

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (58%) ;GLABERSON, WILLIAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             947 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Gaza Strip, Anger at the U.S. Still Smolders

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1179 words

DATELINE: GAZA, Sept. 19


Two symbols of Palestinians' anger against the United States hovered over Gaza
City shortly after noon on Saturday. The city went to the streets, all heads
craned up. The two black dots above were American-made Apache helicopters,
searching for targets.

A boy on a bicycle, his eyes more on the sky than the road, struck a cab.
Children ran out of school. Five rockets from the helicopters crashed into a
military intelligence headquarters of the Palestinian Authority -- one of three
official buildings struck that day in the Gaza Strip.

A cease-fire has now taken tenuous hold, but the mood remains dark.

"We are against terrorism," said Abd al-Raof Abu Daka, a captain with the
Palestinian police force in the southern town of Rafah, who watched as his
headquarters was hit. "We don't like Americans to die. But the Israelis are
hitting us with American weapons."

Anger, even hatred, of the United States as the perceived best friend of Israel
is strong in the Gaza Strip.

Few Palestinians in the strip, whose unresolved status fuels conflict in the
Middle East, go so far as to say they feel the joy of other Palestinians filmed
celebrating after the terror attacks last week in New York and Washington.

But they look at the misery of their lives and cannot help feeling that the
United States has a hand in it. The two sides are killing each other, but nearly
every day for the last year, young Palestinians have died in intensified clashes
with Israeli soldiers and, increasingly, in Israeli assaults on Palestinian
areas.

Here in the isolated territory of Gaza, the Israelis have sealed off the border
for almost a year.

That has made Israelis feel safer, but it has made Palestinians feel that they
live in a giant prison of poverty and despair, which makes a ripe breeding
ground for fanatics and suicide bombers.

Baram al-Faramawy, 17, shrieked away with giggles from Israeli soldiers who were
firing back bullets at youths like him throwing stones near Rafah last weekend.
Out of breath but full of bravado, he stopped amid shops eroded by bullet holes
and said he would happily do worse, and to Americans if he had the chance.

"I am willing to go and explode myself," he said.

Eyad Sarraj, a psychiatrist and human rights activist in Gaza, said most
Palestinians, like most people around the world, were horrified at the enormous
loss of civilian life in New York and Washington. But he added that United
States support of Israel, particularly during the yearlong surge in fighting,
had earned America few friends here.

"Many people around the world," he added, "including this place, are expressing
a kind of evil spirit of joy: that the Americans, at last, are tasting from the
same cup. We are backward and ignorant, but this has been helped by the American
policies in the Middle East."

As with most of the military strikes, Israeli officials said the attacks on
Saturday had been retribution for Palestinian violence, in this case grenades
thrown at the main crossing from Israel into Gaza, at Erez, wounding two Israeli
soldiers.

Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, has drawn parallels between the attack on
the United States and Israel's long experience with violence. All suicide
bombers are terrorists, he says, whether in Jerusalem or Manhattan. He has
called Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, "our bin Laden."

There is some debate in Gaza -- home to the radical Islamic groups Hamas and
Islamic Holy War -- over whether the attacks in the United States should force a
change in tactics.

Ziad Abu-Amr, a prominent Palestinian politician, said most Palestinian leaders
had agreed in recent days that suicide bombings inside Israel should be
suspended.

"This would be helping Israel," he said of further bombings now. "And unless you
are ignorant and stupid, you wouldn't do these things under the circumstances."

One who disagrees is Sheik Abdallah al-Shami, spokesman for Islamic Holy War, a
group founded in the 1970's that has carried out so many suicide bombings that
he said he could not count them.

"There is a big difference between what is going on inside occupied Palestine
and what is going on inside the United States," he said, strongly disavowing any
connection between his group and the men who carried out the attacks in the
United States. "We don't have the weapons that Israel has."

Here he drew a connection to the United States and the fighter jets it sells to
Israel. "They have F-16's," he said of the Israeli military. "We have F-16's
that are our bodies, and that's what we use by exploding."

Public opinion polls show that since the so-called second intifada, or uprising,
began last September, extremist groups like Islamic Holy War and Hamas have
gained more support.

Even before the new fighting, the Gaza Strip, where some 700,000 of the
Palestinian residents live as refugees, was exceptionally poor and a hotbed for
extremism. But since last September, almost none of the 40,000 Gazans who worked
in Israel have been able to cross the border. The United Nations estimates that
the unemployment rate has shot up to about 50 percent from 25 percent. The
poverty rate, defined as those living on less than $2 a day, has risen.

Hamed al-Batnijy, 74, a farmer, is letting some of his fields lie fallow because
trucks cannot take his tomatoes and cucumbers to their usual markets in Israel
and Jordan.

Nazir Ghabir, 43, said he had succumbed recently to the despair of not having
enough money for his 12 children by pouring about five gallons of gasoline on
himself and threatening to light a match. His neighbors stopped him.

Last week, Muhammad al-Madhon, 13, dyed his hair to cover up gray growing in,
which his mother insists is from the stress of constantly hearing Israeli
warplanes over Gaza.

"Our husbands are sitting at home," said his mother, Mariam, 52, whose husband,
for years a construction worker in Israel, has not worked for a year. Like
nearly every Palestinian interviewed in Gaza, she said she felt bad for the
people who had died in New York. But she added that the attack was, in the end,
America's own fault.

"America is the one who caused it, because of what it is doing," she said.
"America is a superpower. They are the strongest. They should stand beside us.
Why do we get all this pressure? This pressure is generating a volcano."

In Gaza, death has become routine. "This is normal," said Raed al-Balawi, 18, as
yet another funeral for a young man shot while throwing stones passed by. Flags
waved, and men fired guns in the air and hauled the body through the streets on
a green army cot. "Sometimes it's even more crazy," he said.

The dead boy's father, Khalil Hasona, said his son, Ramzy, 17, had been shot
while throwing stones on three occasions in the last six months, twice in the
same leg and then, on Friday, through the heart.

"The first time he was shot, he promised he wouldn't go anymore," Mr. Hasona
said. "But he was shot again, so I knew he was going again. I beat him up."

Still, he was proud of his son -- proud, he explained, that Ramzy was a martyr.

"But," he added, "I hope he is the last martyr."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Palestinian boys in Gaza throwing stones at an Israeli
checkpoint near Rafah. One youth declared, "I am willing to go and explode
myself." (James Hill/The New York Times) Map of Israel highlighting Gaza: A
cease-fire has taken hold in Gaza, but the mood is dark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HELICOPTERS (77%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); POLICE
FORCES (73%); MISSING PERSONS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PALESTINIANS

PERSON: FISHER, IAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL
(97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             948 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 21, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: SAFETY AND LIBERTY;
Groups Fault Plan to Listen, Search and Seize

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


The Bush administration's plan to rewrite immigration and surveillance laws
after last week's terrorist attacks drew new criticism today from both the left
and the right after a detailed analysis showed the plan would also create
sweeping federal powers to gather evidence and share it within the government.

Early drafts of the plan showed that the Justice Department wanted broad new
wiretapping authority and the power to deport immigrants suspected of terrorism
without any court review of the evidence.

The administration's full legislative package, which was sent to Congress on
Wednesday, went further. It also sought authority for the government to seize
evidence from terrorism suspects, including DNA samples, to seize the assets of
foreign governments suspected of aiding terrorists and to gain wider access to
educational records and tax returns.

After analyzing the dozens of specific proposals overnight, many lawmakers and
privacy and civil liberties groups said today that they were alarmed by the
scope of the proposed legislation.

More than 150 groups across the political spectrum, from the American Civil
Liberties Union on the left to the Gun Owners of America and the Rutherford
Institute on the right, joined in a statement calling on Congress to avoid hasty
action on antiterrorism legislation in response to the attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon.

"We should resist the temptation to enact proposals in the mistaken belief that
anything that may be called antiterrorist will necessarily provide greater
security," the statement said. "We should applaud our political leaders in the
days ahead who have the courage to say that our freedoms should not be limited."

The Justice Department has defended the proposals, insisting that they uphold
basic constitutional freedoms while providing important new tools to the
government in dealing with the threat of further, even more deadly terrorist
attacks.

The department suggested today, however, that it was open to negotiations with
lawmakers over the package. Asked about complaints that some proposals may
abrogate civil liberties, Mindy Tucker, the department's spokeswoman, said
today, "Nobody argues that these concerns shouldn't be taken seriously."

Other legal experts and scholars suggested that the administration was acting
responsibly in seeking broader law enforcement powers and that concerns about
civil liberties were largely misguided in the emergency created by last week's
attacks.

"The notion that the government is the oppressor and is just trying to use this
occasion to deprive citizens of our liberties is distressing and uninformed,"
said Amitai Etzioni, a political scientist at George Washington University.
"Even if the only thing you are concerned about is our rights, who are you going
to look to in order to protect our rights if not the government?"

The Bush administration's proposals would allow law enforcement agents to do the
following:

*Obtain voice-mail messages by warrant rather than go through the more
cumbersome procedure of applying to a court for wiretap authority.

*Use information collected by foreign governments against American citizens even
if the information was obtained by techniques that would have violated the
Fourth Amendment's prohibition against illegal searches and seizures.

*Compel Internet service providers to turn over credit card information on
suspected terrorists through use of a subpoena, rather than go through the
process of obtaining a court order.

*More freely exchange evidence with intelligence agencies, including information
obtained by wiretaps.

*Compel suspects to give DNA samples in a wider variety of terrorism
investigations.

*Place wiretaps in national security investigations for one year without needing
additional court approval, up from the current 90-day period. Unlike wiretaps in
criminal cases, the subjects of national security wiretaps need never be
informed that they had once been under surveillance.

The proposal would also rewrite laws to place new limits on the storage of
biological agents that could be used as terrorist weapons. Current law prohibits
possession of substances specifically "for use as a weapon." Under the rewritten
law, storage of the agents would be barred for "any purpose other than a
prophylactic, protective or peaceful purpose."

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who is chairman of the Judiciary
Committee and a leading critic of parts of the administration's proposal, said
today that he remained hopeful that the administration would modify its proposal
and avoid a conflict.

Mr. Leahy, who has prepared an alternative package of antiterrorism legislation,
said through a spokesman that senior staff aides from the committee and the
Justice Department met through the day in an effort to reach a bipartisan
compromise.

The groups that joined today in pleading against rash action on new
antiterrorism laws included many organizations that would normally have nothing
in common.

At a news conference, the coalition released a petition calling on the
administration "to consider proposals calmly and deliberately with a
determination not to erode the liberties and freedoms that are at the core of
the American way of life."

The groups signing the petition include People for the American Way, Americans
for Tax Reform, Amnesty International, Common Cause, the American Muslim
Council, the Eagle Forum, the Free Congress Foundation, the National Black
Police Association, Human Rights Watch, the Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights and the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.

Grover Norquist, a staunch conservative who is president of Americans for Tax
Reform, said he had joined the coalition with some of his traditional liberal
adversaries because he feared Congress was moving too quickly. Mr. Norquist said
he had sent a letter to every member of Congress, pleading with each not to vote
"for legislation you have not actually read."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); SEARCH & SEIZURE
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); ASSET FORFEITURE (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); SCIENCE NEWS (77%); SCIENCE &
TECHNOLOGY (77%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (76%); WIRETAPPING (73%); REFUGEES (73%);
POLITICAL SCIENCE (72%); DNA (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); TAXES & TAXATION
(70%); MISSING PERSONS (69%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON
BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(55%); GUN OWNERS INC (55%); RUTHERFORD INSTITUTE (55%)

PERSON: SHENON, PHILIP; LEWIS, NEIL A; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             951 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberals' Ideology Challenged by Urge to Fight Terrorism

BYLINE:  By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 638 words


For many liberals in New York, these are confusing times, as they try to balance
their ideals about what the nation should be with their fears of a crisis that
threatens to dwarf issues like civil liberties and racism.

Some believe that Americans for now have to put aside their differences on
issues like supporting the president or accepting racial profiling in order to
identify terrorists. Others argue that the worst outcome of the terrorist
attacks would be for Americans to follow authorities blindly into war or to tamp
down their criticism of social ills.

In dozens of interviews across the New York area, ordinary men and women, as
well as those active in organizations working for social change, talked about
what it meant to be liberal after Sept. 11.

"We have to cherish our rights as leftists, as liberals," said Maurice Berger,
45, a cultural and social critic who lives on the Upper West Side and is a
senior fellow at the New School University. "I don't want to see the country
turn its back on civil liberties, when people's phones are tapped or people are
pulled off planes because their skins are dark."

But Betsy Llanos, 32, a sales clerk at the Columbia University bookstore, who
calls herself "very liberal," said, "We wouldn't have so many problems if we
would inspect these people from other countries."

New York City has historically voted Democratic and has been more supportive of
abortion rights, labor unions and gays than much of the rest of the nation.

It is a measure of the times that with the mayoral primary today -- and the
efforts to extend Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's tenure -- even many liberals say
Mr. Giuliani has been great in the last two weeks.

"If we knew that we were going to have a tragedy like this every six months, I'd
love to have Giuliani," said Bill Rosenthal, a Hunter College professor who was
attending a peace rally at Columbia University yesterday. "People are forgetting
what happened before Sept. 11 and the problems we had," he said, mentioning his
particular dislike of Mr. Giuliani's school budget cuts.

Many liberals are worried that patriotism will be narrowly identified as the
province of some groups or some political ideologies. At the New York Urban
League in Harlem, its president, Dennis M. Walcott, said there were many blacks
and dark-skinned Hispanics proudly waving flags and yet wincing at the idea that
Arab-Americans could be racially profiled the same way they are.

On the Columbia campus, some students who think of themselves as liberal said
they sensed a change in acceptance of public criticism of the country or
President Bush.

"Three weeks ago, it was O.K. to be a dissident" said Jason Paez, 20, a junior
majoring in economics. "Now, it's our duty to stand together. We are facing a
lot worse than a president with a low I.Q. and delusions of grandeur."

Many who are otherwise dovish said their feelings about military response were
complicated because the enemy is not so clear and this time the personal losses
hit so close to home.

"I think if you raise the political consequences of the attack, people see you
as heartless," said Andrew Stettner, the executive director of Jews for Racial &
Economic Justice.

Mr. Stettner said that although he saw a continuing robust liberal commitment to
civil liberties, "I've been surprised that a lot of people are willing to
support a level of military action that they would not have accepted before."

Along those lines, Judith Stallwert, 51, a secretary in Montclair, N.J., said,
"In college, I joined movements against the war in Vietnam, but I don't think I
would join protests this time, for this war. I don't want to see people die and
I don't want to raise my children during a horrible time. On the other hand, I
don't want my grandchildren to one day live in a world with terrorism and fear."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Columbia University students held a peace rally yesterday,
although some called for closer inspection of foreigners. Peter Marcuse, above,
a professor, was a speaker. (Photographs by Richard Perry/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (92%); TERRORISM (91%); RACE & RACISM (90%); POLITICS (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); RACIAL PROFILING (77%); US PRESIDENTS
(76%); HIJACKING (76%); BUDGETS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARAB AMERICANS (72%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (71%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (71%); MAYORS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); SCHOOL BUDGETS
(67%); AIRLINES (66%); BOOKSTORES (51%); LABOR UNIONS (50%); ABORTION (50%);
BUDGET CUTS (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  MISSING PERSONS;  UNITED
STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  BLACKS;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT;  DISCRIMINATION;  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (82%)

PERSON: RUDY GIULIANI (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%); RICK PERRY (50%) LEE, FELICIA
R

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             952 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Disputes on Electronic Message Encryption Take On New Urgency

BYLINE:  By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 877 words


The attacks on the World Trade Center have reawakened a debate on how strongly
the public -- and by extension terrorists and other criminals -- should be able
to encrypt their electronic messages.

The technology of scrambling data and messages has become a crucial element of
computer security for businesses and consumers alike. Officials of law
enforcement and intelligence agencies have long warned lawmakers that they were
unable to break the strongest encryption products, and that crimes eventually
would be committed that might otherwise have been prevented.

"We can give our code breakers all the money in the world, but the technology
has outstripped the code breakers," said Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New
Hampshire, who has met with Attorney General John Ashcroft and other officials
to get encryption limits on the legislative agenda.

The F.B.I. has not said publicly whether the hijackers who attacked the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon even used encryption to cloak their
communications. But Philip R. Zimmermann, the creator of one of the most popular
encryption programs, known as P.G.P., for Pretty Good Privacy, said that he
would be surprised if this were not the case.

"I just assumed somebody planning something so diabolical would want to hide
their activities using encryption," Mr. Zimmermann said.

Senator Gregg said he would not make a specific legislative proposal until he
saw what Mr. Ashcroft included in the final version of his broad anti-terrorism
bill. But he said he wanted to see legislation to order encryption companies
that sell products in the United States to include a back door that would allow
government access when "a bad guy or a terrorist" uses encryption. "Law
enforcement agencies, after pursuing proper law enforcement restrictions, will
have access" to the encrypted data, he said.

Proposals for such systems, known as "key escrow" because a key that unlocks
encrypted messages would be stored and made available to law enforcement, were
the subject of bitter debate in the mid-1990's. The Clinton administration
proposed a technology popularly known as the "Clipper Chip" that would provide
back-door access for law enforcement, and also restricted the export of strong
encryption products by American companies.

Over time, however, the administration's two-pronged encryption initiative
failed. Companies and consumers said they would not use a product that had
government access built in, and argued that criminals surely would not; the
trove of escrowed keys, they argued, would itself become a prime target of
hackers and spies.

Also, encryption companies were able to show that foreign competitors were
already producing strong encryption products that rendered any export ban
useless. By the end of the Clinton administration, the Clipper proposal was dead
and the export controls were largely lifted.

To experts like Dorothy E. Denning, a professor of computer science at
Georgetown University who supported the Clinton administration's key escrow
efforts, the issue was properly settled and should not be reopened.

"We had all those debates a few years ago at a time when we could rationally
debate it -- the consensus really emerged," said Professor Denning, "that
regulating encryption wasn't the right thing to do."

But Senator Gregg argued that the issue should, in fact, be reopened. "This is
an attempt to find a functional approach to this that both sides can agree
with," he said.

He is recommending that Congress create a "quasi-judicial" body appointed by the
Supreme Court that would handle subpoenas for encryption keys to avoid one
objection to the original Clinton administration plan. But he also acknowledged
that criminals and terrorists would find alternatives to any escrowed system.

"Nothing's ever perfect," he said. "If you don't try, you're never going to
accomplish it. If you do try, you've at least got some opportunity for
accomplishing it."

For Mr. Zimmermann and many other programmers who have brought encryption
products to market, the Sept. 11 attacks brought reflection on the balance
between the good uses of encryption and the bad.

"Did I re-examine the question? Of course I did," he said. "But after some
reflection, the conclusion is still the same."

"I have no regrets," said Mr. Zimmermann, whose product was distributed free of
charge via the Internet. "I did this for human rights 10 years ago, and today
every human rights group uses it. And I feel very good about that."

A newspaper article last week suggested that Mr. Zimmermann felt guilty about
P.G.P., but he said the account, which appeared in The Washington Post,
misrepresented his views; he had only said that he felt bad that his technology
might have been used for evil ends, "the way that the Boeing engineers felt bad
that their airplanes were used" to commit the attacks, he said.

Last week a group of 150 civil liberties organizations from across the political
spectrum urged lawmakers to consider with caution any measures that might reduce
the rights of citizens. The coalition stressed what, in a statement, it called
the "need to consider proposals calmly and deliberately with a determination not
to erode the liberties and freedoms that are at the core of the American way of
life."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CRYPTOLOGY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); HIJACKING (90%); EXPORT TRADE (89%); EXPORT CONTROLS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (89%); COMPUTER CRIME (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); DATA
SECURITY (77%); ONLINE SECURITY & PRIVACY (77%); COMPUTER & INTERNET LAW (77%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(76%); ESPIONAGE (76%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (76%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (74%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (72%); INTERNET PRIVACY (72%);
INVESTIGATIONS (71%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  CODES (CIPHERS);  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  COMPUTER SECURITY;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%) ;FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

PERSON: JUDD GREGG (76%) ;GREGG, JUDD (SEN); ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN);
ZIMMERMANN, PHILIP R; SCHWARTZ, JOHN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             954 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberties In a Time Of Fear

BYLINE:  By David Cole;  David Cole is a professor at Georgetown University Law
Center.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the wake of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, nothing is more important than
ensuring that Americans are protected on our home soil. But in doing so, we must
not let the symbolic need to do something in a time of fear lead us to sacrifice
our constitutional commitments to freedom.

The Bush administration has already proposed giving government greatly expanded
powers, including broader authority for electronic surveillance and the ability
to detain and expel immigrants not for their acts but for their associations.
Others have suggested that ethnic and racial profiling of Arabs and Muslims may
now be justified.

Yet no one has made an adequate case that our intelligence agencies failed to
detect the Sept. 11 plot because we lacked surveillance power. In fact, the
government already has extraordinarily broad powers to wiretap, investigate,
detain, deport and prosecute terrorists.

History suggests caution, for in times of fear we have virtually always
overreacted, loosely targeting whole groups of people for suspicion rather than
narrowly focusing on those engaged in criminal conduct. Such responses now would
be likely to prove counterproductive in the fight against terrorism.

Eighty years ago, the United States was shaken by a series of politically
motivated bombings, including an explosion at the home of Attorney General A.
Mitchell Palmer. In the "Palmer raids" that followed, federal agents in 33
cities arrested 6,000 people, most of them immigrants, on suspicion of
connections to radical causes. Suspects were beaten, detained in intolerably
crowded "bullpens" and forced to sign confessions.

During World War II, the government interned 120,000 citizens and immigrants,
not because of any individualized determination that they posed a threat but
solely because they were of Japanese ancestry.

Facing the Soviet threat in the 1940's and 50's, we imposed criminal and civil
penalties on individuals for mere association with the Communist Party, even if
those dealings were limited to the party's lawful activities, like labor
organizing.

And in 1996, after the Oklahoma City bombing, Congress authorized the
Immigration and Naturalization Service to deport immigrants on the basis of
secret evidence and made it a crime to provide any support to any foreign
organization labeled as a terrorist group by the State Department, even if that
support is used solely for lawful activities.

In retrospect, we have recognized that most of these responses were mistakes.
Congress paid restitution to the Japanese internees in 1989. The anti-Communist
laws were eventually declared unconstitutional or repealed.  And President Bush
himself has expressed concern about the I.N.S.'s practice of using secret
evidence.

Yet in the immediate grip of terror and anger, voices of restraint are not
easily heard because while we all feel the fear created by an attack, we don't
all bear the burdens on civil liberties imposed by new law-enforcement
responses.

We must resist antiterrorism measures that we would not be willing to impose
uniformly. Airport security measures imposed on all travelers, for example, are
likely to reflect a proper balance between security and freedom, because we all
have a stake in maintaining that balance. But measures selectively targeted at
particular groups or individuals are more subject to abuse.

What's more, guilt by association and ethnic profiling encourage sloppy
intelligence gathering and impede security efforts. Over the last 15 years, for
example, the I.N.S. has selectively detained Arab aliens on secret evidence for
their political affiliations; this has made the Arab-American community
suspicious of federal intervention, which in turn can make the job of
identifying real threats even more difficult.

Precisely because the terrorists violated all principles of decency and law, we
must hold fast to ours. As the Supreme Court said in a 1967 decision that
invalidated an anti-Communist law, "It would indeed be ironic if, in the name of
national defense, we would sanction the subversion of one of those liberties --
the freedom of association -- which makes the defense of the Nation worthwhile."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); WIRETAPPING (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
POLITICS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); AVIATION SECURITY (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (76%); LEGISLATION (75%); RACIAL PROFILING (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (71%); WORLD WAR II (71%); RACE & RACISM (71%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); MISCONDUCT (70%); FINES &
PENALTIES (68%); MISSING PERSONS (68%); AIRPORTS (60%); AIRLINES (60%); RELIGION
(55%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (51%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;
DEPORTATION;  UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) COLE, DAVID

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             955 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 26, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE RUSSIANS;
Schroder Urges Milder View Of Moscow Role in Chechnya

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Sept. 25


Western nations today gave a first indication of the price they may be ready to
pay for Russian support in the fight against terrorism as Gerhard Schroder, the
German chancellor, said the world should moderate its view of Moscow's actions
in Chechnya.

Speaking during a visit to Berlin by the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin,
Mr. Schroder said: "Regarding Chechnya, there will be and must be a more
differentiated evaluation in world opinion."

Germany, among other Western states, has long criticized Russia for severe human
rights abuses in Chechnya, including the indiscriminate bombing of civilian
targets, torture and murder. Moscow has put sharp restrictions on independent
press coverage in Chechnya and on visits of international agencies like the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

"Silence on Chechnya is the price for this new solidarity," a senior member of
Mr. Schroder's party said tonight. "And I don't think Germany will be the only
country to pay it." Mr. Putin committed Russia this week to supporting the
United States in anti-terrorist operations in Afghanistan, including opening
Russian airspace to relief missions, taking part in some search-and-rescue
operations and arming anti-Taliban forces inside Afghanistan.

Mr. Putin called for "the complete political and ideological isolation" of
terrorists through international cooperation, and he supported President Bush's
call for a global freeze on the assets of known terrorist organizations.

In a news conference and a speech to the German Parliament, Mr. Putin said that
"with terrorists, we cannot come to terms, we must leave them no peace," and he
argued that the rebellion against Russian rule in the province of Chechnya is
also sponsored by Islamic militants and terrorists. Russia has long described
its enemy in Chechnya as "terrorists."

Mr. Putin, fluent in German, became the first Soviet or Russian leader to speak
to the German Parliament, and he read his speech in German. It was an
extraordinary moment, not least because the Bundestag is still adorned with the
graffiti of the victorious Soviet soldiers who entered Berlin in 1945 at the end
of World War II. Mr. Schroder emphasized his close ties to Mr. Putin and praised
him for offering Russian support "on all levels in the fight against terrorism."

This is Mr. Putin's first trip to a NATO country since the Sept. 11 attacks on
America, and it reflected his longstanding interest in Germany, where he served
as a K.G.B. spy in the East German city of Dresden from 1984 to 1990. Mr. Putin
is expected to visit the city, where he is believed to have worked with
scientists trying to defeat the Reagan administration plan for a "Star Wars"
missile defense, on Thursday.

Security was extremely tight today, with police sealing off important government
buildings and using metal detectors to screen anyone who entered.

Mr. Putin defended the Chechen war, arguing that Chechens had set off terrorist
bombs in Moscow, killing hundreds, and saying that "religious fanatics, as they
did in Chechnya, have made shameless attacks on neighboring Dagestan."

He asserted that "international terrorists have openly -- very openly --
expressed their desire to create a fundamentalist state between the Black and
Caspian seas, the so-called Caliphate, or United States of Islam," but then
hastened to say that Islam should not be confused with terrorism.

Good relations with Russia are popular in Germany, which still sees itself as a
bridge between east and west. Mr. Putin's speech, which concentrated on Russia's
desire to be part of Europe while maintaining good relations with America, was
greeted almost rapturously by the members of Parliament, reminiscent of Mikhail
Gorbachev's first visit here.

The Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, also meeting Mr. Schroder in Berlin,
warned today that any solution to global terrorism could only come about with a
Middle East peace. "Without solving the Palestine problem with U.S. and European
help we will see a new generation of terrorists threatening world security," Mr.
Mubarak said in a news conference here. "It's a breeding ground for terrorism.
No state will be able to protect itself."

Mr. Mubarak repeated his support for American efforts against terrorism, which
had touched Egypt, too, he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); METAL DETECTORS (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%);
MISSILE SYSTEMS (75%); WORLD WAR II (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); TORTURE (75%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (69%); MISSING PERSONS (66%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (60%);
RELIGION (50%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  GERMANY-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-RUSSIA;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;  EGYPT-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-GERMANY

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY & COOPERATION IN EUROPE (56%)

PERSON: GERHARD SCHRODER (92%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); HOSNI
MUBARAK (56%) ERLANGER, STEVEN; SCHRODER, GERHARD (CHANCELLOR); PUTIN, VLADIMIR
V (PRES); MUBARAK, HOSNI (PRES)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); BERLIN, GERMANY (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); GERMANY (96%); UNITED STATES (94%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); EGYPT (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ISRAEL
(79%); EUROPE (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GERMANY;  RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);
EGYPT;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             957 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Move: Room for Guns and Butter?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 123 words


To the Editor:

We talk about a long and arduous war, but it is far more laborious than we
realize. There is one real and effective solution: the liberation of Afghan
women.

The Taliban limit the education of women as one of a number of human rights
abuses against them.

As Americans, we aim to create a world in which diversity is not only tolerated
but also celebrated. But we as a world are woefully short of this goal. Yet
there is one major element: women. Women who have hope for the future, who feel
valued as people and as human beings and who feel a sense of controlling their
own destiny.  These women do not send their sons to die for the sake of killing
the innocent sons of others.

MARGARET M. MCCARTHY
Baltimore, Sept. 24, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WOMEN (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (56%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             958 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: WASHINGTON TALK;
Bush Law-Enforcement Plan Troubles Both Right and Left

BYLINE:  By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


After the terrorist attacks, there was a bipartisan rush to provide the
administration with emergency aid money, new military authority and financial
relief for the airlines. But Congress is taking a second look -- and a third and
a fourth -- at the administration's proposals for new law enforcement powers to
fight terrorism.

Asked about the strikingly different response, Representative Dick Armey, the
House majority leader and a conservative Republican, said this week:

"This is a tougher area for us to look at than areas that involve money. This is
about how we equip our anti-espionage, counterterrorism agencies with the tools
they want while we still preserve the most fundamental thing, which is the civil
liberties of the American people."

In fact, the concerns over civil liberties -- and the desire to keep careful
checks on the government -- run deep on Capitol Hill, although they are
expressed with the utmost care these days, given the magnitude of the losses and
the anger at the terrorists who caused them.

Everyone begins their remarks by vowing that law enforcement authorities should
be given the tools they need. But there are questions and second thoughts that
the balance between civil liberties and national security in the
administration's proposal is not quite right.

And those concerns are bipartisan, voiced by those on both the left and the
right.

The result is that legislation that Attorney General John Ashcroft asked
Congress to pass in a matter of days last week is now the subject of intense
negotiations among Democrats, Republicans and the administration. Some
provisions will apparently be dropped, others substantially revised.

The Bush administration's proposal seeks more authority to detain suspected
terrorists and those suspected of aiding and supporting them; broader powers to
track communications over telephones and computers, and greater powers to seize
assets and attack the "financial infrastructure" of suspected terrorist
organizations.

Lawmakers say they hope to move legislation through the House Judiciary
Committee next week, at the least -- still a very fast pace, by Congressional
standards -- and give the administration major new enforcement powers very soon.
But they also say it is critical to reach a broad consensus first.

"I'm not going to bring a bill to the floor that's going to be attacked by the
left and the right," said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who
heads the Senate Judiciary Committee, "because it's not going to go anywhere."

Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, is worried about the
administration's proposal to allow the indefinite detention of immigrants if
they are deemed to be threats to national security.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, shares those objections.

Representative Barney Frank, a liberal Democrat from Massachusetts, wants to
ensure that, if the government gets the new surveillance powers proposed, there
are also new remedies against those in the government who release
"inappropriate, personal" information.

At a hearing this week, Mr. Frank recalled the lengthy wiretapping of the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. by the Federal Bureau of Investigation under Director
J. Edgar Hoover.

Mr. Armey voiced a similar concern but reached back to a different precedent,
the gathering of F.B.I. files on Republican officials by an aide in the Clinton
White House.

"There are a lot of members that are acutely aware of the fact that the agencies
don't always exercise due diligence in the way they handle information," Mr.
Armey said. "I draw my case by raw F.B.I. files apparently being turned over to
political operatives at a moment's notice, and that sticks in a lot of people's
craw in terms of the security of who you are in your life and what right the
government has to share that information."

Representative Bob Barr, a conservative Republican of Georgia, has been one of
the House Judiciary Committee's most vocal critics of the administration's
legislation. Mr. Barr argues that some provisions in the proposal -- for
example, tougher new money laundering statutes to deal with terrorist
organizations -- are areas of consensus and could be passed very quickly. But
others, he says, need careful scrutiny, like allowing a wider use of material
obtained in grand juries.

Representative Maxine Waters, a liberal Democrat from California, declared at
the House committee's hearing this week that while many lawmakers had "bent over
backwards" to rally behind the administration, "we have to draw the line" when
it comes to civil liberties.

Ms. Waters said she feared that the definition of terrorism in the bill was too
wide. She concluded, "I find myself agreeing with Mr. Barr, and that is very
unusual."

Representative Bobby Scott, a Virginia Democrat on the House Judiciary
Committee, was pleased with the decision by Representative F. James
Sensenbrenner Jr., the Wisconsin Republican who is the panel's chairman, to
postpone action on the bill until next week.

"The first victory was the idea that we're actually going to deliberate and take
some time before we report a bill," Mr. Scott said.

He noted that it was not clear whether some of what the administration wanted
was constitutional.

Some legislative staff members say the indefinite detention of immigrants will
clearly be changed in the final bill. Other provisions are also undergoing
substantial rewriting.

Grover Norquist, the influential conservative strategist, said his regular
Wednesday meeting of advocates heard this week from Mr. Barr on civil liberties.
Mr. Norquist said he was pleased that the process had slowed.

"Things are slowed down now to the point where there's an honest, serious
discussion about what points are useful and what are not," Mr. Norquist said.

"I'm very encouraged that the civil liberties left has not taken the position
that the administration doesn't need any additional powers," he said, "and I
haven't heard anything from the establishment that whatever additional powers
you want to give the government are all right with me."

The buzzword on Capitol Hill is balance.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft, right, met Senator Patrick J.
Leahy on Tuesday before a hearing on the administration's antiterrorism plan.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)(pg. B5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); LEGISLATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); ESPIONAGE
(89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); ASSET FORFEITURE (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
CONSERVATISM (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); LIBERALISM (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%);
WIRETAPPING (67%); MISSING PERSONS (62%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  CIVIL RIGHTS;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  ASSETS, FROZEN;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (58%); ARLEN SPECTER (58%); TED KENNEDY (58%); BARNEY
FRANK (57%) TONER, ROBIN; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             961 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Act Of Terror Reshapes The Globe

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1562 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


EN route to Spain to marry Prince Pedro of Castille in 1348, England's Princess
Joan foolishly paused in plague-ridden Bordeaux, fell ill and died, dooming an
English-Spanish alliance that could have remade Europe. A Serbian madman
murdered an Austrian archduke in 1914, and the echoes of that deed -- World War
I, an imperial carving-up of the Middle East, totalitarianism's rise -- still
resound nine decades later.

Tragedy is history's pivot. The question now, as a single breathtaking act of
horror cracks old alliances and snaps together unlikely new ones in their place,
is whether a modern madman has swung history onto a new axis, with ramifications
far from his own intentions.

Underscore "whether," for this is, literally, history in the making.

But to grasp how profound these tectonics are -- and how unpredictable -- look
first at Moscow. It is no exaggeration to say that the events of Sept. 11 may be
delivering what Peter the Great, the empress Catherine and President Boris N.
Yeltsin could not: a Russian state anchored solidly in the West, for the first
time in a millennium. By shattering the notion of a sole American superpower
that could single-handedly build global stability and prosperity, those events
may have removed the biggest obstacle to Russia's final integration with the
West.

President Vladimir V. Putin, until now everyone's friend and no one's ally,
jumped decisively off the fence last week with a string of offers to assist the
Western-led campaign against terrorism. Most striking, he dropped Russian
objections to the deployment of American and other NATO counterterrorism forces
in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and elsewhere in Russia's Central Asian sphere of
influence.

A month ago, the notion of allowing American troops on former Soviet soil would
have been politically suicidal; even after the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Putin's own
defense minister declared it unthinkable.

Mr. Putin not only did it, but hinted that Russians might eventually join the
battle, depending on how relations with the West develop.  "Nobody has asked
us," he told German journalists. "We can't be more Catholic than the Pope."

Mr. Putin, of course, was not being munificent. His commitments sprang from a
calculation that suppressing terrorism furthers Russia's own interests --
particularly in Chechnya, where Islamic extremists lead a guerrilla revolt, but
also along the nation's Muslim southern border, where extremism threatens to
take root.

But that is exactly the point. Students of history who call themselves realists
say that commitments based on vital interests, despite differences about ideals,
can be the most profound.

And the Sept. 11 attack opened opportunities for Mr. Bush too. He and his
advisers have long derided nation-building and the advancement of human rights
abroad. Under President Clinton, those goals hurt relations with Russia, China
and other less than democratic countries whose support the Bush administration
now wants. Since Sept. 11, the logic of war has freed Mr. Bush to make those
missions expendable as he pursues something the Russians can truly understand: a
no-holds-barred fight against enemies.

Indeed, President Putin extracted a fee for Russia's support. Within days, the
United States and Germany lined up behind a Kremlin demand that rebels in
Chechnya lay down their arms, pointedly omitting the West's standard criticism
of human-rights abuses there by Russian troops. The United States also hopes to
accelerate Russia's admission to the World Trade Organization, the American
trade representative, Robert O. Zoellick, said here on Friday.

Most of all, Mr. Putin himself has begun pushing publicly for a Western
unthinkable: Russian admission to NATO. And while that seems unlikely any time
soon, some other formal security arrangement between the West and Moscow seems
likely -- and given the developing campaign against terrorism, desirable.

"I don't want to overstate it, to make it too poetic," Robert Legvold, a
Columbia University historian and Russia scholar, said. "But this is the first
time since Dec. 7, 1941, in which the United States and Russia have in fact had
potentially a common enemy, which allows us to band together and overlook those
things that divide us. In those days, very fundamental things divided us, and in
the end we couldn't sustain the relationship. This may be the first case in
which we have what might be called a transcendent common enemy."

And, he might have added, no deep ideological fight over how to organize the
human race.

The enemy has opened the way for reassessments in other alliances and rivalries
around the world. Consider Pakistan, the American ally that essentially
engineered the Taliban's rise to power in Afghanistan and now finds itself in an
excruciating bind. Before Sept. 11, American policy there focused on one goal:
averting nuclear war between India and Pakistan.

Since Sept. 11, nothing has been the same. India has come out forcefully against
terrorism in Afghanistan. Pakistan, its military and intelligence ranks riddled
with Taliban sympathizers, struggles to maintain its American alliance without
triggering a coup or popular revolt. In Washington, economic sanctions stemming
from the nuclear competition have been lifted, and even part of Pakistan's
foreign debt burden eased. But how the new partnerships with Washington will
complicate -- or perhaps clarify -- the long-range goal of pacifying the
subcontinent is anybody's guess.

Or consider Iran. Long branded by Washington as the world's leading state
sponsor of terrorism, Tehran turns out to have a redeeming quality: it despises
Osama bin Laden and the Taliban's extreme fundamentalism almost as much as the
United States does.

NOW, American policy makers have been debating whether to try once more to thaw
relations with Iran. And Iran's theocratic rulers, for all their stinging words
about America, have not ruled out joining an antiterrorist coalition, provided
the United States does not lead it.

Or consider the former Soviet states that border Afghanistan -- Uzbekistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and others -- many of which are racked by their own
pro-Taliban insurgencies. Last July, a State Department official warned that
their aid could be in jeopardy because many are led by autocrats. Since Sept.
11, Turkmenistan has opened its airspace to American humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, and Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan have agreed
to open airfields to Western military forces.

Finally, consider the common element in these equations, the United States.
Before Sept. 11, the White House had unilaterally abandoned or rejected a string
of international accords and placed dues payment to the United Nations on a back
burner.

Since Sept. 11, Congress has suddenly ratified the long-delayed nominee for
ambassador to the United Nations and moved to pay arrears to the United Nations.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, who stands out in this administration as a
multilateralist, has swept past go-it-aloners to the forefront of American
foreign policy. Missile defense seems to have lost its center-stage position at
the White House.

In one way or another, the depth and permanence of these changes depend to a
large extent on the United States and Russia. Mr. Putin appears to see Europe as
Russia's eventual home, but Europe looks to the United States for guidance.

American-Russian relations have been adrift for at least eight years, plagued by
Washington's deep mistrust of the Russian commitment to democracy and Moscow's
bottomless suspicion that America seeks, in its heart, to rule the world.

That suspicion still runs deep in the Kremlin and in Russian society at large,
and there is no guarantee that Mr. Putin can tame it. And Russia's alliance with
the West could yet prove a feint.

On Washington's part, there is no guarantee that the White House can navigate a
foreign-policy minefield in which too much prudence renders its war on terrorism
impotent, and too little unleashes a backlash from Moscow and others against
American hegemony.

Still, it is a moment to stand in awe before the potential for change. It is
possible that a shared commitment to eradicating terrorism could override
mistrusts and salve a host of other irritants -- including with China, which has
its own problems with Islamic separatists and is a potential ally in any
international campaign against terror.

Dmitri Trenin, a Carnegie Endowment scholar whose recent book, "The End of
Eurasia," examines Russia's prospects for a westward turn, likens Russia's
position now to Britain's after World War II.

The British came late to the realization that they were no longer an empire and
could not conduct a global policy without American help. The events of Sept. 11,
Mr. Trenin said, give Russia a unique opportunity to gracefully put aside its
own superpower legacy and assume its new logical role: as an important, if
junior, partner in a Western alliance stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok.

"It's really a godsend situation, in which the Russians could turn to the West
on an issue on which the West, Russia and China basically have the same
position," he said. "This was a tragedy out of all proportion imaginable in the
post-cold-war era. But if it leads us to take a more realistic view of ourselves
and the world around us, then it would be truly historic."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BRITISH ROYALTY (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (86%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (86%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (85%); WORLD WAR I (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
HISTORY (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); WAR ON TERROR (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(68%); ARMED FORCES (63%); RELIGION (60%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (60%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (79%); BILL CLINTON (55%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); SPAIN (92%); ENGLAND
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPE (91%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%);
ASIA (79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); GERMANY (78%); AUSTRIA (73%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             981 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 11, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Bosnian Serb Chief to Face Genocide Charges in The Hague

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 10


The former president of the Bosnian Serb republic surrendered today to face
charges of genocide and other war crimes committed primarily against Muslims in
Bosnia in 1991 and 1992.

The indictment was unsealed after the former president, Biljana Plavsic
(pronounced beel-YAHN-ah plahv-shich), turned herself in this morning to the
United Nations war crimes tribunal for the countries that once made up
Yugoslavia. She flew Tuesday to The Hague, where the tribunal is based, from the
Bosnian Serb town of Banja Luka.

Ms. Plavsic, 70, becomes the first woman, and the most senior Bosnian Serb
official to face charges for atrocities committed during the ethnic warfare that
followed the breakup of Yugoslavia.

At a news conference today in The Hague, Carla del Ponte, the tribunal's chief
prosecutor, said the charges against Ms. Plavsic encompassed genocide, crimes
against humanity, violations of the laws and customs of war, and grave breaches
of the Geneva Conventions.

Ms. del Ponte said Ms. Plavsic "surrendered voluntarily, having been advised of
the existence of an indictment against her."

Ms. Plavsic, a biologist who once taught at Sarajevo University, was a deputy of
the former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic. Her prominence in the high
command of the Bosnian Serb armed forces and her anti-Muslim rhetoric during the
Bosnian war fueled reports that she was on a list of people who had been
secretly indicted.

Dr. Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, were previously indicted
by the tribunal and are still fugitives.

"I think everyone is very interested in what she might testify to, because she
was at the highest level of the Bosnian Serb leadership," Fred Eckhard, the
United Nations chief spokesman, said at a news briefing here, but he declined to
speculate how her testimony would affect other Serb leaders.

Richard C. Holbrooke, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, said
he knew Ms. Plavsic from diplomatic efforts in securing peace in Bosnia. He said
NATO troops in Bosnia had the option of seizing her but that she opted to
cooperate with the tribunal. "I think it is another sign to Karadzic that he is
running out of time," Mr. Holbrooke said. "She knows a lot and she's going to
tell."

Ms. del Ponte said the sealed indictment had been drawn up last April 7 and that
it accused Ms. Plavsic of jointly committing crimes with Momcilo Krajisnik, a
wartime speaker of the Bosnian Serb Parliament, who was arrested last April. Ms.
del Ponte said she wanted to put Ms. Plavsic and Mr. Krajisnik on trial
together.

Ms. Plavsic and Mr. Krajisnik are known to hate each other.

Ms. Plavsic is scheduled to appear before the tribunal on Thursday to hear the
details of the charges against her and enter her plea. She is being held at the
tribunal's detention center, Mr. Eckhard said.

The newspaper Nezavisne Novine in Banja Luka reported today that the American
ambassador to Bosnia, Thomas Miller, informed Ms. Plavsic last month that she
had been secretly indicted by the war crimes tribunal, and that she offered to
go to The Hague after the Orthodox Christmas, which was last Sunday.

When she learned of the indictment, Ms. Plavsic decided to surrender to the
tribunal, her lawyer, Krstan Simic, said, because "she is aware that this is the
only place she can legally prove her innocence or guilt."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); GENOCIDE (92%); INDICTMENTS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES
(87%); TESTIMONY (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); RELIGION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); POLITICS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%);
ARRESTS (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (57%) WREN, CHRISTOPHER S; PLAVSIC, BILJANA; KARADZIC,
RADOVAN; MLADIC, RATKO

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); NETHERLANDS
(94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             993 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

January 7 - 13;
Bosnian Serb Surrenders

BYLINE:  By Christopher S. Wren

SECTION: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 95 words


A former president of the Bosnia Serb republic has become the first woman
indicted for atrocities committed during the ethnic slaughter that followed the
breakup of Yugoslavia.

Biljana Plavic, a prominent nationalist in the Bosnian Serb leadership during
the war, surrendered to the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

She pleaded not guilty to charges of genocide and crimes against humanity. Ms.
Plavic, 70, could provide damning new revelations of the Serb campaign to
violently purge Bosnia of its Muslim and Croat inhabitants.   Christopher S.
Wren

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Biljana Plavic. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); NEWS BRIEFS (86%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             996 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2001 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Killing for the Glory of God, In a Land Far From Home

BYLINE:   By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2810 words

DATELINE: PANJSHIR VALLEY, Afghanistan


Muhammad Khaled Mihraban, a polite, soft-spoken 26-year-old Pakistani, thinks he
has already killed at least 100 people. Maybe more; he isn't really sure.

"My goal was not to kill," he said. "But I had a line to follow, an Islamic
ideal. I knew that Muslims needed their own country, a real Islamic country."

Mr. Mihraban found that country when he came to Afghanistan in 1992. Having
decided "to consecrate my life to jihad" while studying Islamic law at Punjab
University in Lahore, he said, he joined a Pakistani militant group that was
fighting India in the disputed province of Kashmir. His training took place in
Afghanistan.

"We learned how to plant mines, how to make bombs using dynamite and how to kill
someone quietly," he recalled.

A gifted student, he was soon asked to train others in group camps near Khost.
"But I wanted to act, not teach," he explained. So after a stint waging war in
Kashmir, he returned to Kabul to fight alongside the Taliban forces that control
most of the country.

Mr. Mihraban, who was captured by the rebels fighting the Taliban in northern
Afghanistan, said in an interview in a bleak prison that if he were released, he
would "stay right here and fight again for Kabul." If he were asked to do so, he
said, he would go to London, Paris or New York and blow up women and children
for Islam. "Yes, I would do it," he said quietly, without hesitation.

If the international terrorism that has haunted Americans for the last decade
has a home, it is Afghanistan, the place that comes closest to the extremists'
ideal of a state ruled by the strict code of Islamic law.

Afghanistan is an inspiration, an essential base of operations, a reservoir of
potential suicide bombers and a battle front where crucial ties are forged. It
is also, American officials say, where Osama bin Laden is experimenting with
chemical weapons.

Participants in nearly every plot against the United States and its allies
during the last decade have learned the arts of war and explosives in Afghan
camps, authorities say, including the defendants in the 1998 bombings of two
American Embassies in East Africa.

The Central Intelligence Agency estimates that as many as 50,000 to 70,000
militants from 55 countries have trained here in recent years. The agency says
the Taliban permit a wide range of groups to operate in Afghan territory, from
the Pakistani militants who trained Mr. Mihraban to Mr. bin Laden's organization
Al Qaeda (Arabic for The Base). Middle East officials said that as many as 5,000
recruits have passed through Mr. bin Laden's camps.

American and Middle Eastern intelligence officials believe that Mr. bin Laden
maintains a network of a dozen camps in Afghanistan that offer training in small
arms and in explosives and logistics for terrorist attacks. The officials said
the embassy bombings, which killed more than 200 people, were rehearsed on a
model built to scale at one of Mr. bin Laden's Afghan camps.

One camp, according to those officials, is educating a new generation of
recruits in the uses of chemicals, poisons and toxins.

Within the last year, trainees at the camp, which is called Abu Khabab, have
experimented on dogs, rabbits and other animals with nerve gases, the officials
said. Recruits have also fashioned bombs made from commercially available
chemicals and poisons, which have been tried out on animals tethered to outdoor
posts on the camp test range, according to surveillance photographs and
informers' reports.

"The role of Afghanistan is now absolutely clear," said Michael A. Sheehan, the
former coordinator of the State Department's Office of Counterterrorism, who in
late December became assistant secretary general for peacekeeping operations for
the United Nations. "Every Islamic militant we've looked at goes scurrying back
there for sanctuary. Afghanistan, and to a lesser extent Iran, are the only
major sanctuaries left."

The Training
Where Recruits Study Tactics and Explosives

Middle Eastern officials estimate that in the last six months, more than 100 men
recruited by Mr. bin Laden's and affiliated groups have been trained at the
camp, which is named after the Egyptian militant who runs it, Midhat Mursi --
whose nom de guerre is Abu Khabab.

The camp is part of a large complex of such training sites known as Darunta,
about eight miles from Jalalabad, an Afghan eastern provincial capital, down a
dusty road that runs atop an old stone dam of the same name. According to
Western and Middle Eastern officials, a cache of chemicals is stored in the
reinforced caves of nearby mountains and naturally protected underground
tunnels.

Abu Khabab's graduates in the last year include Raed Hijazi, the
Jordanian-American whom Jordan has convicted in absentia as a ringleader of the
failed plot to attack tourists in Amman during the millennium celebrations.

Mr. Hijazi, whom the Syrians arrested in October and sent back to Jordan, has
described his advanced training on explosives to Jordanian investigators,
according to Western officials. He has told investigators that a key lieutenant
of Mr. bin Laden helped arrange his trip to Afghanistan.

A rare reference to the explosives training at the Abu Khabab camp appears in
the sealed indictment of Nabil abu Aukel, a Palestinian arrested last June by
Israel.

Israel has accused Mr. Aukel of collaborating with Hamas, or the Party of God,
the militant Palestinian organization, and several Arab-Israelis on plots aimed
at military and civilian targets inside Israel. The indictment, a copy of which
was provided by Steven Emerson, an American expert on Islamic terrorism, states
that Mr. Aukel, a Palestinian, received advanced training in explosives using
chemicals at the Abu Khabab camp in March 1998.

The camp leader warned Mr. Aukel "never to discuss the nature of the training,"
the indictment says. Israeli officials said Mr. Aukel's arrest marked first time
Israel had uncovered an Al Qaeda cell inside its borders.

At the urging of the United States and Russia, which also sees a threat from
Afghan training camps, the United Nations recently imposed the harshest economic
sanctions on Afghanistan to press the Taliban not only to evict Mr. bin Laden
and his senior entourage, but also to close down all the militant camps to
foreigners.

The Taliban, or "students of Islam," who rule all but a sliver of Afghanistan,
deny that they harbor terrorists or those who train them. Wakil Ahmad Mutawakil,
the Taliban foreign minister, said the pressure to expel Mr. bin Laden was both
"insulting and useless." Mr. Mutawakil denied in an interview in November that
Mr. bin Laden was financing the Taliban, saying he had become a "very poor man."
Mr. bin Laden, the foreign minister said, could not possibly be planning
terrorist operations since his activities were "closely supervised by Afghan
guards."

Mr. Mutawakil recently invited a New York Times reporter to visit any location
in Afghanistan identified by Western officials as part of Mr. bin Laden's
network.

But Taliban officials in Afghanistan ultimately barred the reporter from
visiting any of the locations. At Darunta, the reporter was stopped several
miles from the gates of the complex. After five days in Kabul, Jalalabad and
environs, the reporter and her Afghan-American interpreter were politely
escorted to the border and told to leave Afghanistan.

The Inspiration
Afghanistan's Appeal As a War Zone

The Afghan cause has inspired several generations of young men determined to
wage holy war. Thousands came here in the 1980's to fight the Soviet forces in
response to a fatwa, or religious order, from leading Islamic scholars.
Thousands more have come since then to help the Taliban expand their power, or
to be trained for jihads elsewhere.

Taliban officials boast that they have imposed true Islamic rule, cleansing
Afghan society of Western influence. Since their capture of Kabul in 1996, they
have among other things banned education for girls and most work for women, and
instituted harsh punishments for blasphemy, playing cards, watching television,
listening to music and trimming one's beard.

Mr. bin Laden arrived in Afghanistan in 1996 after he was expelled from Sudan.
American officials and Afghan opponents of the Taliban say their loyalty to him
has been well earned. The officials say Mr. bin Laden provided the Taliban with
some of the cash they used to buy off local warlords in their march to power.

His financial support of the Taliban is said to continue. Several diplomats and
aid workers in Afghanistan estimated that he had put up millions of dollars --
one diplomat's estimate was $40 million -- to rebuild roads destroyed in the war
against the Soviets and the ensuing civil war.

Mr. bin Laden is also said to be providing the Taliban with military help.

Ahmed Shah Massoud, commander of a group of rebels in northern Afghanistan, said
in an interview at his headquarters that he was fighting a unit of soldiers
specially trained by Mr. bin Laden, the 55th Brigade, which includes some 700
Arabs and other militant Muslims. Mr. Massoud said he had captured brigade
members, whom he called the most seasoned fighters.

Despite financial aid and weapons from Iran and Russia, Mr. Massoud's alliance
lost ground to the Taliban last year. His forces are now confined largely to the
northern region's impregnable Panjshir Valley with its soaring, snow-tipped
mountains and dazzling vistas.

Mr. Massoud said his soldiers were holding some 1,200 Taliban prisoners, 122 of
them foreign Muslims. There are Pakistanis, an immigrant to Pakistan from the
Burmese province of Arakan, Yemenis, Britons and Chinese Uigurs, among others.
Interviews with several of them illustrate the attraction that Afghanistan still
has for militants around the world.

Mr. Mihraban, the young Pakistani, comes from the town of Chaghi, in the
province of Baluchistan. His gentle eyes and polite manner gave no hint of the
fervor that had led him to this stark prison in the harsh, craggy mountains of
the Hindu Kush.

His trip to Afghanistan began when he joined Harakat ul Mujahedeen, a group
whose dedication to unlocking India's grip on Kashmir has landed it on the State
Department's list of terror groups. He trained first in 1992 at the Salman i
Farsi camp in Baktiah, Afghanistan, which was run by Harakat. He said he also
fought in Tajikistan.

Obeida Rahman, 21, a Yemeni from Sana from a poor family of 10 children, had his
living and training expenses in Afghanistan paid for by the teachers at his
madrassa, or religious academy. They had urged him to fight in Afghanistan
against his family's wishes, he said. He had relished his training. "When you
have a gun, you're free," he said. "You feel as if you can do anything."

Abdul Jalil, 21, from Kashgar in Xingiang Province, China, said that despite his
capture, he was glad that he had come and fought in Afghanistan on the $1,000
his father, a farmer, gave him to study. "I still want to create an Islamic
state all over the world, God willing," he said. When he is released, he said,
"I will go fight a jihad in China."

The goal of returning home to continue the jihad is common among the prisoners.
Julie Sirrs, a former Defense Intelligence Agency analyst who has interviewed
many of the non-Afghan prisoners held by Mr. Massoud, said nearly half belonged
to groups that the State Department has designated as terrorist. None had ever
met Mr. bin Laden, they said, but he was their hero. Ms. Sirrs, now an
independent consultant, financed her own studies of the prisoners.

In an interview at one of his camps in the Panjshir Valley in late summer, Mr.
Massoud said his prisoners had been deluded into believing that they were
fighting a jihad in Afghanistan by helping the Taliban.

The prisoners, he said, are in fact "sinners" for conducting terrorism and
violating Islam's injunction against fomenting division within Muslim ranks. "My
message to those fighting in Afghanistan now is that they will never get God's
blessing for what they are doing in my country," he declared.

The Enablers
How Islamic Schools Urge Students On

American officials acknowledge that they have limited influence over the
Taliban, who they say have a powerful regional ally in Pakistan.

Relief officials and Afghans said they saw soldiers in Pakistan Army uniforms
fighting for the Taliban last summer and fall. The witnesses reported that
Pakistani Army buses with blackened windows and burlap-covered trucks filled
with weapons and supplies routinely crossed into Afghanistan heading for the
front near Taliqan, a northern town that the government captured last fall.

Mr. Massoud and relief officials in Afghanistan said the Taliban were finding it
ever harder to recruit fighters for the civil war and had even encountered armed
resistance to their recruitment missions in different towns and villages. The
Taliban forces, he asserted, are increasingly dependent on Pakistani soldiers
and students sent to the front to fight for the Islamic cause.

Pakistan denies that it has sent soldiers to fight alongside the Taliban. But
diplomats, relief workers and Afghans interviewed in Kabul and Jalalabad insist
that Pakistan has provided not only weapons, logistical and other assistance,
but soldiers as well.

"Some soldiers apparently came to fight; others for just a look-see at real
fighting," said a United Nations official who visited areas near the front
during the offensive. "The Taliban were doing quite badly at first. But there is
no doubt that Pakistani support gradually turned the tide."

There are also suggestions that Pakistani authorities have pressed students to
fight for the Taliban. One relief worker who visited the Indira Gandhi
Children's Hospital in Kabul in late June said that all of its 400 beds were
filled by Pakistanis wounded at the front, some as young as 15. Several patients
said that they had been sent to fight by their religious academies, many of
which closed for the summer battle season, leaving impoverished students with no
place else to go. A doctor at the hospital said Chechens, Yemenis and Saudis
were among the patients.

American officials say they have little leverage over Pakistan. The United
States cut off military aid in 1990 after the Pakistanis detonated a nuclear
bomb.

With no ally in the region to help, the Clinton administration has mounted a
wide-ranging diplomatic campaign to isolate the Taliban militia from the world
community. The effort bore fruit late last year when the United Nations, prodded
by the United States and Russia, expanded economic sanctions on Afghanistan -- a
change that will take effect on Jan. 19.

Senior American officials said that for all their concern about the threat of
terrorism, the administration never explicitly offered the Taliban what they
most want: formal diplomatic recognition. In its dealing with the Taliban,
officials said, the administration promised only that relations would
dramatically improve if they expelled Mr. bin Laden and Al Qaeda's leaders and
barred foreigners from the camps.

Officials said they decided against directly offering recognition, because, they
said, the administration had profound reservations about the Taliban's abuses of
human rights, particularly of women.

Senior officials also felt that they could not trust the Taliban to deliver on
their promises, citing what they called repeated "lies" from the Afghan
leadership about Mr. bin Laden's status.

In late December, President Clinton's top national security advisers gathered in
Washington to consider the next steps against the Taliban, including possible
military action.

A senior C.I.A. official told the group that the bombing of the destroyer Cole
in Yemen in October 2000 appeared to have been organized by Muhammad Omar
al-Harazi, a longtime member of Al Qaeda also involved in an earlier attempt to
destroy an American warship, The Sullivans, as it passed through Aden in January
2000. Mr. Harazi founded the first Al Qaeda cell in Saudi Arabia and was
arrested in 1997, accused oftrying to smuggle antitank missiles into the
kingdom. Between the failed attack on The Sullivans and the bombing of the Cole,
officials said, Mr. Harazi fled to an Al Qaeda guest house in Kandahar, a
Taliban stronghold. The C.I.A. said this evidence did not conclusively establish
that the group ordered the attack.

Several officials at the meeting opposed military action on the ground that it
would achieve little and would make Americans targets of further terrorist
attacks. And officials said a military strike could even be counterproductive,
enhancing Mr. bin Laden's public standing among militants. "Making him a hero is
the last thing we want to do," said one senior American official.

Holy Warriors

SUNDAY -- The making of an Islamic terror network.
MONDAY -- A look inside a plot that could have crippled Jordan's capital.
TODAY -- What motivates the jihad's young recruits.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

SERIES: HOLY WARRIORS/Last of three articles: The Jihad's Young Recruits

CORRECTION-DATE: January 21, 2001



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Tuesday about Islamic militants who train in
Afghanistan misstated the reason the United States cut off military aid in 1990
to Pakistan, which supports the government of Afghanistan. The United States
suspected Pakistan of developing nuclear weapons; Pakistan's detonation of
nuclear devices did not occur until 1998.

Because of an editing error, the article mistranslated Hamas, the name of the
militant Palestinian organization linked by the Israelis to a man they arrested,
who trained in Afghanistan. The name, an Arabic acronym, stands for Islamic
Resistance Movement, not Party of God. Hamas is also an Arabic word for zeal or
enthusiasm.

The article also misspelled the name of the region in China from which some
members Uighur ethnic group have gone to fight in Afghanistan. It is Xinjiang,
not Xingiang.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Muhammad Khaled Mihraban, a Pakistani captured in the Muslim
war for control of Afghanistan, says he has killed 100 people. (Alan Chin for
The New York Times)(pg. A1); CONDUIT TOWN -- Bustling Torkham, on the Afghan
border, is reported to be a crossing point for Pakistani fighters and supplies
in the Muslim war for control of Afghanistan. (Judith Miller/The New York
Times); TALIBAN FOE -- Ahmed Shah Massoud, who commands Afghan rebels,
criticized foreign holy warriors for dividing Muslims. (Alan Chin for The New
York Times); (Satellite image by Space Imaging)(pg. A8) Chart: "The Darunta Camp
Complex"A cluster of camps in eastern Afghanistan where militants are taught
terrorism. ABU KABHAB CAMP -- Osama bin Laden's camp specializing in training in
chemicals, poisons and high explosives. ASSADALAH ABDUL RAHMAN'S CAMP -- Camp of
the son of Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, who was convicted in the World Trade Center
bombing. TALIBAN AREA -- Housing for Taliban guests. HIZBI ISLAMI CAMP -- Camp
of a Pakistani militant group waging war in Kashmir. JALALABAD AREA -- The
capital of Nangarhar Province. (Sources: Middle Eastern and Western
intelligence)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (91%); TALIBAN (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); EXPLOSIVES (88%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (75%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); INTERVIEWS (71%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(69%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (64%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KHOST, AFGHANISTAN
(79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (72%); PARIS, FRANCE (69%); LONDON, ENGLAND (54%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); PUNJAB, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (93%); MIDDLE EAST (93%);
INDIA (79%); AFRICA (79%); EASTERN AFRICA (79%); FRANCE (69%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             998 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Environmental Radicals Set Fire to Trucks; F.B.I. Raids House for Clues

BYLINE:  By AL BAKER

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY, N.Y., Jan. 16


An elusive band of environmental radicals has struck again on Long Island, this
time claiming responsibility for the torching of two trucks at a North Shore
construction company on Sunday morning.

A day after the arson, the Federal Bureau of Investigation seized computer files
and other material from a suburban house a few miles from the crime scene in
Suffolk County, as they searched for clues about a larger wave of fires and
vandalism in recent months that the group, the Earth Liberation Front, says it
has committed.

In a news release posted Monday on the Internet, the group claimed
responsibility for dousing a 14-ton payloader and a 1986 General Motors pickup
truck filled with tools with "eight gallons of petrol" and then setting the
vehicles ablaze with "improvised torches."

It said the fire, at a fenced-in yard behind the offices of Melo's Construction
on Route 25A in Miller Place, was its "11th major action" in Suffolk County and
warned that its sabotage would continue.

"All businesses, large or small, which participate in earth-raping industries
will continue to be targeted as a part of the ELF's ongoing campaign to evoke
economic damage to those responsible for urban sprawl," said the bulletin,
released by Craig S. Rosebraugh of Portland, Ore., a spokesman for the group.

The bulletin said the fire was also set to show support for Andrew Stepanian, an
animal rights activist from Lloyd Neck who was recently sentenced to 90 days in
jail for throwing a brick through the display windows of a fur store in
Huntington.

"This is a pristine example of how law enforcement agents are unable to catch
the real perpetrators and instead target vocal above-ground activists," the ELF
bulletin said of Mr. Stepanian's conviction. "The ELF supports the release of
all political prisoners and an end to the unjustified police repression."

A squad of the New York Joint Terrorist Task Force, including agents of the
F.B.I., the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Suffolk
County police, is investigating the group's claims of destruction and arson
going back to July, said James M. Margolin, a spokesman for the New York office
of the F.B.I.

No arrests have yet been made.

Mr. Margolin said the arson fire on Sunday in the North Shore hamlet of Miller
Place was the latest in a series of attacks that included uprooting a Cold
Spring Harbor cornfield, scrawling "Meat Is Murder" in red paint at a McDonald's
corporate office in Hauppauge, and firebombing luxury homes under construction
on former farmland in Mount Sinai.

On Monday, F.B.I. agents with a search warrant went through a wood-shingled
ranch house on a quiet street in Coram, about six miles south of Miller Place.

A law enforcement official familiar with the investigation said that the search
of the house, on Bristol Downs Street, was conducted in connection with the ELF
investigation, and that computer files and other materials were seized. Agents
were looking for evidence of the acts of vandalism and arson for which ELF has
taken credit, the official said.

No one answered the door at the house today. Neighbors who saw the F.B.I. agents
arrive said they did not know who lived in the house.

The fire at Melo's erupted shortly after 5 a.m. Sunday and caused about $8,000
worth of damage, said Detective Lt. Charles Dohrenwend, commander of the arson
squad of the Suffolk County police.

The pickup truck was destroyed and the payloader was burned less severely, said
a spokeswoman for the construction firm.

"There could have been a horrible explosion and someone could have gotten hurt,"
the spokeswoman said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Long Island highlighting Miller Place: Two trucks were torched
in Miller Place on Sunday morning

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARSON (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL &
WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FIRES (90%); ECOTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEARCH WARRANTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); CONSTRUCTION (89%); NEW
CONSTRUCTION (78%); VANDALISM (78%); SENTENCING (77%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); ARRESTS (76%); MOTOR
VEHICLES (73%); TERRORISM (66%); POLICE FORCES (66%); FIREARMS (66%); ANIMAL
RIGHTS (64%); FUR APPAREL STORES (50%) LAND USE POLICIES;  ARSON

COMPANY: GENERAL MOTORS CO (57%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%) EARTH LIBERATION FRONT

TICKER: GM (NYSE) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK & UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (57%);
NAICS336111 AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3714 MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS &
ACCESSORIES (57%); SIC3711 MOTOR VEHICLES & PASSENGER CAR BODIES (57%)

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); OREGON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: SUFFOLK COUNTY (NY)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1001 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

METRO BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1171 words


NEW YORK

MANHATTAN: A.C.L.U. ACCUSED OF BIAS -- A former employee of the American Civil
Liberties Union said yesterday that she was suing the organization for age and
race discrimination. The woman, Maria A. Torres-Sylvan, who is 50 and Hispanic,
worked as a computer operator at the A.C.L.U.'s national headquarters in
Manhattan for nearly 17 years. In 1998, when Adrienne Stein, a white woman in
her 30's, became the direct supervisor, Mrs. Sylvan said, several older
employees began to feel unwelcome. Last April, she said, she was replaced by a
23-year-old white man. An A.C.L.U. spokeswoman said the charges were groundless.
Sherri Day (NYT)


MANHATTAN: MORE SUBWAY CARS -- Hoping to ease the rush-hour crush on the busiest
subway lines, New York City Transit officials voted yesterday to increase their
order for new subway cars by $185 million for 150 additional cars. The increase
means that over the next two years, 1,550 new subway cars will appear on the IRT
lines -- the Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9 -- replacing all 1,400 of the oldest
trains. Lawrence G. Reuter, transit president, noted that the train fleet
included about 6,000 cars, so the expansion was relatively small. But he said he
expected some improvement in the subway system, where ridership has risen
steeply.  Randy Kennedy (NYT)

UNIONDALE: POWER USE RISES 9 PERCENT -- The Long Island Power Authority said
yesterday that while Long Island's population had barely grown last year,
electricity use by the average household had shown a 9 percent increase. The
utility's 2000 population survey said that Suffolk County's growth was 1.2
percent and Nassau's 0.2 percent. It said that the strong economy, lower
electric rates, expanded construction and new technology were the reasons power
use was growing faster than expected.  Tina Kelley (NYT)

ROCHESTER: JUDGMENT IN STUDENT HOMICIDE -- A jury awarded $1 million yesterday
to the mother of a 13-year-old girl who was killed by a classmate in the first
student slaying at a public school in Rochester. A 12-year-old girl used a steak
knife to stab the 13-year-old, Stephne Givens, in the neck outside Jefferson
Middle School on Sept. 21, 1995. They had been quarreling over a boy, witnesses
said. A State Supreme Court jury said the city school district had failed to
adequately supervise the students, and ordered it to pay $430,000 in damages to
Stephne's mother, Aledia Givens. The 12-year-old and her mother were ordered to
pay $570,000.  (AP)

OYSTER BAY: PETITIONERS SEEK RETAIL MALL -- The Nassau Suffolk Building Trades
Council yesterday delivered 6,000 petitions to John Venditto, the supervisor of
Oyster Bay, that support plans to build a mall on the grounds of the Cerro Wire
and Cable Company plant near Syosset. "It means an awful lot of employment for
our construction workers," said John M. Kennedy, the council's president. Some
of the town's residents oppose the mall, although it is expected to generate
more than 2,000 construction jobs. But Morton Weber, a lawyer for the developer,
the Taubman Company of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., said, "The rest of the town
realizes it is so essential for the economics of the town, and jobs." Tina
Kelley (NYT)

ALBANY: COURT RULES ON ACCUSED PEDIATRICIAN -- The appellate division of the
State Supreme Court has ruled that Stuart M. Copperman, a pediatrician from
Merrick, on Long Island, who is accused of molesting some of his teenage
patients, cannot practice, even with a chaperon, while he is appealing the
revocation of his license. The ruling was made on Friday but made public on
Wednesday. It is considered a victory for the State Health Department, which
revoked the doctor's license in December.  Tina Kelley (NYT)

NEW JERSEY

TRENTON: SCOOTER HELMET BILL -- Children 14 and younger would have to wear a
helmet while riding a scooter under a bill approved by an Assembly committee
yesterday. The measure is in response to the death of an Elizabeth boy, Andy
Pinto, while riding a scooter in September. The measure, which passed the
Assembly Law and Public Safety Committee and will go to the full Assembly for
consideration, amends a law that requires children to wear helmets while riding
bicycles or using skateboards or in-line skates. Parents of children who do not
wear helmets would be fined $25 for the first offense and $100 for subsequent
offenses.  (AP)

SOUTH BOUND BROOK: POLICE CHIEF DISCIPLINED -- The chief of the South Bound
Brook Police has been placed on administrative duty, the Somerset County
prosecutor said yesterday. The action follows a restraining order granted to the
chief's former wife last week and an assault complaint on Wednesday by his
neighbor. The chief, Robert A. Verry, had his weapon seized and his duties
suspended temporarily on Friday by the prosecutor, Wayne Forrest. Mr. Forrest
said he would decide on permanent measures after consulting with the mayor and
other authorities. Chief Verry did not return telephone calls.  Steve Strunsky
(NYT)

NEWARK: PORT AUTHORITY GRADUATION -- The police force of the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey, which was recently criticized by Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani, will graduate 77 new recruits from its academy training program today.
The increase in the force, to 1,300, will make it the nation's 26th-largest
police agency. Mayor Giuliani had charged the agency with failing to stem an
increase in crime at the city's airports. The force, disputing the criticism,
said that one-third of its class was made up of former New York City police
officers.  Ronald Smothers (NYT)

NEWARK: 3 INDICTED IN GAS SCHEME -- Two company presidents and another official
were indicted yesterday in an alleged conspiracy to falsify laboratory results
and sell hundreds of millions of gallons of substandard gasoline. Charged in an
11-count federal indictment were Richard Kaminski, 53, of Houston, former
president of Caleb Brett U.S.A., a petroleum testing laboratory; Waldo
Schroeder, 53, president of Blending, Marketing and Service Inc.; and his
brother, Mark Schroeder, 43, a Blending operations manager.  (NYT)

CONNECTICUT

NORWICH: SHRINE SEIZED -- The city has taken title to a hillside religious
display known as the Sanctuary of Love because the owner cannot pay overdue
taxes and utility bills. Tenants of the apartment house on the property are
moving out so the city can condemn the area and close the shrine. The owner,
Salvatore Verdirome, 80, who worked for 30 years building the sanctuary by hand,
may stay in his apartment with his caretaker until the city can assess whether
the apartment meets housing regulations.  (AP)

HARTFORD: APPELLATE JUDGE NAMED -- Judge Joseph Flynn, who has served as deputy
chief court administrator since late 1999, was named yesterday to the state's
Appellate Court. Judge Flynn, 60, a Democrat from Ansonia, has been a judge
since 1985. His promotion to the state's second-highest court was announced by
Gov. John G. Rowland. He will serve on the Appellate Court on an interim basis,
pending confirmation by the Legislature.  (AP)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); URBAN RAIL SYSTEMS (90%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); URBAN TRANSIT
SYSTEMS (90%); AGE DISCRIMINATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); DAMAGES (89%);
JURY TRIALS (89%); POPULATION SIZE (88%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES
(86%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TESTIMONY
(78%); HOMICIDE (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (76%); PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (74%); OLDER WORKERS (73%); TRAINS
(73%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (69%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (69%); COUNTIES
(68%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (68%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (68%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (66%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (66%); POLLS & SURVEYS (66%); ENERGY &
UTILITY LAW (64%); UTILITY RATES (63%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (61%);
SCHOOL DISTRICTS (61%); VERDICTS (61%); PETITIONS (60%); SUPREME COURTS (50%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: LONG ISLAND POWER AUTHORITY (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4931 ELECTRIC & OTHER SERVICES COMBINED (54%)  SIC2711 NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHERS;

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1002 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 936 words


EUROPE

TURKEY: FRANCE CONDEMNED
Turkey condemned France over its passage of a bill in Parliament accusing the
Turks of genocide in 1915, recalled its ambassador and threatened to boycott
French goods in government contracts. Ismail Cem, the Turkish foreign minister,
left, said the bill, which "publicly recognizes the Armenian genocide of 1915,"
would harm relations with France and make it harder for Turkey and Armenia to
normalize relations. Armenians say vast numbers of their countrymen were
massacred. The Turks argue that the killings occurred in partisan fighting as
the Ottoman Empire collapsed.  Douglas Frantz (NYT)

YUGOSLAVIA: KOSTUNICA SWITCHES
President Vojislav Kostunica, reversing his previous position, said he had
decided to meet the chief United Nations war crimes prosecutor, Carla del Ponte,
when she visits Belgrade next week. Mr. Kostunica also suggested that he would
publish any sealed indictments issued by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia that Mrs. del Ponte handed over to him.  (Reuters)


NATO: URANIUM WEAPONS
Trying to calm the furor in Europe about radioactivity in depleted uranium
weapons, NATO said possible traces of highly radioactive elements such as
plutonium and americium were not relevant to soldiers' health because of their
minute quantities. But Germany's defense minister ordered a German laboratory to
search for plutonium in weapon samples from Kosovo. He also summoned the
American charge d'affaires, requesting more information.  Marlise Simons (NYT)

BRITAIN: MILLIONS FOR TORIES
The Tories announced they had received a campaign donation of $7.5 million from
Stuart Wheeler, chairman of a betting firm, to help offset three recent $3
million gifts to Labor from Lord Sainsbury, a supermarket heir, and Lord Hamlyn
and Christopher Ondaatje, both publishing millionaires. Prime Minister Tony
Blair is expected to call an election for May, and Labor and the Conservatives
have criticized each other over dependence on large individual contributions.
Warren Hoge (NYT)

NETHERLANDS: LOCKERBIE DEFENSE RESTS
The defense ended its summations, arguing that the web of circumstantial
evidence woven by Scottish prosecutors had failed to prove that the two Libyan
defendants had bombed Pan Am 103 in 1988, killing 270 people. The court said it
would reconvene on Jan. 30 to announce a date for its verdict.  Donald G. McNeil
Jr. (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

ECUADOR: U.S. ACCORD UPHELD
The supreme court has upheld the constitutionality of a 1999 agreement
negotiated with the United States that allows American anti-narcotics
surveillance flights over Colombia to operate from an Ecuadorean Air Force base
in the coastal city of Manta. Opposition groups that see the American presence
as an infringement of Ecuador's sovereignty that will drag their country into
the deepening Colombian conflict had asked that the accord be overturned.  Larry
Rohter (NYT)

ASIA

CHINA: FALUN GONG PRISONERS
A single labor camp in northeast China has held at least 470 adherents of the
banned Falun Gong spiritual movement, according to a report in Legal Daily, the
first official confirmation that large numbers of believers have been imprisoned
in labor camps. At an "awards meeting" at the camp, 47 inmates were given early
release, 86 were allowed to serve the rest of their terms outside the camp and
337 had their sentences reduced because they have renounced their beliefs to
varying degrees, the article said without reporting how many other inmates have
refused to cooperate. Human rights monitors estimate that as many as 10,000
believers have been imprisoned in such camps.  Erik Eckholm (NYT)

AFGHANISTAN: OPIUM CROP DROPS
Severe drought conditions caused opium production to plummet 29 percent last
year, the United Nations Drug Control Program reported. But it also said the
number of Afghan districts growing the opiate continued to rise, by 59 percent
over the last three years, despite the ruling Taliban's declared ban on opium
cultivation. The ravages of civil war and the lure of illicit profits have
driven Afghan farmers to give up traditional crops in favor of opium poppies.
Christopher S. Wren (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

SAUDI ARABIA: BAN ON UGANDANS
Saudi Arabia has stopped issuing visas to Ugandan Muslims hoping to make the
pilgrimage to Mecca because of fear that they will spread the Ebola virus, the
Ugandan Health Ministry said. An outbreak of Ebola, which was identified in the
northern Ugandan town of Gulu last September, has so far killed 174 people. The
next pilgrimage to Mecca is scheduled for February.  (Agence France-Presse)

IRAN: BILL FOR WOMEN UNDERCUT
The conservative constitutional watchdog, the Guardian Council, has rejected a
bill that Parliament passed to allow single women to study abroad on state
scholarships, newspapers reported. The bill would also have let unmarried women
travel abroad without parental permission, the daily Qods said. Other newspapers
carried similar reports. If Parliament persists in its support, the bill would
go before the Expediency Council for final arbitration. (Reuters)
AFRICA

NIGER: FAMINE THREAT
Poor cereal harvests, low stocks and high prices for staple foods threaten
people in northeast Niger with famine and have set off an exodus from the area,
the disaster management agency said. People have resorted to searching anthills
for grain the insects collected, it said. In the northwest, people still had
food but only enough for one meal a day, and small children were malnourished,
the report said. Niger warned in September that a deficit of cereal output
threatened two million people with famine.  (Reuters)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Map of Niger highlights Niamey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CULTS & SECTS
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); SUPREME COURTS (84%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
ELECTIONS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); BOYCOTTS (77%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%);
INDICTMENTS (74%); AIR FORCES (74%); LITIGATION (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (72%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (70%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (69%); BRITISH NOBILITY &
GENTRY (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (69%); WEALTHY
PEOPLE (69%); NUCLEAR CHEMISTRY (67%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (66%);
ARMED FORCES (66%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (64%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (60%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (90%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (56%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); NIAMEY, NIGER (79%)

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (96%); ARMENIA (95%); FRANCE (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); ECUADOR
(93%); EUROPE (93%); CHINA (92%); SERBIA (92%); SCOTLAND (92%); GERMANY (92%);
COLOMBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); ASIA (79%); KOSOVO
(79%); NIGER (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1003 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2001 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Safe Havens on the Freedom Line

BYLINE:   By SANDEE BRAWARSKY

SECTION: Section E; Part 2; Column 1; Leisure/Weekend Desk; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 3257 words


While oysters were being shucked in the kitchen, and distinguished crowds of
diners from New York's business and political establishment feasted at Thomas
Downing's Oyster House at the corner of Wall and Broad Streets, the proprietor's
son, George, led fugitive slaves down into the basement. Amid bottles of wine
and molasses, they found shelter from the bands of blackbirders, bounty hunters
roaming the streets in search of runaways.

Born as free blacks, the Downings were committed abolitionists. Their
restaurant, across from Federal Hall, is known to have been a station on the
Underground Railroad from the 1830's to the 1860's, a safe and secret haven on
the route north toward Canada and freedom.

Now the Oyster House is long gone. Its years of operation were the peak of
Underground Railroad activity, although there were runaway slaves and people
willing to help them dating back to Colonial days. In the New York metropolitan
area, most of the passageways, cellars and safe houses associated with hiding
escaping slaves are sealed or destroyed or have been built over. But this is a
city where layers of history are sometimes visible, and interesting sites
believed to be linked with the Underground Railroad can still be found.

Tracking the railroad, a line of spontaneous movement and mystery, is
complicated by its very nature. Fugitive slaves left few traces for fear of
jeopardizing other escapees. Although slavery in New York State was abolished in
1827, aiding a runaway slave was a violation of the Fugitive Slave Law, passed
in 1793 and reinforced with harsher terms in 1850. Clergy and ordinary citizens
-- both black and white -- who participated recorded very little of their
efforts other than in code. Documentation of the Underground Railroad is still
very much a work in progress. "No one left a road map," says Christopher Moore,
a historian at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.

To get to New York, more a stopping-off point than a destination, the runaway
slaves traveled mostly by night and often in disguise, leaving loved ones
behind. Some had no assistance at all and made their way through dangerous
terrain, following the North Star. Others were aided by a network of kind
strangers willing to break the law for a moral purpose. Along the way, some died
and some were captured and returned to bondage. A number of these heroic figures
went on to take leadership roles in the abolitionist movement, but most remain
anonymous.

In the New York area, the Underground Railroad was tied to the waterways. People
often arrived by boat, and many of the stations are near water, usually
clustered in neighborhoods that had some combination of African-American
churches and communities of free blacks, Quakers, white abolitionists and other
sympathizers.

Guided by historical accounts, addresses gleaned from slave narratives and
memoirs published after the Civil War, and a preliminary list of sites offered
by the New York State Freedom Trail Commission, I visited a sampling of places
associated with the Underground Railroad in the metropolitan area.

Starting in TriBeCa

My journey began on a quiet street in TriBeCa near what was once the home of an
early hero of the clandestine network, David Ruggles. "New York is one of the
hubs of the Underground Railroad, and David Ruggles is at the center," said
Graham Russell Hodges, a professor of American and New York history at Colgate
University and the author of a forthcoming Ruggles biography. Still, in
Manhattan, there are scant signs of the life of this particular leader of the
New York Committee of Vigilance, which aided in the escape of more than 600
fugitive slaves.

In 1838 Ruggles published perhaps the earliest black magazine in the United
States, Mirror of Liberty. That same year, he greeted and sheltered Frederick
Washington Bailey, a fugitive slave who arrived in New York disguised as a
sailor and later changed his name to Frederick Douglass.

The building where Ruggles ran a boardinghouse, reading room and library, at 67
Lispenard Street, at the corner of Broadway, no longer exists. The National City
Bank of New York, a once grand stone structure built in 1927 on the site, is now
a discount shoe store. Ruggles later lived at 36 Lispenard, at the corner of
Church Street, where he hid Douglass. Today it is a five-story building anchored
by a pizzeria where no one has heard of Ruggles. His memory is honored in
Bedford-Stuyvesant, where Junior High School 258 was named the David Ruggles
School.

Several blocks south of Lispenard, a plaque on the sidewalk in front of 158
Church Street, at the southwest corner of Leonard Street, commemorates the
founding of the original Mother A.M.E. (African Methodist Episcopal) Zion
Church, one of the first churches in New York built and led by
African-Americans. Known as Mother Zion African Church, it was at this location
from 1800 to 1864, and is thought to have been a major Underground Railroad
depot. The church is now based in Harlem.

African-American churches were also the central bases for political activity. At
Mother Zion, 1,500 people gathered in 1850 to protest the seizure of James
Hamlet, an escaped slave who had been sent back to Maryland, and they raised
$800 to secure his freedom. In other instances African-Americans successfully
rescued people snared in the streets by blackbirders. Some free blacks devised
their own Underground Railroad efforts, buying slaves from their masters,
bringing them to New York and setting them free.

In 1853 Ana Marie Weems stole away from her slave masters in Maryland, dressed
up as a boy and set out for New York. When she arrived, said Richard Hourahan, a
specialist on the subject, she was sheltered at 153 Baxter Street, at the corner
of Grand Street, before being taken to the next safe place. That was the home of
the Rev. Charles B. Ray, a blacksmith turned journalist and clergyman who was an
activist with the New York Committee of Vigilance as well as editor of The
Colored American; he often had fugitive guests arriving day after day. Now the
site is a condominium with a Chinese beauty shop at street level and a salon
above specializing in back rubs "for relief of tension."

A Hidden Door

Several blocks away I found the first hidden door on my foray to the Lower East
Side, at the Bialystoker Synagogue, formerly the Willett Street Methodist
Episcopal Church. The stone building, a New York City landmark, became a
synagogue in 1905 and was restored in 1987. In the corner in what is now the
synagogue's women's gallery, Rabbi Yitzchok Singer, who died earlier this month,
and his son Boruch pointed out a barely visible break in the wall. Behind is a
narrow shaft with a tall wooden ladder leading to an attic. In the peaked
chamber, palely lit by two small windows, additional ladders lean against loft
spaces. It has been frequently said that fugitive slaves were hidden here,
although the only evidence is oral history.

Because stories of daring escapes and grass-roots collaboration are so
compelling, there is a human desire to embrace them as true whatever their
provenance. Standing in the airy Bialystoker attic, I could almost hear
whispers, though I realized that what felt like sacred space may simply have
been storage. I left both exhilarated and exasperated, reminded that those who
made this history intended their disappearing acts to be just that.

Across the river in Brooklyn, the Wunsch Student Center stands out in a landmark
1846 Greek Revival building on the campus of Polytechnic University. From 1854
to 1938 it was the African Wesleyan Methodist Episcopal Church, the first black
congregation in Brooklyn, known as the Bridge Street Church. In the basement the
church housed and fed fugitive slaves, who slept on the floor. When in fear of
detection, they descended into a subcellar. Dr. Amos Jordan, the congregation's
historian, said he had been told by old-timers that the runaways left markings
on the walls.

The interior of the building at 311 Bridge Street is totally renovated: campus
organizations occupy the area where the sanctuary was, and a fitness club is in
the basement. Yousef Ibrahim, 21, a computer engineering student, had not
previously heard of the building's history but found it inspirational. "There
were tough people down here trying to survive," he said. "Here I am just working
out. It puts things into perspective -- how people had to go through hardships
so I could be at Polytech."

At Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn Heights, the Rev. Sharon
Blackburn, a successor to the abolitionist Henry Ward Beecher, who preached
there from 1847 to 1887, led the way into the basement, where fugitive slaves
are thought to have been sheltered. Lowering our heads, we entered a maze of
tunnel-like passageways that run the length of the building. Some of the
archways are filled in with newer bricks, and one tunnel is said to lead out
onto Hicks Street. In his "Reminiscences," Beecher wrote of hiding fugitives at
Plymouth and in his own home. The church's minister, Mr.  Blackburn, said that
the church was considering creating a museum in the basement.

I joined Elaine Purvis's fifth-grade class and a handful of third graders from
P.S. 273 in the East New York section of Brooklyn for their field trip "Slavery,
the Underground Railroad and the Freedom Trail," organized by Fred Laverpool and
R. K. Smith of the tour group Bragging About Brooklyn. The group specializes in
African-American history -- "sites left out of classrooms and textbooks," in Mr.
Laverpool's words.

At the Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian Church in Fort Greene, built between 1860
and 1862, Mr. Laverpool led the class through the basement tunnels in a human
chain, with each student grasping the shoulder of the person ahead, some
clinging in the dark. "Oh freedom," Mr. Laverpool sang in his trained baritone,
and the children joined in, softly, shuffling along the dirt floor.

"I wasn't feeling it," 10-year-old Daynesha Vicks said later, reflecting back on
when Ms. Purvis had read them a book about Harriet Tubman, the well-known
conductor on the Underground Railroad. But walking through the cavernlike space
was different. "I felt like crying," she said. "Like we were slaves trying to
run away."

Back upstairs, the Rev. David Dyson has letters written by the congregation's
first preacher, Dr. Theodore Cuyler, an outspoken opponent of slavery, that
mention fugitive slaves' hiding in the basement heating tunnels when other
regular hiding places were "compromised" or under surveillance.

Brooklyn and Queens were much more rural than Manhattan in pre-Civil War days,
so clandestine travel for the runaways may have been easier. Flushing has its
own Freedom Mile, with several Underground Railroad-related sites identified by
the Queens Historical Society. The current exhibition at the society's landmark
Kingsland Homestead, "Angels of Deliverance: The Struggle Against Slavery in
Queens and Long Island," highlights the role of local African-Americans and
Quakers in the abolition movement. It includes documents certifying manumission
(release from slavery), newspaper ads offering rewards for runaway slaves and
three-dimensional replicas of neighborhood Underground Railroad stations. The
show also traces links between local leaders and abolitionists in Brooklyn and
Manhattan.

Around the corner at the Macedonia A.M.E. Church, the Rev. Nicholas Tweed spoke
proudly of his church's connection to the Underground Railroad, and offered a
tour of the basement area -- now the boiler room -- that was used to house
fugitive slaves, usually overnight, until they left through a side door to head
to the next place. Founded in 1811, the church has been expanded and renovated,
although this room has remained underneath the chapel.

Built in 1694, the Friends Meeting House on Northern Boulevard is the oldest
house of worship in continuous use in New York City. Before it was built,
Quakers met for worship at the 1661 Bowne House, now a museum. The Bowne
property extended for 400 acres, and there may have been other buildings where
runaways were sheltered, as Evangeline T. Egglezos, executive director of Bowne
House, explained. Many Bowne descendants were involved in abolitionist work. A
1906 obituary of Samuel Bowne Parsons displayed in the exhibition states: "It
was his boast that he assisted more slaves to freedom than any other man in
Queens County."

The Friends Meeting Houses in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Flushing have antislavery
connections, although not all Quakers denounced slavery. East of Flushing,
meeting houses dot the north shore of Long Island. By 1776 some Quakers were
freeing their slaves and educating them, inspired by Quaker principles.

Through the efforts of the Westbury Friends and the minister Elias Hicks, more
than 150 manumissions of slavery were recorded by 1790 on Long Island. I visited
the Westbury Meeting House on a recent Sunday morning, and as members broke the
silence of their worship to share messages of social responsibility, they seemed
linked to those earlier Quakers.

The Hicks Family

Nearby, in Jericho, Long Island, is the Maine Maid Inn, a restaurant believed to
have an Underground Railroad connection. The building was the 1789 home of
Valentine Hicks, a member of the Westbury Meeting and a cousin and son-in-law of
Elias Hicks. On the second floor, the current owner, Bryan Kishner, pointed out
a cupboard door that hides a set of stairs leading to an attic where there is a
hidden crawl space. The cellar also has an unseen passageway behind a wall
leading outdoors.

Accounts of the Hicks family relate that Valentine Hicks helped a runaway
pursued by a slavecatcher to hide in the attic. The family is also said to have
transported fugitive slaves across Long Island Sound, possibly after they stayed
in the adjacent black community of Guinea Town.

On Staten Island, fugitive slaves were said to find sanctuary in the free black
community of Sandy Ground, founded in the 1840's; the A.M.E. Zion Church there
(now called Rossville) dates back to the 1850's. In the northeastern corner of
the island, several white abolitionists built homes. Last month a house that
once belonged to the Wilcoxes, a prominent antislavery family, was demolished
despite community protests. Still standing on Delafield Place in Livingston,
close to the Kill van Kull shore, is the gabled stone home of Dr. Samuel
McKenzie Elliot, a well-known abolitionist. Built around 1850, it is believed to
have been an Underground Railroad station and is a New York City landmark.

When Rosemarie and Douglas Walsh bought the Elliot house 10 years ago and began
restoring it to its former glory, they knew little of its history. Now a
photograph of Dr. Elliot hangs in their foyer. They have been told that a tunnel
leads from their cellar down to the waterfront but have not yet found it. When
they first moved in, they say, doors would open on their own, and faucets would
turn on. He says ghosts; she says spirits. Whatever, they're gone now.

Honoring the Railroad

The Underground Railroad has been called America's first civil rights movement.
While there are probably more trap doors than verifiable facts, there is much to
honor. For the last decade, as part of a Congressional initiative, the National
Parks Service has been trying to identify and preserve sites related to the
railroad. A new museum, the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, is
scheduled to open in early 2004 in Cincinnati with some federal financing. In
1997 the New York State Freedom Trail Commission was established to promote
understanding of the flight from slavery, and the Schomburg Center in Harlem has
been a leading consultant in identifying more than 300 related sites,
personalities and events of significance.

Among the Freedom Trail Commission's plans are the development of curricular
materials and a tourism program based on this heritage. By the end of this year,
it expects to place historical markers at selected sites, said Sandy Stuart,
coordinator of the commission. "This is an important piece of American history,"
she said, "not just African-American history."

Where to Hear Whispers of History

Traces of the Underground Railroad can be found at various sites in the New York
area. A sampling of related exhibitions and sites, including churches, landmark
buildings and unofficial monuments:

Manhattan

1. "LEST WE FORGET: THE TRIUMPH OVER SLAVERY," an exhibition through March 31 at
the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Lenox Avenue, at 135th
Street, Harlem, (212) 491-2200. Hours, Monday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 6
p.m, Sunday 1 to 5 p.m.

2. DAVID RUGGLES RESIDENCES (FORMER LOCATIONS), 67 Lispenard Street, at
Broadway; 36 Lispenard Street, at Church Street, TriBeCa.

3. BIALYSTOKER SYNAGOGUE, landmark structure (built as Willett Street Church),
7-13 Willett Street (renamed Bialystoker Place), between Grand and Broome
Streets, Lower East Side. Tours of the synagogue arranged by the Lower East Side
Conservancy are held every Thursday until March 31 at 2 p.m. Reservations are
necessary; information about additional tours: (212) 598-1200.

Brooklyn

4. WUNSCH HALL, Polytechnic University, landmark building is former location of
the Bridge Street Church (the interior is fully renovated as a student center),
311 Bridge Street, downtown Brooklyn.

5. PLYMOUTH CHURCH OF THE PILGRIMS, National Historic Landmark building, tours
(not including the basement) after services on Sundays at noon; Orange Street
between Hicks and Henry Streets, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 624-4743.

6. LAFAYETTE AVENUE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Romanesque Revival building with
Tiffany windows, 85 South Oxford Street, Fort Greene; tours, which include the
basement tunnels, are available by appointment. A donation is requested; call
(718) 625-7515, or make arrangements through the tour group Bragging About
Brooklyn, (718) 771-0307.

Queens

7. "ANGELS OF DELIVERANCE: THE STRUGGLE AGAINST SLAVERY IN QUEENS AND LONG
ISLAND," an exhibition through March 11 at the Queens Historical Society,
Kingsland Homestead, 143-35 37th Avenue, Flushing, (718) 939-0647. Hours:
Tuesday, Saturday, Sunday, 2:30-4:30 p.m., or by appointment. Admission: adults,
$3; students and the elderly, $2. Copies of the book "Angels of Deliverance: The
Underground Railroad in Queens, Long Island and Beyond" are available at the
Kingsland Homestead (or by mail, $14.95 plus $3 for shipping and handling).
Copies of the Historical Society's brochure "Flushing Freedom Mile Historic
Tour" are available for free at the Kingsland Homestead, or $1 by mail.

8. BOWNE HOUSE, landmark historical museum (closed for renovations), 37-01 Bowne
Street (between 37th and 38th Avenues), Flushing, (718) 359-0528.

9. FRIENDS MEETING HOUSE, landmark building, 137-16 Northern Boulevard (between
Main and Union Streets), Flushing; visitors are welcome to attend the weekly
Quaker worship meeting on Sundays from 11 a.m. to noon; tours are available at
noon; (718) 358-9636.

10. MACEDONIA A.M.E. CHURCH, 37-22 Union Street, Flushing. Visitors are welcome
at this church, founded in 1811, (718) 353-5870.

Staten Island

11. SAMUEL McKENZIE ELLIOT HOUSE, historical landmark (now a private home), 69
Delafield Place, Livingston

Long Island

12. MAINE MAID INN, restaurant in 1789 historic home, Route 106 and Jericho
Turnpike, Jericho. Reservations: (516) 935-6400.

13. FRIENDS MEETING HOUSE, rebuilt 1902, 550 Post Avenue, Westbury. Visitors are
welcome at weekly worship, Sundays 11 a.m. to noon, (631) 271-4672.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 20, 2001



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article in Weekend yesterday about
Underground Railroad sites in the New York region referred incorrectly to the
minister of the Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn Heights. The
minister, the Rev. Sharon Blackburn, is a woman.

GRAPHIC: Photos: An underground passageway at Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims in
Brooklyn. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)(pg. E37); A student center at
Polytechnic University in Brooklyn was once the Bridge Street Church, where
worshipers hid runaway slaves in the basement.; Likely hiding place: Attic of
the Bialystoker Synagogue in Manhattan. (Photographs by Chester Higgins Jr./The
New York Times); A flier from an exhibition in Queens on the Underground
Railroad. (Queens Historical Society)(pg. E46) Map of New York highlighting
Queens. (pg. E46)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); HISTORY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (78%); RESTAURANTS (78%); HISTORIC DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES (78%);
LEGISLATION (77%); RELIGION (69%); CITIES (67%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (64%);
BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (62%); BIOGRAPHY PUBLISHING (50%) SLAVERY;  BLACKS;
HISTORY;  HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND SITES;  UNDERGROUND RAILROAD (19TH CENTURY);
TRAVEL AND VACATIONS

PERSON: BRAWARSKY, SANDEE; MOORE, CHRISTOPHER

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Slave Havens in Brazil Gaining Rights

BYLINE:  By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1448 words

DATELINE: MANGAL DO BARRO VERMELHO, Brazil


The nearest telephone is 19 miles away, and television arrived only in 1998. For
generations, communities of poor blacks like this one, people descended from
slaves who had run away from their masters during Portuguese colonial times,
have existed in wary seclusion deep in Brazil's trackless backlands.

But now, more than a century after slavery was abolished in Brazil, these
settlements that hint of Africa, known as quilombos, are hesitantly emerging
from their traditional isolation and poverty.

With the encouragement and support of the Brazilian government, they are now
pressing for legal title to ancestral lands and reaffirming their threatened
culture.

Long neglected by the rest of Brazil, the quilombos have been facing extinction
as the modern world closes in on them. Improved road, river and rail links have
made their once remote fields valuable to ranchers, mining companies and land
speculators, who have been seeking to dislodge them and seize village lands for
commercial development.

"We have been here for 300 years, resisting as best we can, but until recently
no one paid us any heed, because we were black and poor and didn't even know
that we had any rights," said Carlos Alberto Gomes, a leader of this community
of 110 families on the banks of the Sao Francisco River. "But these are fertile
lands on which you can grow anything, and so people covet them now." In total,
724 quilombos, some dating back as far as the 17th century, have been identified
across Brazil and are seeking formal recognition of their status.

The largest single concentration of such communities, 259, is here in the
northeastern state of Bahia, which has the country's highest percentage of black
residents, followed by the Amazon states of Para and Maranhao.

"When we started out, we thought there would just be a few isolated cases," said
Claudio Braga, an official of the National Land Reform and Colonization
Institute in Brasilia who deals with the quilombos. "As people have overcome
their shame at saying they are descendants of fugitive slaves, the numbers have
grown surprisingly."

Indeed, quilombos -- the word quilombo means encampment or forest settlement in
various West African languages -- have been found in settings as diverse as
mountains, jungles and arid scrubland.

"They went wherever the geographical barriers were the greatest, so that whites
wouldn't go there after them," Mr. Braga explained.

At first glance, quilombos like this one, whose name means red clay mangrove
thicket, seem indistiguishable from any other poor village in the Brazilian
interior. The lone school offers classes only up to fourth grade, the single
road is a rutted dirt path and "the closest medical care is an 11-mile boat ride
away," said Egidio Gomes Pereira, a community leader.

But the words commonly used here and in nearby quilombos for such everyday
concepts as house, spoon, straw and grandparents are derived from West African
languages like Yoruba. Houses in some communities are arranged in what is said
to be West African style, in a circular fashion around a central space. Though
most residents are nominally Catholic, their religious ceremonies and festivals
contain elements that anthropologists and sociologists say are traceable to
African practices even more strongly than those of other black Brazilians.

"The African elements are there, but the people have always had a certain
timidity about considering their historic culture as something positive," said
Valdelio Santos Silva, director of the sociology department at the State
University of Bahia in the nearby town of Bom Jesus da Lapa and a leader of the
United Black Movement. "Until recently they've been treated as if they were
worthless, so they have learned to hide their culture from outsiders."

Slavery was instituted in Brazil shortly after the first Portuguese expedition
arrived in Bahia in 1500 and endured until 1888, longer than anywhere else in
the Western Hemisphere. During that time, an estimated 18 million Africans were
forcibly transported to Brazil, more than any other country or colony in the
Americas. But slaves often fled their harsh lives in servitude, joining Indians
in the remote outback and fighting wars against the Portuguese troops sent to
recapture them.

The conflicts continued on a smaller scale after Brazil achieved its
independence from Portugal in 1821. During most of the 20th century, though,
quilombos were largely ignored by the Brazilian state.

In 1988, 100 years after slavery ended, Brazil adopted a new Constitution that
finally recognized the rights and status of descendants of runaway slaves.

But the Brazilian Congress has yet to adopt legislation to put the provision
into effect. "There are just too many powerful interests at play any time an
issue of land tenancy comes up," said Murilo da Costa Santos, an official at the
Palmares Cultural Foundation, a government agency entrusted with preserving and
developing black culture in Brazil.

So the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso has used its decree
power to begin the process of identifying and registering the black settlements.

"This is a question of basic human rights" to Mr. Cardoso, Mr. Braga said. The
president was a sociologist before he entered politics and wrote extensively on
questions of race and class in Brazil.

Advocacy groups like the Roman Catholic Church's Pastoral Land Commission praise
the Cardoso administration's initiative as long overdue. But they and other
defenders of quilombo residents complain that the land titling process is so
long and complicated that it encourages commercial interests to try to drive the
residents off their lands before deeds are granted. "Whenever they can, real
estate speculators destroy the vestiges of African culture that they find, in
order to claim that there never was any quilombo on the land in dispute," Dr.
Santos of the cultural foundation said.

Since the runaway slaves were illiterate, there are no documents that would
verify claims that their communities date to colonial times, and because they
were fugitives, they rarely registered the births of their children. The
government ordered the destruction of all official records of slavery in 1890,
further complicating the titling process now under way.

"There are a lot of historical gaps, and it is difficult to fill them in," said
Dr. Silva, the sociologist, who has researched the history of quilombos in Bahia
in an effort to help the communities here gain legal status.

Mangal do Barro Vermelho is one of only a handful of quilombos that have
completed the titling process, and it now legally occupies more than 17,000
acres. But winning that status involved years of conflict with a wealthy cattle
rancher, who arrived in 1971 with what he said was a deed to the community's
land.

Residents say they were forbidden to graze their flocks in fields the rancher
claimed as his or to fish in ponds on the contested property. Some hired
themselves out to him as day laborers. They were paid with chits that could be
redeemed only at the rancher's store at inflated prices.

"It was like we had fallen back into slavery again," Mr. Pereira said. "The only
thing missing was the whip."

Based on oral tradition, the residents of this community believe that they are
descended from Africans who jumped from slave ships as they were being
transported to their masters on the Sao Francisco River.

Dr. Santos said other quilombos had been founded by slaves who had fled salt and
gold mines farther south or cotton and sugar cane plantations nearer the coast.

Among them is another larger quilombo about 80 miles south of here, called Rio
das Ras, or Frog Creek. The testimony of the oldest of the settlement's
inhabitants, Jose Francisco Arcanjo de Souza, was essential in establishing the
claim of the community's 4,000 residents to more than 90,000 acres of land.

"Chico Tome," as Mr. de Souza is known, who says he was was born in April 1894,
just six years after the Brazilian Empire officially abolished slavery, and
though his sight is failing, his mind is still sharp. In an interview in the
decaying adobe house where he prefers to live on his own rather than move in
with his sons, he recalled a childhood of privation and isolation.

"We suffered greatly and ate little in those days," he said. There were no
whites around, "just blacks and Indians, living off the land." Mr. de Souza
recalled hearing from his parents tales of attacks by Portuguese troops in the
early 19th century.

"I thank God for this victory," Mr. de Souza said. "I never thought that I would
live to see the day that we quilombo dwellers could live in peace, but we are
the masters of our land now."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Canoes arriving at Mangal do Barro Vermelho as part of the
annual marujada, or river festival, held each October. The villagers, descended
from slaves who ran away from their masters during Portuguese colonial times,
long lived in wary seclusion. (Ricardo Teles)(pg. A4) Map of Brazil highlighting
Mangal do Barro Vermelho. (pg. A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (77%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (75%);
TRENDS (75%); RURAL DEVELOPMENT (74%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (73%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); MINES & MINING (68%) SLAVERY;  BLACKS;
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  MINES AND MINING;  LIVESTOCK;  AGRICULTURE;
LAND USE POLICIES

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY

CITY: BRASILIA, BRAZIL (73%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (99%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

REGION: BRAZIL

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1019 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 925 words


EUROPE

YUGOSLAVIA: PROSECUTOR GREETED BY EGGS -- Carla del Ponte, chief prosecutor of
the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague, was pelted with eggs thrown
by supporters of the former president of Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic, as she
drove away from a meeting in Belgrade. The prosecutor met with Yugoslav cabinet
ministers on the second day of her three-day visit to seek cooperation on war
crimes prosecutions.  Carlotta Gall (NYT)


RUSSIA: IMMUNITY PARED -- The lower house of Parliament sharply pared back a
Kremlin proposal that would grant former Russian presidents virtually complete
immunity from criminal prosecution, including broad protection from searches.
The legislation would lock into law a decree issued by President Vladimir V.
Putin granting immunity to Boris N. Yeltsin. But legislators approved a revised
bill that would allow Parliament to lift prosecutorial immunity by a simple
majority vote.
Michael Wines (NYT)

RUSSIA: JEWISH LEADER HELD -- The St. Petersburg police arrested the local head
of the Russian Jewish Congress and charged him with kidnapping two people in a
case they implied was linked to struggles within the city's crime-ridden
business world. Mikhail Mirilashvili also operates Russkoye Video, which runs a
St. Petersburg television station in league with Media-Most, the media empire
under legal attack by the Kremlin. Prosecutors said the arrest was unrelated to
the Media-Most cases.
Michael Wines (NYT)

RUSSIA: FEBRUARY PULLBACK -- The Russian military said the first army units
would be withdrawn from Chechnya starting in mid-February. On Monday, President
Vladimir V. Putin ordered the F.S.B., the domestic security service, to take
over command of operations in the region. He ordered combined forces to be cut
back to an army division of 15,000 and an Interior Ministry brigade of about
7,000.  Sophia Kishkovsky (NYT)

NETHERLANDS: GLOBAL WARMING PLEA -- The Bush administration has requested a
two-month postponement of the next round of international talks aimed at
completing a treaty to fight global warming, a State Department spokesman,
Richard Boucher, said. The request was made to Jan Pronk, the Dutch environment
minister, who is president of the talks, Mr. Boucher said. According to Agence
France-Presse, a Pronk spokeswoman said he viewed the request as a "positive
sign." The spokeswoman said Washington asked for the delay "to better prepare"
for the talks, which were scheduled for May.  Andrew C. Revkin (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: CHRETIEN HINT -- Prime Minister Jean Chretien, in a veiled warning to
younger rivals, has suggested he might run for a fourth term, a feat not
accomplished in Canadian politics since 1908. Although Mr. Chretien, 67, easily
won a third term last November, supporters of Paul Martin, the 62-year-old
finance minister, are pushing the governing Liberal Party to hold a leadership
review 14 months from now.  James Brooke (NYT)

COSTA RICA: SENTENCE IN SLAYINGS -- A Costa Rican man was sentenced to 70 years
in prison for killing two American women last March. Alberto Urbina Cisneros,
19, was convicted of killing Emily Eagen of Ann Arbor, Mich., and Emily Howell
of Lexington, Ky., both 19 years old. The crime shocked Costa Rica, a popular
tourism and retirement destination with a reputation for safety. A 16-year-old
boy was previously sentenced for his role in the killings, and officials are
still searching for a third suspect, who is believed to be from Nicaragua.  (AP)


AFRICA

CONGO: PRESIDENT APPROVED -- The inauguration of the new president, Joseph
Kabila, was postponed until today, a day later than initially planned. But
members of Parliament, who were appointed last year by the slain president,
Laurent D. Kabila, voted unanimously to approve his son as the new head of
state.
Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

ASIA

NORTH KOREA: GERMANY SEEKS TIES -- The German government said it was opening
talks with North Korea aimed at setting up diplomatic relations. A spokesman
added that Berlin expected North Korea to make further progress in building ties
with South Korea, improving human rights and preventing the spread of weapons of
mass destruction.  Victor Homola (NYT)

MONGOLIA: U.N. AID PLEA -- The United Nations is appealing for further aid to
assist Mongolia through a harsh winter that has already killed 500,000 head of
livestock and seems likely to kill several million more. Carolyn McAskie, the
United Nations emergency relief coordinator, who just returned from Mongolia,
said heavy snows, ice and sub-zero temperatures, after a drought last summer,
have created the worst natural disaster there in 50 years.  Christopher S. Wren
(NYT)

PHILIPPINES: PRESIDENTIAL POWER -- President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo
consolidated her hold on power when a coalition of parties that back her wrested
control of the House of Representatives from supporters of the deposed leader
Joseph Estrada. An Arroyo backer, Feliciano Belmonte, left, was voted in as the
new speaker. Mrs. Arroyo also won pledges of support from the United States,
receiving a phone call from President Bush offering her assistance "in any way."
(Reuters)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: ASSAD VISITS -- President Bashar al-Assad of Syria was greeted in Tehran
by President Mohammad Khatami after arriving on his first visit to Iran, a close
regional ally, since taking office last July. Mr. Assad, who has made only a
handful of trips abroad since succeeding his late father, Hafez, is also to meet
with the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, during his two-day visit.
(Agence France-Presse)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); IMMUNITY
(90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); LEGISLATION
(75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE
(72%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (71%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES
(71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); JEWS & JUDAISM (68%); GLOBAL WARMING (62%);
ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (62%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (51%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (52%)

PERSON: JEAN CHRETIEN (60%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%); PAUL MARTIN (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); THE
HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA (92%); CANADA
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1020 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Nation Building'? Yes.

BYLINE:  By Joseph R. Biden Jr.;  Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware is the senior
Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Having just returned from Kosovo, Serbia and Bosnia, I am convinced that
President Bush must change his position on America's role in the Balkans. During
the campaign, the Bush team asserted that extended peacekeeping in the region is
Europe's responsibility, not ours, and that long-term "nation building" missions
only degrade our troops' combat readiness over time.

My extensive experience in the region supports the view that precisely because
the Balkans are central to Europe's security, they are central to our security
-- and thus require our active engagement. Indeed, the development of democracy
in the Balkans and continued American leadership of NATO depend on an American
military presence in Bosnia and Kosovo that lasts until the missions are
successfully completed.

Participation in these missions is seen in the Balkans as a litmus test of our
commitment to stability and democracy in the region. What's more, Western Europe
cannot move toward union and economic growth if Southeastern Europe languishes
in poverty and ethnic hostilities. The massive refugee movements in the Balkans
during the 1990's are only a prelude to what will happen unless the zone of
democratic stability in Europe is extended eastward and southeastward.

It is true that progress toward stable democracies and free-market economies
will be uneven in the Balkans, with their fresh legacy of war, violence and
economic catastrophe.

But already in Kosovo and Bosnia, a new generation of leaders is emerging. And
last fall, the Serbian people rid themselves of Slobodan Milosevic. Their new
leaders, President Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia and Prime Minister Zoran
Djindjic of Serbia, appear to reject aggressive, xenophobic nationalism. My hope
is that they will begin to educate Serbs about the crimes against humanity
perpetrated in their name -- an effort that includes cooperating fully with The
Hague's war crimes tribunal.

Meanwhile, Croatians have moved away from the authoritarianism of the late
President Franjo Tudjman, with the new government in Zagreb cooperating with the
war crimes tribunal. And Slovenia has fulfilled NATO's requirements for
membership. That Balkan success story should be rewarded -- by our support for
Slovenia's admission to NATO.

To be sure, we must make clear that our security umbrella and economic
assistance will continue only if the Balkan nations pick up the pace of
governmental reforms and only if Bosnia breaks free from the stranglehold of its
three nationalist parties.

Does this mean that we are intervening in the Balkans in part to aid "nation
building"? Yes. The fact is, nation building, if done well, can prevent vastly
more expensive full-scale military actions.

Currently, America spends just 1 percent of its defense budget on its
peacekeeping troops in Kosovo and Bosnia. Our European allies provide
approximately four-fifths of these peacekeeping forces. But with our less than
one-fifth contribution, we retain overall command of these forces.

As for the issue of weakening our troops' war readiness, American commanders in
Bosnia and Kosovo vigorously reject the notion that their missions degrade our
troops' ability to handle other conflicts. They say the experience helps develop
skills that enhance the soldiers' abilities in high-intensity conflicts.

Dealing with Balkan conflicts has always been difficult. But America cannot
afford to shy away from this challenge.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); WAR CRIMES (86%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (75%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
(73%); POLITICS (73%); EMERGING MARKETS (72%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (72%);
BUDGETS (72%); DEFENSE SPENDING (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); REFUGEES
(68%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (67%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (63%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); JOE BIDEN (58%) BIDEN, JOSEPH R JR (SEN); BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); ZAGREB, CROATIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); EUROPE
(95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); SLOVENIA (92%); SOUTHEASTERN
EUROPE (92%); CROATIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); SOUTHERN
EUROPE (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (58%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1028 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia, in Risky Move, Plans To Cede Zone to 2nd Rebel Group

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1560 words

DATELINE: SAN PABLO, Colombia, Jan. 22


Two years ago, hoping to end more than 30 years of grinding civil war, President
Andres Pastrana took the unusual step of ceding a Switzerland-size region of
land to the largest guerrilla group in the country to lure it into peace talks.

The talks have gone nowhere. Even the government concedes that the territory has
been used to stage attacks elsewhere, hide kidnapping victims and grow coca.

The rebels from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia are stronger than
ever, and Mr. Pastrana's government now faces the daunting prospect of
dislodging them from 16,000 square miles.

Yet it is a strategy that Mr. Pastrana is preparing to use again. Officials say
he is on the verge of granting a smaller sliver of land in and around this
northern town to the second largest rebel force, the National Liberation Army.

His reasoning is the same -- that pulling police and army units from the
territory offers the best chance to foster peace talks. What is different, the
government says, is that the liberation army is showing a willingness to
negotiate and that the group, weakened by attacks by paramilitary forces, has
more to lose than the Revolutionary Armed Forces, or FARC, by not taking part in
the peace effort.

But many people here say they are not so sure about that. They view the plan as
a risky proposition that could further bleed an already debilitated government
and pull the country into a deepening quagmire.

An array of forces -- paramilitary groups that have gained at the rebels'
expense, ranchers, businessmen and poor farmers -- have lined up against the
plan.

Weary residents say they are eager for any measure that may bring peace. But
they also fear being left defenseless against the guerrillas and say they feel
certain that the abuses that have been carried out in the first rebel zone will
recur in the new one, which would be about the size of Delaware.

"This would be an irreversible act that would fracture the country," said Alvaro
Uribe, a presidential candidate whose popularity has skyrocketed because of his
hard-line stance toward both rebel groups. "I think the alternative is that if
you are going to negotiate with the E.L.N.," he said, referring to the National
Liberation Army, "you do so in a hotel, in another country, but not in a
clearance zone created for that purpose."

The government says it is taking steps to prevent the abuses that occurred in
the larger zone. The liberation army has agreed to allow 150 foreign and
Colombian monitors into the zone to investigate villagers' complaints. The
rebels say they will also let local officials like mayors work free of
intimidation. That has not been the case in the first zone.

"Like the government has always said, we have been discussing more than just a
zone, but the possibility of a peace process," the high commissioner for peace,
Camilo Gomez, said in an interview. "It is a process of peace with a clear
design, with clear signals on the part of an E.L.N. that wants to advance a
political solution."

Proponents of the plan and the rebels say that without a safe haven, the rebels
will not feel secure enough to sit down to talks. The liberation army also says
it wants a place where Colombians in public forums can feel safe to voice their
concerns.

"We need a secure place, a place with tranquillity," the military strategist for
the force, Antonio Garcia, said in a telephone interview. "We need a stable
scenario, where we can count on certain guarantees."

The creation of the zone is being driven in large part by the desire of Mr.
Pastrana, who won office on the promise of ending the war, to reach a peace with
at least one rebel group before presidential elections late next year.

"It's akin to Clinton's Middle East negotiations," said Larry Birns, director of
the Council on Hemispheric Affairs in Washington and an expert on Colombia. "His
presidency will be identified with two things, the E.L.N. negotiations and his
peace efforts with the FARC. In order to have a historical legacy, his policies
have to prove out in one of these two areas."

Mr. Pastrana's efforts to make peace with the liberation army began early last
year, when he announced details of the plan. By spring, angry residents of the
region, the southern part of Bolivar Province, held noisy demonstrations,
blocking roads and delaying the plan.

Last month, talks in Cuba between the liberation army and government negotiators
began to bear fruit. The rebels released 42 captive soldiers and police
officers, and its elusive leader, Nicolas Rodriguez, became more accommodating
in public comments, telling RCN television that the peace effort was
irreversible and that his group was open to a regional cease-fire, a proposal
that the Revolutionary Armed Forces has refused.

Here in this river valley, a lush land of dense jungles, cattle farms, oil
refineries and some of the richest mineral deposits in Latin America, opposition
to the plan by officials and residents has not diminished, and it appears to be
overwhelming.

"We don't want it," said Levis del Carmen, 40, displaying his family's ancient
Remington rifle. "We'll take up arms if we have to. It doesn't matter if the
rebels have better arms. If we can hide, we'll get them when they come in."

Interviews with government officials, human rights workers and dozens of
residents this month found a solid, if smaller, level of support for a
demilitarized zone in the smaller farming communities sprinkled across the
middle Magdalena River Valley, in the hope that such a zone would restore calm
to a region that has been buffeted in the triangular conflict among the rebels,
the government and paramilitary forces.

"Everything that we do for peace is welcome," said Cesar Emilio Palacio, a
farmer in Puerto Matilde, hours from here in the southeast of the planned zone.
"For us, for the Colombian people, we just want to end this violence. We're up
to our eyebrows in it, especially people here in the countryside."

A demilitarized zone, residents hope, will also mean the end of fighting by
paramilitary forces, in particular, the United Self-Defense Force of Colombia,
which Carlos Castano leads. Those forces have committed abuses and moved into
the coca trade as they have taken over territory from the rebels in recent
months.

"The guerrillas, for years, ran the area and they were the ones who made the
rules," said Bishop Jaime Prieto, who has lobbied for the demilitarized zone
from his base in a regional city, Barrancabermeja. "Now it's another outlaw
group, the Self-Defense Forces, and they are the ones who rule. And the people
are under the same kind of pressure."

Experts say the paramilitary groups have tried to whip up opposition to the
cease-fire as part of Mr. Castano's attempt to gain political recognition for
his group and the chance to take part in talks with the government, a move that
the government opposes.

Indeed, the paramilitaries have allies in local organizations like one called No
to the Clearance Zone and another named Asocipaz, whose leaders have been
instrumental in organizing protests.

"We'll defend ourselves," a leader of Asocipaz here, Javier Perez, said. "We
won't let this fall to the guerrillas. I think the only Colombians who believe
in this process are the president and the high commissioner for peace."

The obstacles to the government plan have in many ways been compounded by the
gains of the paramilitary groups, who are now highly unlikely to give up the
money they are reaping from their expanding coca trade without a fight.

Even proponents of the plan acknowledge that ceding territory to the rebels is
not a sure bet, as doubts swirl around the liberation army's commitment to
peace. The group, started by university students and peasants who trained in
Cuba in the early 1960's, had long vowed to topple the government in the name of
social justice. In the 1980's, when other rebel groups, including the
Revolutionary Armed Forces, opened serious talks with the government, the
liberation army stayed away.

In the mid-90's under the leadership of Manuel Perez, a defrocked Roman Catholic
priest who had rebuilt the splintered group, the liberation army embarked on
talks. Efforts for an accord, however, stalled when Mr. Perez died in 1998,
leaving the group fractured.

"One of the things that has been the strength and the weakness of the E.L.N.,
perhaps, is that they don't take any decision in the central command without
what they call consensus," said Walter J. Broderick, writer of "The Invisible
Guerrilla," a biography of Mr. Perez. "They want everyone to be on the same
wavelength. That's one of the reasons why the whole process has been slow."

When the government created the first demilitarized zone, creating an impression
that it was ignoring the liberation army, the alienated group responded with
mass kidnappings, an airliner hijacking and attacks on oil pipelines, acts that
cost them support. But in the last few weeks, signs have emerged that the
leadership of the group has reached a consensus on peace talks.

"I think that we have to have a political solution," said a top commander in
Barrancabermeja, who goes by the nom de guerre Fabian Rodriguez. "We can't keep
this war on for another 50 years. No one would keep following us. To look for a
political resolution is to take a realistic approach that matches the current
situation."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A paramilitary force attacked and burned a village in the San
Lucas Mountains, Vallecito. Smaller farming communities are speaking up in favor
of a demilitarized zone, in the hope of bringing calm to violent areas. (Robert
Stolarik for The New York Times)(pg. A7) Map of Colombia shows the location of
San Pablo: Residents of San Pablo voice doubts about a new rebel zone. (pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); NATIONAL
LIBERATION ARMY (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (74%); ARMIES (73%); MAYORS
(73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES
(50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%); EJERCITO DE
LIBERACION NACIONAL (83%) NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (COLOMBIA); REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (58%) FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); SWITZERLAND (92%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  SAN PABLO (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1047 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Church's Window on the Past, and the Future

BYLINE:  By JOHN W. FOUNTAIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Feb. 8


A slave ship rises in the east, a testament frozen in time and sun-washed
stained glass.

At the New Mount Pilgrim Missionary Baptist Church on Chicago's West Side, the
ship is personified in the Christlike figure of an African man. His muscular,
chain-draped arms are outstretched. His body, from his torso to his calves, is
the pit of a ship, drifting across the Atlantic Ocean with a cargo of men and
women, sardine-packed and bound for slavery.

The window is a symbol of the middle passage, the route through which millions
of Africans traveled, many of them dying, on their way to slavery in America.

On Sunday mornings, when the Rev. Marshall Hatch stands to preach in the pulpit
in this building, formerly a Catholic church; when members of his congregation
lift their eyes and voices; when the spirit is high and the cadence ripe, their
new stained-glass window stands as a reminder of how far they have come as a
people.

As the service begins, the deacons bellow a cappella the Baptist call to prayer,
"I love the Lord, he heard my cry." The congregation responds in Southern-bred
harmony, "I, I, I love the Lord." The light shines through the mural.

Leaders at this church are embracing their past and intending to teach their
children about the black presence in the Bible, while trying to become part of a
continuing national dialogue on reparations for African-Americans. So they
installed the stained glass, from an illustration by Tom Feelings for his
picture book on the middle passage.

The project, which cost $30,000, is called "Maafa Remembrance." Maafa, a Swahili
word pronounced may-AH-fah, means unspeakable horror and is used to refer to the
horrors of the trans-Atlantic slave trade, just as Holocaust is used to refer to
the deaths of millions of Jews at the hands of the Nazis.

Last Friday, the National Reparations Convention opened in Chicago. Organized by
a Chicago alderman, Dorothy J. Tillman, the convention, held over the weekend,
was a gathering of black political and civil rights leaders, local and national,
who drafted a proposal for officials in Washington on ways to compensate
African-Americans for the enslavement of their ancestors.

Mr. Hatch's stained-glass window is part of a wave of projects in the last 10
years at black churches across the country to replace white figures with African
figures in biblical art and stained glass. The effort has been spurred in part
by Afrocentrism and a growing body of literature about blacks in the Bible.

In adding black art and icons, in some cases a black Jesus, to their churches,
black religious leaders seek to make Christianity relevant to their
congregations, who seek hope but sometimes find little solace in the idea of
worshiping a white Jesus, given the history of slavery and racism in this
country. Mr. Hatch and other black preachers hope that depictions of their slave
past can help connect worshipers to God.

"I was there at some point," Mr. Hatch, 42, said recently, standing in the
church's sanctuary, staring at the slaves depicted in the stained-glass window.
"I was in somebody else, but I was present. That's my theology. It makes me
whole to remember that this is what I've come through to get where I am. Then
this passes down to our children.

"If we don't do this going into a new millennium, the memory of these people can
be easily forgotten. So we take their memory into the new millennium, and we
also become a part of the contemporary discourse on how to repair African
people, the reparations movement."

The effects of placing African art and stained glass in black churches run deep,
said the Rev. Gregory Thomas, 53, an adjunct faculty member at Harvard Divinity
School.

"It's very important for people of color, but also others, to see that there are
other icons and that they see themselves within those images," Mr. Thomas said.
"These are just pictures, but they have powerful meanings about God preserving.
That's why the middle passage picture is so important, and we need to tell our
children what this means."

"There are many people who say, 'Well, you have to get over that and move on,' "
he said. "That's a mistake for us as a people and for our country to deny and
not understand."

Others agree. The Rev. Melbalenia Evans, executive minister at Trinity United
Church of Christ in Chicago, which has undertaken a $500,000 project to install
stained-glass windows, said the images of blacks as biblical figures, slaves and
patriarchs in the church are "priceless in terms of letting young people look up
and see themselves in roles that are positive and affirming."

"It is priceless in terms of what it does to one's psychological mind-set," she
said.

It was in a bookstore while he was on sabbatical in 1999 at Harvard Divinity
School that Mr. Hatch stumbled upon "The Middle Passage: White Ships Black
Cargo" (Dial, 1995), a narrative art book by Mr. Feelings. Mr. Hatch was
overpowered by the image, which now fills his church's east window. In his
neighborhood, where poverty and crime run deep, he hopes the image will be one
of hope.

Even for the artist, seeing the window at the New Mount Pilgrim Missionary
Baptist Church at a dedication ceremony seven weeks ago was moving. Mr.
Feelings, 67, of Columbia, S.C., said he had not been to church in years because
he was "turned off" by the images still prevalent in black churches.

"Any black person who goes into that church and sees that image realizes that
we're bound together in this particular way," he said, adding that his art had
never been used in a church until now. "Even though it's a painful experience,
out of it comes this positive spiritual connection."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A detail of a new window at Mount Pilgrim, imagining Christ as
a ship.; The Rev. Marshall Hatch and other black preachers hope that depictions
of their slave past can help worshipers connect with God. (Photographs by Todd
Buchanan for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (90%); SLAVERY (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); BIBLE & CHRISTIAN
TEXTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (78%); RACE & RACISM (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE
(70%); HOLOCAUST (68%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (66%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(66%); HISTORY (65%); CHILDREN (50%) BLACKS;  STAINED GLASS;  SLAVERY;  BAPTIST
CHURCHES

ORGANIZATION: NEW MOUNT PILGRIM MISSIONARY BAPTIST CHURCH (CHICAGO)

PERSON: FOUNTAIN, JOHN W

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (92%)

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: CHICAGO (ILL)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1052 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Accessory to Murder?

BYLINE:  By Samantha Power;  Samantha Power, executive director of the Carr
Center for Human Rights Policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, is the
author of "The Quiet Americans," a forthcoming book on American responses to
genocide.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 2; Book Review Desk; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1072 words


A People Betrayed
The Role of the West in Rwanda's Genocide.
By Linda Melvern.
272 pp. New York:
Zed Books/Palgrave/St. Martin's Press.
Cloth, $69.95. Paper, $19.95.

On April 9, 1994, three days into the genocide in Rwanda, Gen. Romeo Dallaire,
the Canadian commander of 2,500 United Nations peacekeepers, watched as European
troops descended upon Kigali Airport to begin evacuating their citizens. The new
arrivals were cleanshaven, well fed and heavily armed, a marked contrast with
the ragged, ill-equipped force that General Dallaire had battled his own
headquarters to arm, shelter and feed.

Estimates of the number of dead in the capital were already approaching 10,000,
and General Dallaire was overcome by the smell of rotting flesh and the feeling
of utter impotence. He knew that without outside help his troops could not deter
the machete-wielding, largely Hutu militiamen who appeared bent on exterminating
moderate Hutu and ethnic Tutsi citizens. His forces were even running out of
ammunition, fuel, water and food. General Dallaire had pleaded with the Security
Council for troop reinforcements, supplies and the authority to protect
civilians. None of these were forthcoming. The Rwandan people would become, in
the words of Linda Melvern, a British journalist, "a people betrayed."

General Dallaire spent the next two weeks watching his last best hope for
assistance from the West disappear over the horizon. The European evacuation
forces swooped in and out, departing by April 13. Then, in the aftermath of the
murder of 10 Belgian soldiers, the Belgian backbone of the multinational mission
was yanked out. Finally, on April 21, with reports of some 100,000 Rwandans
dead, the Security Council, in perhaps its most shameful hour, slashed the
flimsy peacekeeping force further, leaving 450 troops to tackle tens of
thousands of killers. "An operation should begin with the objective and then
consider how best to achieve it with minimal risk," General Dallaire later
noted. "Instead, our operation began with an evaluation of risk, and if there
was risk, the objective was forgotten."

As a result of the force reduction, peacekeepers often stranded Tutsi who had
sought their protection, leaving them at the mercy of Hutu assailants who
prowled nearby. All told, an estimated 800,000 Rwandans were slaughtered in
fewer than 100 days.

A vast array of international decisions, non-decisions and decisions not to
decide ensured that the Rwandan people and the peacekeepers would be abandoned
to their fates. Two international investigations of the disaster have already
been completed. The current United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, who at
the time of the genocide was the head of the United Nations' peacekeeping
department, commissioned an independent inquiry in May 1999 that proved harshly
critical. And last July, six years after the massacre, the Organization of
African Unity issued a more polemical report, blaming the United States in
particular and calling upon Security Council members to pay reparations to
survivors of what it called "the preventable genocide."

Drawing on these reports, interviews with peacekeepers and previously
unpublished records of private Security Council deliberations, Melvern offers a
vivid picture of the role of Western nations in abetting, ignoring and allowing
Rwanda's genocide. She singles out "accomplices" like France, which, with an eye
to preserving its dominance in the region, provided the murderous Hutu regime
with arms, money and even protection (allegations France has denied). And she
documents the fatal lapses of the more remote bystanders, who, from their
offices in New York, Washington, London, Brussels and Paris, failed Rwanda at
every juncture. Melvern's workmanlike account is not as stirring as Philip
Gourevitch's splendid "We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed
With Our Families." But by capturing the cold, calculating debates at the United
Nations, she has contributed a valuable behind-the-scenes version of the events
that Gourevitch described so movingly on the ground.

In the months before the mass killings began, official Western "Rwanda watchers"
ignored warnings that Hutu militias were mobilizing for extermination of the
Tutsi minority. Annan's peacekeeping office flatly rejected General Dallaire's
requests to seize weapons. And once the killing had begun, American and European
policy makers insisted on withdrawing peacekeepers, refused to jam radio
broadcasts inciting murder and issued only tepid and belated condemnations of
the massacres. To defuse pressure to act, they also notoriously refrained from
labeling the slaughter "genocide."

Stung by the loss in 1993 of 18 American soldiers in Somalia, and vocal
Congressional pressure to steer clear of United Nations operations, the Clinton
administration was the most adamant opponent of sending reinforcements. American
policy makers insisted that the United Nations pinpoint its exit strategy
precisely before it would vote to allow even other countries to deploy a rescue
mission, and also complained about the cost of any expanded peacekeeping
presence.

While Melvern offers an important account of the international response to the
crisis, "A People Betrayed" only begins to tell the story of how and why the
United Nations and its member states failed Rwanda. France, Belgium and the
United Nations have at least been pressured into investigating their roles. But
in the United States, while President Bill Clinton acknowledged on a visit to
Rwanda in 1998 that the United States and the world community "did not do as
much as we could have and should have done to try to limit" the killing, his
administration rejected Congressional calls for an investigation into the
American response and refused requests for high-level cooperation with the
United Nations investigation. "Accountability" was a concept that the last
administration rightly pursued for the perpetrators of genocide but wrongly
evaded itself.

Many count the Rwandan genocide as one of the defining events of the
post-cold-war world. It has become commonplace to hear international statesmen
trumpet the importance of "reforming peacekeeping." But if that effort stands
any chance of success, Western leaders will have to do more than open their eyes
after a genocide. They will have to commit troops and resources to risky
missions, and open their classified files on past disasters.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: PEOPLE BETRAYED, A (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); MURDER (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%);
WRITERS (78%); JOURNALISM (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); LITERATURE (73%);
CRIMINAL ACCESSORIES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%) BOOKS AND
LITERATURE;  REVIEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (58%) POWER, SAMANTHA; MELVERN, LINDA

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (88%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1055 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 985 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Bush to Press Energy Plan During Visit to Mexico
President Bush will bring an agenda to Mexico on Friday that along with trade,
immigration and anti-drug efforts offers a vision of an energy policy reaching
from the Yukon to the Yucatan, weaving together the United States, Mexico and
Canada. But such a plan, which Mr. Bush believes could help stave off
recurrences of the California energy crisis and free the United States from its
addiction to Persian Gulf oil, faces huge financial and legal obstacles.   A1


Likud-Labor Unity Deal Close
Prime Minister-elect Ariel Sharon and the outgoing prime minister, Ehud Barak,
were said to have approved crucial policy guidelines for a coalition government.
A8

Russia and Ukraine Affirm Ties
The presidents of the two former Soviet republics agreed to expand cooperation
in civilian space research and aviation.   A3

Report on Torture in China
Amnesty International said a review of scores of allegations found that torture
and ill treatment of prisoners was widespread and systemic.   A4

Effort to Reduce Drug Prices
The influential charity Oxfam, following the lead of other groups, said it would
press multinational drug companies to cut the prices of life-saving drugs to
poor nations.   A5

U.N. Details Afghans' Plight
More than 150 Afghan civil war refugees, most of them children, have frozen to
death at makeshift refugee camps in Western Afghanistan in recent weeks, United
Nations and private aid officials said.   A10

U.N. to Streamline Congo Force
The United Nations is working on plans to send fewer peacekeeping troops to
Congo than planned, but to send them sooner, to take advantage of the change in
leadership, an official said. The plan reduces the number of troops and
observers to 3,000 from the 5,537 authorized last year.   A9

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-28

Bush Would Shuffle Budget To Improve Troop Benefits
President Bush urged shifting $5.7 billion in Pentagon spending to provide
higher pay and better health care and housing for the armed forces, warning that
substandard benefits and aging barracks were taxing members and their families.
A1

Sub Followed Procedures
Navy officials said the Greeneville was following standard procedures for
detecting surface vessels when it hit a Japanese vessel off Hawaii.   A20

Design Not Cause of Crash
The Marine Corps commandant said investigators had found that the fatal crash of
a V-22 Osprey on Dec. 11 resulted from hydraulic and computer failures, not the
tilt-rotor design.   A20

Clinton Pardon Inquiry
Congressional investigators said they would issue subpoenas in their
investigation of President Bill Clinton's last-minute pardon of Marc Rich to
determine whether there was a link to money being raised for Mr. Clinton's
presidential library.   A26

No. 2 at State Dept. Is Picked
President Bush said he had chosen Richard L. Armitage for deputy secretary of
state. Mr. Armitage, 55, was an assistant secretary of defense in the Reagan
administration.   A26

Failing Grade for Airlines
A Transportation Department report found that airlines had not made delays more
tolerable for passengers, despite promises to do so.   A18

Judicial Pay Raise Sought
A report by the American Bar Association and the Federal Bar Association to
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist asserts that federal judges should get a
raise of nearly 10 percent and that their compensation should not be tied to the
salary level of members of Congress.   A23

Setback for California Utility
A federal judge denied a request by Southern California Edison to let it raise
rates immediately and pass its $5 billion debt to consumers.   A24

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Clinton Changes Office Plan From Midtown to Harlem
Former President Bill Clinton abandoned plans for an office on the 56th floor of
Carnegie Hall Tower and is looking at more modest space 14 floors above Harlem's
main shopping boulevard, 125th Street, between Lenox and Fifth. The rent savings
would be about $528,700 a year.   A1

City Hospitals Faulted
New York City hospitals are the state's worst at informing the State Health
Department of mistakes and unexpected harm suffered by patients, state officials
said.   B1

Neediest Cases   B5

FASHION   B9

EDUCATION

Mixed Grades for Summer Class
Summer school markedly improved the reading levels of elementary school
students, but educators said the gains were far less noteworthy for middle
school students.   B1

ARTS   E1-10

SPORTS   D1-8

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

First Landing on an Asteroid
NASA said the 1,100-pound NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft had defied the odds and
ended its yearlong mission orbiting Eros by landing on the 21-mile-long space
rock.   A1

Human Genome Findings
The biologists who reported their first analysis of the decoded human genome
discussed their findings in a news conference in Washington.   F1

Health & Fitness   F7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Ruling Against Napster
A federal appeals court largely affirmed a lower-court ruling that Napster, the
online music service that shook the record industry by letting users copy music
free, encourages and abets the wholesale infringement of copyrighted works.   A1


Lucent Credit Rating Falls
Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investors Service lowered their ratings on
Lucent's debt to one notch above the junk level, its fourth cut since October.
Questions have mounted about past revenue and regulators have begun looking into
Lucent's accounting practices.   C1

XFL Uproar at NBC
NBC moved to placate Lorne Michaels, the executive producer of "Saturday Night
Live," which was delayed 45 minutes by the second Saturday night broadcast of
XFL football, which plunged in the ratings compared with its first week.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   B8

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: Reaching out to Japan; a flawed wireless auction; basketball's
troubles.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E7
TV Listings   E9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (91%); IMMIGRATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%);
PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (77%); DRUG PRICES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%);
BUDGETS (75%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (73%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (73%); PRICE CUTTING (72%);
DRUG POLICY (72%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); FAMILY
(71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (70%); NAVIES
(70%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (69%); APPROVALS (69%); DEFENSE SPENDING (67%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (65%); CIVIL WAR (65%); SUBPOENAS (62%); ASTRONOMY &
SPACE (53%); LIBRARIES (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (88%); BILL CLINTON (78%); EHUD BARAK (54%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (79%); YUKON
TERRITORY, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CANADA (92%);
NORTH AMERICA (92%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); UKRAINE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bomb Kills 7 Serbs In Kosovo Convoy Guarded by NATO

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Feb. 16


Seven Serbs were killed and more than 40 were injured today when a roadside bomb
blew apart their bus in northeastern Kosovo in one of the boldest and bloodiest
attacks NATO troops have seen in 20 months of peacekeeping.

The attack, the second this week on buses carrying Serbs and guarded by
peacekeepers, was interpreted by Serbian leaders as a sign that extremists among
Kosovo's Albanian majority will resist any move to disband armed Albanian
insurgents who have taken control of a zone of southern Serbia.

The assault today also hinted at more trouble for Kosovo's peacekeepers. Almost
immediately, Serbs in Gracanica, a village just south of Kosovo's capital,
Pristina, retaliated by blocking a main road and burning at least one car
belonging to the United Nations mission, which has administered the province
since the NATO war against Yugoslavia ended in June 1999.

Bracing themselves for further violence that belies Western claims to have
brought calm to a province where ethnic hatreds still burn fiercely,
peacekeepers denounced the bomb attack as premeditated and ruthless. Lord
Robertson, the secretary general of NATO, extended sympathy to the families of
the victims and expressed "shock and outrage at this disgraceful and cowardly
incident."

"NATO did not conduct its air campaign in order to see ethnic cleansing by one
group replaced by the ethnic attacks and intimidation of another," the statement
added.

Also using strong language, President Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia expressed
his "extreme loathing" for the attack, which he blamed on Albanian extremists
who, he said, wanted to destabilize Kosovo and the entire Balkans in order to
obtain their dreams of independence and a greater Albania.

He and other Serbian leaders linked the attack to opponents of the government's
proposals, presented this week, to bring peace to the tense Presevo region of
southern Serbia, where Albanian rebels have taken advantage of the agreement
ending the Kosovo war to assert control of an area from which NATO had barred
Serbian troops.

At the news of the violence, legislators in the Yugoslav Parliament interrupted
a debate on an amnesty law that had promised to free hundreds of Albanian
prisoners still being held in Serbia.

Barely three weeks old, the Serbian government is starting to look a little
beleaguered, with threats and violence appearing on every side.

The 18-party alliance that secured victory for Mr. Kostunica over Slobodan
Milosevic in the elections last September went on to mount a revolt that toppled
Mr. Milosevic in October and then to win Serbian parliamentary elections in
December. But those politicians are only now taking control of the levers of
power and appointing new police chiefs, prosecutors and judges.

While the government wants to turn its attention to much needed economic
measures, as well as crime and corruption, it has been preoccupied by the
violence in and around Kosovo, and arguments with Serbia's smaller sister
republic Montenegro, which is threatening to secede.

Clashes between Albanian rebels and Serbian military and police forces in
southern Serbia are reported daily, and the military operation alone is costing
the impoverished government the equivalent of $30,000 a day, according to a
senior Yugoslav minister.

Organized crime also represents a dangerous problem, ministers warned this week.
The new Interior Minister, Dusan Mihajlovic, had a run-in with armed gunmen in
downtown Belgrade during the night, and warned today that organized crime gangs
connected to the old leadership of Mr. Milosevic were aiming for members of the
new government.

A gunman fired on the minister's security escort as it slowed at an intersection
at about 1 a.m., although it is not clear if the attack was intended for the
minister himself. But Mr. Mihajlovic said he had already received a number of
threats and said he was sure there would be more. "All of us in the government
are targets and they are trying to eliminate us," he said.

Just days ago, a jeep belonging to Cedomir Jovanovic, an aide to Prime Minister
Zoran Djindjic, was blown up in central Belgrade and the driver of the newly
appointed State Security chief, Goran Petrovic, was shot in the arms while
waiting in his car.

"Parts of the Interior Ministry are not only connected with organized crime but
also with the former political leadership, which is directing their attacks on
the new government," Mr. Mihajlovic said at a news conference.

Mr. Kostunica meanwhile appealed to all in Kosovo to reject violence and opt for
peace. It was high time for the Albanians in Kosovo to realize that the violence
against Serbs and other minorities in the province "has done them immense harm
and that they find the strength and courage to confront it," the statement said.

But Mr. Kostunica added a strong plea to Serbs not to retaliate either, and to
trust international peacekeepers and the United Nations police to guarantee that
all ethnic groups could live in Kosovo.

The Serbs who were killed, all civilians, were in a bus in a convoy of eight
vehicles traveling from Serbia proper into Kosovo, accompanied by Swedish
peacekeepers. Serbs live in enclaves and isolated villages in Kosovo and rarely
travel alone or unprotected. Peacekeepers escort them to and from the border
with Serbia, where they visit relatives, take care of paperwork or do business.

The bomb, a remote-controlled device, was planted by the side of the main road
linking Nis, in southern Serbia, with Podujevo, in Kosovo, and was detonated
after the peacekeepers' vehicle had passed. British troops who guard the border
were on the scene within minutes and evacuated the injured to a nearby military
hospital.

An officer told reporters that they had quickly found the detonation wire and
the spot where the attackers had hidden. They detained two people at the scene,
although it is not clear they are suspected of carrying out the attack.

United Nations officials have repeatedly warned of the dangers of renewed
violence in Kosovo since last fall, when the political shifts in Belgrade and
the West's embrace of Mr. Kostunica and the other new Serbian leaders began to
alarm the Albanians and made them feel vulnerable.

Mr. Kostunica, a constitutional lawyer by training, has done little to dispel
such fears with statements frequently laced with Serbian nationalism. This week,
at a news conference, he reiterated his desire to see Serbs -- including members
of the Yugoslav Army -- return to Kosovo, something that is envisaged eventually
in the United Nations resolution that ended the Kosovo war but resisted by the
United Nations administrators and Albanians who remember the atrocities
committed by the Serbian police and Yugoslav soldiers.

The bomb today attack followed another attack on a Serbian convoy on Tuesday
when a gunman opened fire on a bus, killing one Serb and injuring two children
near the village of Strpce in southern Kosovo. Ukrainian peacekeepers reported
finding more explosives planted by the roadside in that area, apparently in
preparation for further attacks on passing convoys, according to the independent
Beta news agency.

The violence indirectly affected hundreds of Albanian prisoners still being held
in Serbian jails. Of 650 Albanians, 570 are considered political prisoners, most
of them arrested in Kosovo by Serbian forces during the NATO bombing campaign in
1999 and sentenced on very little evidence, according to Duska Anastasijevic of
the independent Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade.

The Yugoslav government has drafted an amnesty law that -- when passed -- would
free at least half of the Albanians, as well as absolve thousands of
draft-dodgers in Yugoslavia. Nearly 200 of the Albanian prisoners are charged
with terrorism and may not be included in the amnesty; they are expected to have
their charges commuted by the Supreme Court and then be released.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A bomb planted on a road in northeastern Kosovo killed seven
Serbs yesterday on a bus in a convoy protected by NATO peacekeepers. The remains
of the bus were strewn on the pavement near the town of Podujevo. (Andrew Testa
for The New York Times)(pg. A8) Map of Kosovo highlighting Podujevo: A bombing
occurred near Podujevo, just within Kosovo's border. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ELECTIONS (88%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
POLITICS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); AMNESTY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (65%); CORRUPTION (60%); JUDGES (60%); POLICE FORCES (57%) CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); ALBANIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); KOSOVO (95%);
MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  GRACANICA (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1068 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE:  Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 925 words


EUROPE

GERMANY: JEWS TO SUE OVER INTERNET -- The Central Council for Jews said it
intended to sue Internet service providers exhibiting extreme right-wing or
racist Web pages. The group expressed frustration at what it called the "snail's
pace" of government action in applying anti-Nazi laws to fight racist and
anti-Semitic Internet content.  Desmond Butler (NYT)


CHECHNYA: AID ROLLS AGAIN -- A 48-truck convoy carrying 48 tons of food and
other aid rumbled into Chechnya, marking the end of a five-week hiatus in
deliveries spurred by the abduction of an American relief worker. The United
Nations coordinated the delivery, which traveled without a Russian military
escort but was not accompanied by foreign aid workers, who have been ordered to
enter Chechnya only with armed escorts. Aid halted on Jan. 9 after gunmen seized
Kenneth Gluck, above, of Doctors Without Borders. He was later freed.  Michael
Wines (NYT)

BRITAIN: NEW TERROR LAW -- Britain put into effect a new law expanding
government power to ban groups and fund-raising campaigns suspected of promoting
terrorism abroad. The law, replacing one aimed at the Irish Republican Army,
comes in response to overseas complaints that Britain offers a haven to groups
plotting violence in their countries. Now groups like Hamas and Hezbollah could
be outlawed.  Warren Hoge (NYT)

TURKEY: TOP-LEVEL 'CRISIS' -- Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit stormed out of a
meeting of political and military leaders, saying he had been insulted by
President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, creating a "serious crisis." Financial analysts
feared that the episode endangered efforts to meet strict targets imposed by the
International Monetary Fund, and the Istanbul Stock Exchange dropped by 14.6
percent. No details were provided on the dispute.  Douglas Frantz (NYT)

LITHUANIA: NEW HOLOCAUST CASE -- Days after gaining its first Holocaust-related
conviction, a Lithuania court cleared the way for an 85-year-old man to be
extradited from Scotland for trial on charges of murdering Jews in World War II.
Anatanas Gecas is a Lithuanian whom Scottish television has accused of leading a
police battalion responsible for killing Jews in Lithuania and Belarus. He
denies the charges.  Michael Wines (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

BRAZIL: PRISON RIOT ENDING -- Riot troops were seizing control of prisons in Sao
Paulo State in a bid to end Brazil's biggest inmate uprising, which left at
least 15 dead before more than 7,000 hostages were released, officials said.
Guards invaded Latin America's largest prison, Carandiru, and started a
cell-by-cell search in what appeared to be a negotiated end to the 25-hour
siege. Authorities had already taken over other prisons.  (Reuters)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: LABOR OPPOSITION -- Ehud Barak, the caretaker prime minister, faced
bitter opposition from within his own Labor Party for his agreement to serve as
defense minister and to take his party into a unity government under Prime
Minister-elect Ariel Sharon. It is still too early to determine if the internal
opposition is stronger than Mr. Barak, and how the Labor Party's central
committee will vote on the decision early next week.
Deborah Sontag (NYT)

EGYPT: SOCIOLOGIST CASE ADJOURNS -- Prosecutors ended their arguments in a
defamation trial against Saad Eddin Ibrahim, a prominent sociologist charged
with spreading reports abroad about electoral fraud and religious intolerance in
Egypt. The court adjourned until April 14 to give the defense time to prepare
its response in the case, which is being monitored by human rights activists as
a barometer of government tolerance to independent groups.  Neil MacFarquhar
(NYT)

AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: JOURNALIST LEAVES -- A BBC correspondent left the country a day after
unknown assailants attacked his home in the capital, Harare. A high court judge
ordered the government to stop harassing Joseph Winter, who had been ordered to
leave the country. The court delayed the deportation until Friday, but Mr.
Winter said he left because he feared for the safety of his family.
Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

ASIA

KASHMIR: JUDICIAL INQUIRY -- An army commanding officer in Kashmir, Lt. Gen.
John Ranjan Mukherjee, acknowledged that security forces had fired into crowds
of protesters in the last week, killing seven, and promised a judicial inquiry.
The incidents set off widespread protests in Kashmir and have undermined India's
efforts to claim the moral high ground with a cease-fire in the 12-year-old
conflict there with anti-India militants.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

INDONESIA: SUHARTO CHARGES -- Prosecutors barred Siti Hardiyanti Rukmana, left,
eldest daughter of the former dictator Suharto, from leaving Indonesia for a
year because of corruption allegations, and also declared his half-brother,
Probosutedjo, a suspect in another graft case. The actions follow a promise by
President Abdurrahman Wahid to prosecute those responsible for corruption under
Mr. Suharto. Mr. Wahid ordered the crackdown after Parliament threatened to
impeach him over links to two other corruption scandals.  (AP)

PHILIPPINES: CEASE-FIRE ORDERED -- President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo said today
that she would order a cease-fire with the largest group of separatist Muslim
rebels in an effort to boost peace talks. The group, the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front, is fighting for a separate Islamic state in the country's south.
Yesterday she approved the release of 49 dissidents to help restart peace talks
with the Muslim separatists and with Communist rebels who are waging a Marxist
insurgency nationwide, officials said.  (AP, Reuters)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
CORRECTIONS (85%); PRISONS (84%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); TERRORISM (76%); WORLD WAR II (76%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (75%); FUNDRAISING (74%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (74%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HOSTAGE TAKING (74%); INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS (73%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); HAMAS (72%); HEZBOLLAH (71%); RIOTS (70%);
ARMED FORCES (69%); STOCK INDEXES (68%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (66%); PHYSICIANS
& SURGEONS (54%); MURDER (52%); STOCK EXCHANGES (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM
NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (55%); HAMAS (54%); HEZBOLLAH (54%)

PERSON: AHMET NECDET SEZER (50%); EHUD BARAK (50%)

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: LITHUANIA (94%); BRAZIL (93%); SCOTLAND (92%); GERMANY (92%); EUROPE
(92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); TURKEY (79%); BELARUS
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); NORTH & SOUTH
AMERICAS (52%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1084 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

February 18-24;
Ruling on Balkan Rapes

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 83 words


In a landmark case, the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague
sentenced three Bosnian Serbs to between 12 and 28 years in prison for raping
and torturing Muslim girls and women and using them as sex slaves.

It was the first international tribunal to convict soldiers for wartime mass
rape and sexual enslavement. Women's groups that had lobbied for prosecution
were pleased with the ruling, which said that the offenses, committed in 1992,
were crimes against humanity.   Marlise Simons

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); SLAVERY (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (88%); WOMEN (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); NEWS BRIEFS
(86%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); NETHERLANDS
(90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1085 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Must Fight Slavery, From Bosnia to Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 157 words


To the Editor:

The conviction by a United Nations war crimes tribunal of former Bosnian Serb
soldiers for enslaving and raping Muslim women is a watershed (front page, Feb.
23). While slavery and the slave trade are outlawed in many international
treaties, millions live in bondage.

The United Nations tribunal must act against slavery and gang rape wherever they
occur. One glaring example is southern Sudan, where gang rape of women and girls
during slave raids is common.

Many teenage girls who have been liberated recount being repeatedly raped by
government-backed militiamen. Yet the testimony of these young women is
generally met with silence. Just because the victims are not white Europeans
does not mean that we can ignore their plight.

The landmark ruling at The Hague should be but the start of a persistent
campaign against slavery around the world.

JESSE SAGE
Associate Director
American Anti-Slavery Group
Boston, Feb. 23, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (95%); SEX OFFENSES (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WOMEN (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (88%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (66%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%) SLAVERY;  WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  SEX CRIMES;  TORTURE;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; AMERICAN ANTI-SLAVERY GROUP

PERSON: SAGE, JESSE; KUNARAC, DRAGOLJUB

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (79%);
NETHERLANDS (78%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1088 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hague Tribunal Convicts Bosnian Croat for War on Muslims

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 26


In its first trial of a senior Balkan political figure, the United Nations war
crimes tribunal at The Hague today found a former Bosnian Croat leader guilty of
playing an important role in a campaign against Muslim civilians.

The court sentenced Dario Kordic, 40, who was long a close ally of President
Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, to 25 years in prison for crimes against humanity and
other violations. It also convicted Mario Cerkez, 41, a former brigade commander
of Croatian troops in Bosnia, of similar crimes and sentenced him to 15 years in
prison.

The charges stem from events in 1992 and 1993, when Bosnian Croats, backed by
the Croatian government in Zagreb, staged a military offensive against more than
a dozen towns and villages in the Lasva Valley of central Bosnia. The campaign
led to the persecution, killing and imprisonment of hundreds of people, and to
the destruction of homes, schools and mosques. The judges said the ultimate goal
of the terror campaign was to empty the valley of its Muslim inhabitants and
annex that part of Bosnia to Croatia.

Summarizing the verdict, Judge Richard May of Britain said it had been a savage
and ruthless campaign, "in which no distinction was made as to the age of its
victims: young and old were either murdered or expelled and their houses were
burned." The verdict said, "The total number of dead may never be known, but it
runs into hundreds, with thousands expelled."

One notorious attack was in the largely Muslim village of Ahmici, where, the
judges said, the Croatian forces attacked early in the morning of April 16,
1993. More than 100 people, including 32 women and 11 children, were killed.
Some who were elderly or sick burned to death when soldiers set fire to their
homes, where people were asleep or hiding in basements. The village was
destroyed. "There were similar attacks on the villages up and down the Lasva
Valley and on the town of Vitez," the judges' summary said.

Kenneth Scott, an American who was one of the prosecutors, called the sentences
"light" and "not adequate." But prosecutors said they would make no decision
about an appeal until they had read the full written ruling.

The defense also seemed surprised by the relatively mild sentences. A defense
lawyer for Mr. Kordic said his client was "not as unhappy and disappointed as he
could be."

A heavier punishment had been expected by legal experts because the court last
year handed down its harshest sentence so far when it convicted a Croatian
general, Tihomir Blaskic, to 45 years of imprisonment for atrocities committed
by his soldiers in the same campaign. He is appealing the sentence.

In its ruling today, the court linked Mr. Kordic and General Blaskic to a number
of the same events. Both men were considered part of the inner circle of
President Tudjman who, at the time of his death in December 1999, was reportedly
under investigation himself for his role in the Croats' campaign against Serbs
and Muslims.

General Blaskic gave himself up to the tribunal in 1996, and Mr. Kordic
surrendered in 1997 after intense pressure by Western governments on Mr.
Tudjman.

Mr. Kordic, as the chief executive of the Croatian Defense Council, the military
authority in the area, was in effect one of the general's political superiors.
Even though the two accused were involved in the same campaign, the judges said
today that the prosecution had not demonstrated that Mr. Kordic was "an
architect or the prime mover" of the persecution of the non-Croatian inhabitants
of the Lasva valley.

But they told Mr. Kordic that "you were the effective political commander in the
area," and had "joined the campaign enthusiastically and played an instrumental
part" in the offensives.

Mr. Kordic, however, was not convicted of "command responsibility" -- that is,
he was not held accountable for actions or atrocities committed by military
subordinates. But the judges told him: "The fact that you were a politician and
took no part in the actual execution of the crimes makes no difference. You
played your part as surely as the men who fired the guns."

Addressing Mr. Cerkez today, the judges said his position was different from Mr.
Kordic's because he had been a soldier and a middle-ranking commander. But his
role was "aggravated because of your role as a commander."

The judges found Mr. Cerkez not guilty of some of the prosecution's charges. For
instance, they said the military police bore the main responsibility for the
attack on Ahmici, and were not under his command. But the judges said he led his
Viteska Brigade in assaults on three other towns, leading to civilian deaths and
destruction. The judges said positive testimony they heard about his character
would not mitigate his "international crimes."

The judgment is the 10th to be handed down by this tribunal dealing with crimes
linked to the violent breakup of Communist-era Yugoslavia. It has been one of
the longest cases before the court, lasting 20 months and involving 241
witnesses. The transcript of the proceedings runs to 28,000 pages.

Judge May said the trial had been "extremely long" because the defense had not
only insisted that the accused had no responsibility whatsoever, but had also
argued that the events did not take place. So the court first had to establish
that there had been a military campaign in the Lasva area, requiring calling in
more witnesses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); PRISONS
(90%); SENTENCING (90%); RELIGION (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
ARSON (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (75%); CHILDREN (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); BURN INJURIES (73%); FIRES (71%); APPEALS (60%); MURDER
(58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: KORDIC, DARIO; TUDJMAN, FRANJO (1922-99); CERKEZ, MARIO; SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); ZAGREB, CROATIA (72%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: BOSNIA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1089 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 28, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Promises Colombia Help on Trade but Refuses Peace Role

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


In his first meeting with President Andres Pastrana of Colombia, President Bush
agreed today to press for expanding trade preferences to Colombia, but refused a
request to take part in peace talks with leftist guerrillas, officials said.

Mr. Bush told Mr. Pastrana that he would work with lawmakers to renew the Andean
Trade Preference Act, a decade-old accord that expires in December, and seek to
increase the categories of Colombian goods that may enter the American market
under reduced tariffs, a senior official told reporters after the meeting.

But Mr. Bush declined to take part in peace negotiations between the Pastrana
government and Marxist rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or
FARC, which has battled the Colombian state for four decades. Both Mr. Pastrana
and FARC leaders last week invited the United States and Cuba to join a group of
nations assisting in the on-again-off-again talks, which resume in March.

"This is an issue that the Colombian people and the Colombian president can deal
with," said Mr. Bush, who appeared for brief remarks with Mr. Pastrana at his
side. "We'll be glad to help Colombia in any way to make the peace. We'll be
glad to help the Colombian economy through trade. But I won't be present for the
discussions."

Mr. Bush was effusive in his praise for Mr. Pastrana, whose ambitious strategy
to pacify the nation, promote development and curb drugtrafficking has been
underwritten in part with $1.3 billion in mostly military aid from the United
States. Mr. Bush has endorsed Plan Colombia -- a holdover from the Clinton
administration -- but has discussed the need for limits on the extent of
American involvement in Colombia and ruled out the use of American combat troops
there.

"President Pastrana is a courageous leader who is dealing with very difficult
problems," Mr. Bush said. "I am confident that with his leadership his nation
will be better off."

In an interview this week, Mr. Pastrana asserted that his nation had "turned a
corner" in several key areas. He cited the FARC's agreement to resume peace
talks, the American-supported eradication of 75,000 acres of coca in two months
in the drug-growing regions of Putumayo and Caqueta, and four quarters of growth
in an economy struggling to emerge from its worst recession in history.

Despite that progress, Colombia experts and some lawmakers sounded a skeptical
note. There will be no fast resolution to Colombia's problems, they said,
citing, among other things, the need to establish the rule of law and to rein in
paramilitary and security forces, which were harshly criticized by the State
Department's human rights bureau this week.

"The jury's still out as to whether these are going to lead to sustained
improvements in bringing the country to peace and greater control," said Michael
Shifter, a senior fellow at the Inter-American Dialogue, a forum for hemispheric
leaders.

Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who returned from a visit to Colombia
earlier this month, called on the administration to chart a plan that addresses
how long the American-backed effort will take and how much it will cost.

"I think I made the right decision when when we voted for this assistance," Mr.
McCain said. "Not because of any wild enthusiasm, but because I believe there is
no alternative."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); LIBERALISM (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERVIEWS
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
RECESSION (76%); ECONOMIC NEWS (76%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (75%); CIVIL WAR
(74%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (71%); RULE OF LAW
(70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (60%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1090 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2001 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Sexual Violence as Tool of War: Pattern Emerging in East Timor

BYLINE:   By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1241 words

DATELINE: ERMERA, East Timor, Feb. 25


There is one happy thing one glorious thing -- in the shamed and broken life of
Lorenca Martins. Far from her family, hidden away from her neighbors, she lives
in poverty in a tiny hillside house where the loud buzz of cicadas fills her
loneliness.

Her past is too traumatic to think of and her future too uncertain. To almost
every question, Miss Martins, 24, replies that her only thoughts now are of her
beaming 5-month-old baby, Rai, the child of the man who raped her.

"I think I'm just like any mother," she said as she nursed her child. "The only
thing that's important to me now is my baby."

As East Timor recovers from the violence and destruction that followed its vote
for independence from Indonesia in 1999, more and more stories are emerging of
women like Miss Martins -- dozens, even hundreds of rapes, often involving
torture and egregious humiliation.

Investigators say it has become clear that the crimes of the Indonesian military
and the local militias it commanded -- opponents of independence -- include not
only massacres, widespread destruction and mass deportations but also rape and
sexual slavery on a wide and possibly systematic scale.

"Many of these acts were planned, organized and sustained," says a carefully
researched report by East Timor's leading women's aid association. The report
says militia members and soldiers connived "to abduct women or share them like
chattel, or in some cases forcibly taking women across the border into West
Timor where the women were raped daily and made to perform household chores."

It is only recently that rape has been recognized as a war crime and as a crime
against humanity. This month, in the first such conviction, an international
tribunal in The Hague sentenced three Bosnian Serbs to long prison terms for
such sexual violence.

As a newly created tribunal begins its work here in East Timor, its first dozen
cases will include one charge of rape. More may follow.

As of late last year, the aid group had documented 165 cases of "gender-based
violations" in 1999, including 46 cases of rape. The chief investigator of sex
crimes for the United Nations, David Senior, said the full total is probably "in
the hundreds," with violations still continuing in camps in West Timor where
approximately 100,000 people remain under the control of the militias.

"We are coming up with new cases all the time," said Mr. Senior. "I don't think
we've scratched the surface on the incidents of rape. With more confidence, I
think these cases will continue to be reported at a staggering rate."

But numbers alone do not tell the story, he said.

"How do you put a number on 5 women being raped by 12 guys?" he said. "How do
you put a number on a woman being raped daily for six months? How do you put a
number on one girl being raped by three guys for five nights? For me, numbers
don't describe the impact that rape has had on the women of East Timor."

As with Miss Martins, who has been told by one local leader to leave this remote
town 50 miles from the capital, Dili, the victims have often become outcasts.

Some have been shunned by their husbands and their communities as "dirty," said
Olandina Alves, a Timorese social worker who has counseled victims here and in
Dili. In some cases, family members have threatened to kill the babies born of
rapes, Mr. Senior said. In one town, Roman Catholic church workers refused to
allow baptisms for the babies or confessions for their mothers.

The shame of victimhood is so strong that some victims, hearing of
investigations and possible court proceedings, fear it is they who will be
brought to trial for their "relationships" with members of the militias,
according to the women's aid association, Forum Komunikasi Untuk Perempuan Loro
Sae, which is known by the shortened name Fokupers.

"I think these women suffer unbearable silence in their lives as to what they
have been through," said Samantha Aucock, a South African aid worker in the
southern city of Suai, where dozens of women were reportedly raped or
transported to West Timor to serve as sexual slaves.

Mr. Senior said the reports he had gathered suggest that some instances of mass
rape coincided with massacres that occurred both before the independence vote --
in April and May 1999 -- and in the three weeks of destruction that followed the
Aug. 30 vote. The territory, once a colony of Portugual, was annexed by
Indonesia in 1975 after Portugual withdrew.

Ms. Alves said it was possible that the rapes were part of the destruction of
East Timor that investigators are now piecing together as an orchestrated
scorched-earth policy commanded by Indonesia's military.

"They had a plan to destroy all of East Timor," she said. "Rape is one way to
ruin a people too. And so, I wonder, was it a part of their plan of destruction
to rape and torture the women?"

Based on survivor accounts, she said, it appeared that militia units and
Indonesian soldiers had sometimes carried out the rapes in an organized fashion.
"Many times, the young girls were raped by high-ranking officers," she said.
"Those who were married or were not young any more were raped by lower ranking
people."

But the cruelty of many of the rapes seemed to go beyond any systematic policy,
she said. She told the story of a 21-year-old woman named Angelina who was raped
by 11 men in the town of Gleno, where Miss Martins had also lived.

"First they asked for everything in the house, money and everything, and they
said they would kill her father," Mrs. Alves said. "So the family gave them
everything. Then they still threatened the father, so Angelina agreed to be
raped just to save her father. But after they got the money and raped her, they
killed her father anyway. When they did that, she ran around and screamed, and
so they killed her too."

It was a member of the militia named Maximu who took Miss Martins to be his
sexual property in December 1999, in a West Timor refugee camp near the town of
Atambua. When he abducted her, he was wearing a black T-shirt bearing the name
of his militia group, Red Blood.

"He never said anything to me," Miss Martins said. "He just said he would kill
me if I did not have sex with him. He always acted angry. And I always had to
smile at him in public. I didn't smile at him because I liked him but because I
was afraid of him."

When she tried to flee, she said, he locked the door and threatened her with a
pistol. Already pregnant, she made her escape back to East Timor a year ago. She
never learned his last name.

The story she tells could be the story of a woman named Maria da Costa, 26, who,
according to court documents in Dili, was raped in Atambua by a man named
Leonardus Casa, 27.

In an interview at the Dili courthouse, Mr. Casa put forward a defense that Miss
Martins's tormentor might also use: He knew his victim. She belonged to him. The
sex was consensual.

Beyond that, Mr. Casa said, he knew less than just about anybody else in East
Timor about the violence occurring around him. "I never saw any massacre or any
destruction," he said. "I never even left my house."

If the man named Maximu ever returns from West Timor and if he is ever brought
to court, Miss Martins said she would be willing to face him and testify against
him.

And what would she say to him when she sees him?

Miss Martins smiled and cracked her knuckles nervously. "I wouldn't say
anything," she said. "I have nothing to say to him. I just want him to suffer
the way I did."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 17, 2001



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Feb. 23 about the conviction of three former
Bosnian Serb soldiers by the war crimes tribunal in The Hague and a front-page
article on March 1 about rapes in East Timor during political violence there in
1999 misstated the precedent for a conviction for rape as a crime against
humanity. The first such conviction occurred in September 1998 at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It was not the conviction last month
in The Hague.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Leonardus Casa, 27, accused of rape, with his wife and
sister-in-law at a Dili tribunal. "I never saw any massacre or any destruction,"
he said.; Lorenca Martins with her 5-month-old boy, Rai. They are victims of the
violence that followed the East Timor vote for independence. (Photographs by
Anastasia T. Vrachnos for The New York Times)(pg. A10) Map of East Timor
highlighting Ermera: Counselors are doing what they can for the shunned in
Ermera. (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (87%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); SENTENCING (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (72%); SLAVERY (72%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); DEPORTATION (72%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); ARMED FORCES (67%); POLITICS (66%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%) SEX CRIMES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DEPORTATION;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

CITY: DILI, TIMOR-LESTE (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (77%)

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (77%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA;

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1096 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends: Crimes Against Humanity;
A New Legal Weapon to Deter Rape

BYLINE:   By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


WHEN Judge Florence Mumba of Zambia confronted three Bosnian Serbs at the war
crimes tribunal in The Hague last month and convicted them of rape and sexual
enslavement, she dismissed two excuses that soldiers have used through the ages:
"boys will be boys" and "I was only following orders."

For the first time, a war crimes tribunal ruled that rape was a crime against
humanity, and did not have to be ordered from above to rise to that highest
level of atrocity.

"Lawless opportunists," Judge Mumba said, "should expect no mercy, no matter how
low their position in the chain of command may be." In fact, she added, rape did
not have to be perpetrated in time of war to be a punishable offense. "In time
of peace as much as in time of war, men of substance do not abuse women," she
said.

Madeleine K. Albright, the former secretary of state, who as the American
representative at the United Nations pushed for the creation of war crimes
tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, and also pushed for more attention to
crimes against women, called the judgments "a huge deal." Rape, she said, "is a
weapon of war, and to have that recognized was a very big step forward."

After the United Nations, in the mid-1990's, set up the first international war
crimes courts in half a century, it made the crucial decision to expand the list
of crimes to include abuses of women. What Judge Mumba and her panel have now
done is to demonstrate that these crimes can be prosecuted successfully.

Gauging the eventual practical impact of that precedent is more difficult.

According to Ruth Wedgwood, an expert on the United Nations and international
law who teaches at the Yale Law School, the Hague decisions can be expected to
encourage more prosecutions. Those decisions, she said "could mean that in the
future, women's cases will get more resources, and attention to gender balance
on tribunals, a sufficient number of women in prosecutors' offices and dealing
sensitively with rape victims."

"But this is more iconographic, more emblematic, than it is a legal change," she
continued.

In fact, she pointed out, rape has been identified as a war crime since the
American Civil War, when Francis Lieber included it in his code of conduct for
the Union Army. It was also mentioned in the 1949 Geneva Conventions (but
demurely, as an "outrage upon personal dignity" in civil wars).

But prosecution of this crime, as of all war crimes, has always been the
problem. Typically the military officers who commanded the offenders also made
decisions about whom to charge, and that has often meant an unenthusiastic
prosecution, or none at all.

On the other hand, international judgments, like those from Nuremberg and Tokyo
in the 1940's, do set standards of international acceptability, to which all
nations are then expected to adjust the conduct of their troops. In that
context, Ms. Wedgwood was struck by the message sent in convicting men who were
not committing the kind of large-scale abuses that until now have defined crimes
against humanity.

"They've not been charged with the abuse of 10,000 women," she said. "They were
not like the commander of the entire comfort-women enterprise of the Japanese
Army." She said that the ordinariness of the men "makes the conviction more
significant."

Some analysts argue that in the half- century since the war crimes tribunals in
Germany, profound changes in the social as well as legal atmosphere helped make
this new verdict possible. As women's movements have reduced squeamishness about
discussing rape and other sexual abuses, women have slowly become braver in
bringing evidence to tribunals, not only in the Balkans but also in Africa.
There have also been convictions involving rape at the war crimes tribunal for
Rwanda, but only under the umbrella of broader criminal definitions like
torture.

THE new atmosphere of openness and determination among women to press for
attention to crimes against them has had effects in many areas. In East Timor,
for example, where evidence is now unfolding of rape and sexual enslavement on a
mass scale by pro-Indonesian militias, a special office for women's issues is
part of the United Nations administration now governing the territory, and more
attention is being paid to women in refugee camps, where they are almost always
vulnerable to abuse.

Ms. Wedgwood said the United Nations might heed the message of the trial and
begin to take more responsibility for abuses committed by peacekeeping troops
sent out under its flag. Under present rules, peacekeepers charged with rape or
other offenses are still turned over to their national governments and sent
home, not always to punishment.

Looking back over the last decade, some legal experts are surprised at the speed
with which the war crimes tribunals have expanded new fields of law governing
military behavior, helping to lay a strong foundation for a permanent
international court now being considered by the United Nations.

"The whole war crimes operation has gone a lot farther and a lot faster than
anybody ever thought when the United States early in the Clinton administration
first came out for setting up the tribunals," said Warren Zimmerman, who was the
American ambassador to Yugoslavia as it was splintering a decade ago. Since
then, he said, not only has it been proved that Balkan war criminals can be
caught but also "the whole definition of what's accountable before this court
has been broadened."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 11, 2001



CORRECTION: An article last Sunday about an international criminal tribunal's
ruling that rape is a crime against humanity misspelled the judge's surname in
some copies. She is Florence Mumba, not Kumba.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Bosnian woman who was raped during the recent war, with her
sons. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WOMEN (89%);
TRENDS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); ARMIES (78%); SLAVERY (78%); VERDICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); LAWYERS
(75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); ETHICS (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (62%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) SEX CRIMES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: MOMBA, FLORENCE (JUDGE); CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1108 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 32 words


An article last Sunday about an international criminal tribunal's ruling that
rape is a crime against humanity misspelled the judge's surname in some copies.
She is Florence Mumba, not Kumba.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (85%); SEX
OFFENSES (84%) SEX CRIMES

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1110 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Anatomy of a Teenage Shooting

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

Re "Santee Is Latest Blow to Myth of Suburbia's Safer Schools" (front page,
March 9):

Adults are failing our children.

Our smart, well-educated kids, even those in fine suburban schools, know
everything about gender, race, human rights and giving to charity, but they
don't learn inclusion and kindness.

If we want a society that does not discriminate, we cannot allow cruelty to run
rampant in lunchrooms and at recess. The issue is not "not discriminating"; it
is not even "not bullying." These are passive actions.

We must practice and model kindness and inclusion. Adults must challenge the
assumption that cliques and rejection are part of human nature. Kids are born,
then they learn to reject. Instead, they can learn to include.

HANNAH ACHTENBERG KINN
Brooklyn, March 9, 2001

The writer is executive director of the League Treatment Center.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); SCHOOL SAFETY & SECURITY (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SUBURBS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%) MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS;  EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

PERSON: KINN, HANNAH ACHTENBERG; WILLIAMS, CHARLES ANDREW; ZUCKOR, BRYAN;
GORDON, RANDY

REGION: SANTEE (CALIF)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1112 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serb Surrenders to Hague Tribunal

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 12


A former Bosnian Serb mayor wanted for war crimes surrendered today to the
international criminal tribunal in The Hague, the first Yugoslav citizen to do
so.

Blagoje Simic, 40, flew from Belgrade to the Netherlands today, saying he wanted
to prove his innocence. "This is a voluntary act," he said at the airport. "I am
convinced of my innocence."

The new democratic authorities in Belgrade have been under international
pressure to cooperate more actively with the tribunal, which is charged with
investigating crimes against humanity in the countries that once made up the
larger Yugoslavia.

In The Hague, the tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla del Ponte, described the
surrender as "a first encouraging sign" from Serbia. She said that it was too
early to say the officials in Belgrade have cooperated with the tribunal, but
that the surrender indicated "the possibility of cooperation." She said she
wanted to see them arresting indicted people as well.

If President Bush does not certify to Congress that Yugoslavia is cooperating
with the tribunal before the end of March, most American aid will be cut off.

The United States recently provided the new Yugoslav president, Vojislav
Kostunica, and the new Serbian prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, with a list of
"specific actions" that would help Mr. Bush make that certification. The first
item was to arrest former President Slobodan Milosevic and transfer him to
prison. Another major item reads "assist in transfer of at least one" person
indicted by the tribunal to The Hague.

Yugoslav officials close to Mr. Kostunica had said that they would press
indicted people to surrender voluntarily and that they expected to fulfill that
American condition before the end of March.

A Western diplomat here said today that Mr. Simic's act "is certainly a step in
the right direction."

"We're very happy to see this happen," the diplomat said, adding that the
Belgrade authorities "have had a direct role in this." He expressed hope that
more indicted people will be encouraged to surrender.

The Serbian justice minister, Vladan Batic, said today that neither he nor his
ministry had mediated in the Simic affair, but Mr. Batic has been hinting in the
last few days that some of those who have been indicted would surrender soon.

Mr. Batic said he thought that Mr. Simic's act would be seen as positive by the
tribunal and the world. "I think that it will slowly ease the tensions and
pressures that exist on the part of the Hague tribunal, which is looking through
the prism of the former regime," he said.

Mr. Simic was chief administrator of Bosanski Samac, a town of 34,000 taken by
Bosnian Serb forces in April 1992. Half the population were Croats or Muslims,
but at the end of the war in 1995, only about 300 remained.

According to the tribunal, which indicted Mr. Simic in 1995, he led the local
government throughout a campaign of "ethnic cleansing" and atrocities, including
the detention and inhumane treatment of residents who were not Serbs. The
tribunal holds him responsible for the actions of the police chief, Stevan
Todorovic, who was accused of murder and torture.

Mr. Todorovic is awaiting sentencing after agreeing to a plea bargain in
December and pleading guilty to a single count of persecution as a crime against
humanity. Three others have been indicted for the events in Bosanski Samac. The
trial is expected to begin in October.

Mr. Simic turned himself over to Serbian authorities and asked to be transferred
to The Hague, said his lawyer, Igor Pantelic.

Mr. Pantelic said "Mr. Simic believes the whole Serbian nation should not be a
hostage" to the pressure to cooperate with the tribunal.  Mr. Simic holds both
Bosnian and Yugoslav nationality and carries a Yugoslav passport.

The tribunal has publicly indicted 98 people, and other sealed indictments may
also exist. In January, the former president of the Bosnian Serb republic,
Biljana Plavsic, also surrendered voluntarily after having been indicted
secretly by the tribunal. She has pleaded not guilty to charges of genocide and
other war crimes.

Mr. Batic, the justice minister, said in his news conference that the new
authorities did not need ultimatums to cooperate with the tribunal and that
rigid time frames are not helpful.

"Nothing can be limited by time, especially not criminal procedures," he said.
"We will clearly tell this to the people from the tribunal, and I hope we will
meet with understanding."

He said that March 31 was not written in the "holy bible" and denounced
speculation on the imminent arrest of Mr. Milosevic, saying legal procedure must
be followed and must be free from pressure.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Blagoje Simic is the first Yugoslav citizen to surrender at The
Hague. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); US
PRESIDENTS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (66%); RELIGION (50%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) DEL PONTE, CARLA; SIMIC, BLAGOJE; ERLANGER, STEVEN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (95%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA;  BOSANSKI SAMAC (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1114 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 78 words


A front-page article on Feb. 23 about the conviction of three former Bosnian
Serb soldiers by the war crimes tribunal in The Hague and a front-page article
on March 1 about rapes in East Timor during political violence there in 1999
misstated the precedent for a conviction for rape as a crime against humanity.
The first such conviction occurred in September 1998 at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It was not the conviction last month in The Hague.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); RWANDA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
TIMOR-LESTE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1115 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prisoners Defiled: A Chinese Furor

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

A March 11 front-page article describes how the Chinese government, without the
consent of the prisoner, takes the organs of those who are executed for
transplantation.

This recalls the crimes committed by physicians during World War II.

Nazi doctors who sadistically experimented on live humans and Japanese doctors
who performed vivisection without anesthesia went unpunished.

Perhaps it is time to consider heinous physician behavior a crime against
humanity to be prosecuted by the World Court at The Hague.

SEYMOUR M. COHEN, M.D.
New York, March 11, 2001

The writer is an associate clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai School
of Medicine.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); WRITERS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
WORLD WAR II (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

COUNTRY: CHINA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1121 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2001 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Ad Intended to Stir Up Campuses More Than Succeeds in Its Mission

BYLINE:   By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1210 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I., March 19


The editor of the student newspaper at Brown University says he knew a tempest
was headed his way and rose to open the door for it.

A few weeks ago, the editor, Brooks King, read about a campaign by David
Horowitz, a conservative author in Los Angeles, to place an advertisement in
college newspapers denouncing calls for reparations to black Americans for
slavery. In the full-page ad, Mr. Horowitz argues that blacks do not deserve
redress because white Christians ended slavery, and that rather than getting
compensation, black Americans owe the country for the freedom and prosperity
they enjoy.

Mr. King says he concluded that the ad intended to offend sensibilities at
liberal campuses, exposing what Mr. Horowitz and other conservatives describe as
the intolerance of political correctness. And he decided that because this was
part of an important national debate, he would take up the challenge.

"But I didn't expect this," the lanky, bespectacled junior said. Last week,
student protesters removed stacks of The Brown Daily Herald from its stands on
campus.

In running the ad, Mr. King became only the latest college editor in recent
weeks to find himself entangled in a racially tinged controversy prompted by Mr.
Horowitz. At the University of California at Berkeley, The Daily Californian ran
the ad, but, under pressure from protesters, issued a front-page apology
regretting having become "an inadvertent vehicle for bigotry."

And at the University of Wisconsin, Julie Bosman was confronted by 100 students
demanding her resignation after the paper she edits, The Badger Herald, also ran
the ad.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Horowitz said that university campuses suffered
from a prevailing liberal orthodoxy that treats conservative views, and those
who expound them, like toxic waste: fit for burying or burning, but not for
engaging in dialogue. "Colleges should be stimulating discussions of these
issues, not encouraging political rallies on behalf of one side of the issues,"
he said, and called the protesting students "campus fascists."

Mr. Horowitz said he noticed that campuses were holding conferences on
reparations throughout Black History Month, but none were debating the question
so much as presuming reparations were a good idea.

Leon Botstein, president of Bard College in New York, said that Mr. Horowitz was
clearly on a campaign of provocation but that colleges were easy prey. Contrary
to their image as arenas of intellectual debate, he said, colleges tolerate
dissent poorly.

"We say we believe in dissent but we actually do not practice it well," Mr.
Botstein said, especially in matters of race, what he called "the central
question of life in America."

At Brown, the protesters, many representing minority groups, formed human chains
at scattered sites and demanded the paper pay its own form of reparations -- by
donating the $725 it earned from the advertisement to the Third World Student
coalition, and giving them a free page of advertising space to refute Mr.
Horowitz. The paper refused the demands but expanded space for opinion articles
in today's issue.

The group's ire was directed at first at decision to run the advertisement,
transforming the clash here -- and on most other campuses Mr. Horowitz has
approached -- into a debate not over reparations, but over the limits of
expression.

"This is not an issue of free speech," said Kohei Ishihara, a junior whom the
protesters designated their spokesman. "This is about profits. The Herald
profited from the deliberate distortion of history."

Papers at most of the 47 universities approached, including Harvard, Columbia
and the University of Virginia, declined the advertisement from Mr. Horowitz,
who also publishes Heterodoxy, a bimonthly paper lampooning political
correctness. At the University of Wisconsin's Madison campus, The Badger Herald
printed the advertisement, and stacks of the paper were taken from distribution
racks and trashed.

In the aftermath, Ms. Bosman, the Badger Herald editor, wrote a column for The
Wall Street Journal, defending Mr. Horowitz's right to buy the ad. "Rather than
rebut Mr. Horowitz's arguments, the protesters simply tried to drown out his
message with name-calling directed at the Herald," she wrote.

Daniel Hernandez, the editor of The Daily Californian, was chastened by the
experience. In a letter from the editor, Mr. Hernandez vowed to play a tougher
role defining "what is tasteful, appropriate, bigoted or detrimental" to his
paper's readership, a step he acknowledged "now raises a whole slew of questions
and concerns based on the ethics of journalism and publishing."

A former editor of Ramparts magazine, a leftist publication of the Vietnam era,
Mr. Horowitz turned away from his leftist roots after sending a friend to work
for the Black Panther Party. The friend was murdered, and Mr. Horowitz's
investigations led him to say that she had been executed for asking too many
questions. He dissociated himself from the Panthers, branding the organization
as a political front for drug dealing and other criminal activities.

Mr. Horowitz said that like Mr. King, he was surprised by the force of the
reaction to his ad. "Did I think some leftists would lift them from the boxes?
Yes, I did," he said. But he said he was taken aback by the level of outrage
focused on the papers that ran the ad, and on him for placing it. "These black
students come in and say, 'This hurts our feelings,' " he said. "Come on, an
argument hurts your feelings? Fight back."

Here at Brown, some students said they were deeply upset by Mr. Horowitz's
seeming effort to minimize the moral crime of slavery. "For us, it's not about
playing a political game," said Sharon Luk, a senior who donned black to join
the human chain of protesters. "We don't have the money to play that game.

"For us, no, for me, it's that we cannot sit down while blatant lies are being
spread about us or our brothers and sisters who've watched their history be
erased over and over," Ms. Luk said.

Overlooked in much of the uproar over the newspaper's publication of the
advertisement is the deeper national debate on reparations over slavery, which
could have found fertile ground for discussion on this campus. Just over the
Connecticut border, the Aetna life insurance company and The Hartford Courant
newspaper have in recent years acknowledged their historic profits from the
slave trade. Aetna insured slaves, while The Courant ran advertisements seeking
the return of runaway slaves. Recent scholarship has focused on the importance
of slavery to the old New England fortunes. The university itself is named for a
known slave trader, John Brown.

Stanley Fish, dean of arts and sciences at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, said the controversy reminded him of one over ads bought in campus
papers by Holocaust deniers. He said student editors were confused if they
believed they had an obligation to print any advertisements regardless of
content.

Mr. Botstein of Bard said there was another common misperception: "Anybody who
tells you once upon a time you could say anything you want on campus" is
romanticizing the past, he said. "Once upon a time you were labeled a
communist," he said. "Once upon a time you were labeled a Jew lover."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 24, 2001



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Wednesday about a dispute at Brown
University over an advertisement in the student newspaper denouncing the idea of
reparations for slavery misidentified the man for whom the university was named
in 1804. It was Nicholas Brown, a merchant, not his uncle John Brown. While John
Brown and Nicholas's father were established slave traders, there is no evidence
on the activities of Nicholas Brown himself.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brown University's campus newspaper is facing criticism and
protests for the decision by its editors to run an advertisement that denounced
calls for reparations for slavery. (Associated Press)(pg. A17)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (90%); NEWSPAPER
ADVERTISING (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); PRINT ADVERTISING (89%);
STUDENT ACTIVISM (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); WRITERS
(78%); STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (75%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (75%); HISTORY (73%); UNIVERSITY
ADMINISTRATION (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(68%); HAZARDOUS WASTE (63%); RELIGION (56%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (51%)
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;  DEMONSTRATIONS
AND RIOTS;  BLACKS;  SLAVERY;  ADVERTISING

ORGANIZATION: BROWN UNIVERSITY (92%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (55%); UNIVERSITY
OF WISCONSIN (54%)

PERSON: SCHEMO, DIANA JEAN; HOROWITZ, DAVID; BOTSTEIN, LEON

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%);
PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 24, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
'No Greater Tragedy'

BYLINE:  By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Abuk Macam is a fragile-looking young woman from southern Sudan, tall and thin
and black, as are her people, the Dinka. Her calm seemed almost eerie as she
told me her story.

"In 1987, when I was 10 years old, the Arab militia from the north came to our
village," she said. "They killed the men -- my grandfather was shot in front of
my eyes -- and took the children and women. We were taken to a northern town,
Daien, and put in a big stockade. It was a slave market.

"A man named Ahmed Adam bought me. He made me herd his goats and do domestic
work all day. If I wanted to rest, he threatened to kill me. I was there for 10
years.

"When I grew older, Ahmed Adam would come at night and try to rape me. One night
he threatened me with a knife and stabbed my right leg. I started running, with
my leg bleeding. I found a truck taking cattle to Babanusa, and I hid with the
cattle so the driver would not see me.

"In Babanusa I saw a Dinka man, Majak. He took me to Khartoum, and I stayed with
his family. Then some Muslim men came around looking for escaped slaves. Majak
said it wasn't safe for me. He said he could arrange for me to marry his
brother, Atak, who was in Cairo. So I went to Cairo and married Atak. We
registered for refugee status, were accepted by the United States and got here
on Jan. 26, 2000."

Last month Abuk and her husband were brought to Boston by the American
Anti-Slavery Group, which fights slavery in Sudan and elsewhere. She has never
been to school in her life but will now have English lessons. She spoke with me
through an interpreter.

Another escaped Sudanese slave was with her: Francis Bok, 22 years old, like
Abuk a Dinka and Christian. He was 7 when his mother sent him to the market to
sell some eggs and beans. Arab militiamen came, shot the men and took the
children away. Francis was tied on one side of a donkey, two little girls on the
other side.

"The girls couldn't stop crying," he said. "So they shot one first, then the
other. I learned to be quiet.

"My master was Juma Abdullah. He and his family called me 'abid,' which means
black slave. They made me sleep with the animals. 'You are an animal,' master
said."

Francis Bok tried twice to escape but was caught. Finally, at the age of 17, he
made it to a market where a kindly Muslim truck driver took him to Daien, and
then gave him money for a truck trip to Khartoum. From there he made it to Cairo
and, like Abuk, got refugee status.

A Methodist church in Fargo, N.D., sponsored him as a U.S. immigrant, and he
went there in 1999. Now he is working for the Anti-Slavery Group, and going to
high school at night. He has already learned English.

Hearing these stories in an office in downtown Boston was an unreal experience.
It seemed impossible that such things could happen in the contemporary world.
But they do.

Slavery is just one aspect of the terror of life in southern Sudan. For 18 years
now the south has been ravaged by a civil war: the north, largely Arab and
Muslim, against the south, black African, Christian and animist. About two
million people have been killed, four million forced from their homes.

The Sudanese government in Khartoum bombs southern villages and blocks food
relief flights to areas where it wants the population to starve. Now oil has
been found in the south, and the government is destroying villages in oil areas
to clear the way for prospectors.

"There is perhaps no greater tragedy on the face of the earth today" than Sudan,
Secretary of State Colin Powell said in Congressional testimony on March 7. It
was an admirably strong statement after years of American reticence, giving hope
of leadership toward ending the slavery and the slaughter.

This country cannot do everything, but there are relatively easy steps to take
against the evil in Sudan. We should make it clear to Khartoum that we will do
all we can to keep it from using oil revenues to intensify its genocidal war. No
U.S. oil companies are involved, but we should pressure the companies that are
-- Canadian, Swedish, Chinese, Malaysian. We should help break the food blockade
of the south. And as a country, we should forthrightly condemn the horror of
slavery.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (90%); SLAVERY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CHILDREN
(89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); MAMMALS (88%);
REFUGEES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SHOOTINGS (76%); TRUCK DRIVERS (72%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  SLAVERY;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: LEWIS, ANTHONY

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (88%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); EGYPT (88%)

REGION: SUDAN

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1133 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Judging Evil That Was Banal

BYLINE:  By JONATHAN A. BUSH;  Jonathan A. Bush, a fellow at the Center for
Scholars and Writers, New York Public Library, is writing a biography of Telford
Taylor.

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1224 words


FEW people recall that not one but two rounds of war crimes trials were held at
Nuremberg after World War II. The first (1945-46) was international and tried
the two dozen senior surviving Nazis. The second (1946-49) represented a more
ambitious, solely American attempt to try, in 12 separate cases, almost 200
high-level participants from all spheres of German society: political, Nazi
party and SS leaders, arms makers and industrialists, generals, bankers, doctors
and government ministers.

Among those 12 trials was a 1947 case titled United States v. Alstoetter, the
so-called Justice Case, in which Josef Alstoetter and 13 other leading Nazi
legal officials and judges were tried for crimes against humanity and related
charges.

The case has achieved fame as the basis of Abby Mann's "Judgment at Nuremberg,"
originally a presentation on CBS's "Playhouse 90" (directed by George Roy Hill
in 1959), then a motion picture (directed by Stanley Kramer in 1961) with a
companion book, and now a Broadway play, which opens tomorrow at the Longacre
Theater.

Because "Judgment at Nuremberg" has given Alstoetter such renown and thus
largely defined popular memory of war crimes trials, the occasion of this
Broadway debut suggests an examination of the Justice Case a half-century later.

At its heart were profound questions about the demands of unjust regimes and the
personal accountability of professionals in such a regime. Because of its
philosophical themes, it was the least likely Nuremberg case to be transferred
to the stage or screen. It was a real lawyers' trial, less dramatic than the
cases against the Einsatzgruppen (roving killing squad) leaders and the ghoulish
Nazi doctors.

It was also a party with the guests of honor missing: Hitler's first minister of
justice died in 1941; his successor committed suicide in British custody; and
the notorious Roland Freisler, president of the People's Court (a supplementary
civilian court set up by the Nazis), was killed in an air raid near the end of
the war. Yet it was the Alstoetter case that Brig. Gen. Telford Taylor, chief
prosecutor at the trials and later a leading constitutional lawyer, urged Abby
Mann to use for a Nuremberg play.

Forty years ago, critics focused on finding historical discrepancies in the play
and debated whether those they turned up were justifiable as literary license.
Most of the historical departures resulted from compression; Mr. Mann had to
reduce a yearlong trial -- with almost 11,000 pages of transcript, 140 witnesses
and 2,100 exhibits -- to 90 minutes for television, twice that for the movie and
somewhere in between for Broadway.

But the alterations hardly matter. The real question of "Judgment at Nuremberg"
is the overall significance of the Justice Case itself. Alstoetter was a
small-scale genocide trial among the proceedings at Nuremberg; minor, in a way,
because the ordinary Nazi judicial system was not needed to implement the
Holocaust.

The original Allied plan was to hold international trials for major criminals
whose offenses had no fixed geographic location. Under this formula, the second
Nuremberg trials sought to charge hundreds of military commanders and industrial
barons. The formula did not really apply to legal officials, however, even those
with national rank like the defendant Franz Schlegelberger, the senior surviving
official from the Ministry of Justice. On the contrary, the guiltiest lawyers,
like Hans Frank, governor of Poland, or Otto Ohlendorf, Einsatzgruppe commander,
were culpable because they moved from law to a larger stage for their crimes.

None of which is to say that the legal officials and judges tried in Alstoetter
weren't monstrous. But the Holocaust was not fundamentally about law. Legal
rules were important in implementing the terrible persecutions of the 1930's
and, later, exterminating German Jews. But when the genocide assumed continental
proportions, by machine guns and gas and "resettlement in the East," legal
officials were murderous bit players.

If this is so, the Justice Case is less a definitive assessment of a crucial
dimension of the Holocaust than it is an examination by judges of judges who
were ordinary men. In all its versions, "Judgment at Nuremberg" tells a shocking
tale about banal human beings.

To Americans, the Justice Case was crucial. As General Taylor put it in his
opening argument, "The temple" -- of German justice -- "must be reconsecrated,"
and the task was begun with the Alstoetter trial. The fact that American
officials soon granted clemency to the defendants was infuriating to many
Americans but did not affect the principle that international law binds all
judges and lawyers to basic standards of justice. The case is still taught in
law schools, not as it was a generation ago in legal philosophy seminars, but as
a unit in legal ethics courses. The idealism that allowed Americans to condemn
Nazi judges stays alive.

The view from Germany was different. To critics there, the Nuremberg trials were
an illegitimate result of occupation. Lawyers were crucial in the campaign to
free the Nuremberg defendants, and lawyers managed to insert ambiguous language
in a 1954 treaty with the United States so that, in its own view, Germany
disavowed Nuremberg without most United States government officials ever
noticing the sleight of hand.

Yet no case was more difficult to swallow for the Germans than the Justice Case,
which rejected the legitimacy of duly constituted Nazi-era German courts. The
postwar German track record in trying judges and legal officials was consistent
with this view. No legal officials or judges from either ordinary or party
courts were tried for decades. No law professors were tried, and few were even
fired.

Today, the leading fascist jurist, the late Carl Schmitt, is the object of a
modest revival of interest in Germany and in certain American academic legal
circles. In the early 1960's, West Germany prepared charges against scores of
judges, notably in Frankfurt proceedings against Schlegelberger (already
convicted at Nuremberg) and 15 others. None were convicted. A final
investigation of People's Court judges and prosecutors was closed in the 1980's,
with none tried.

In fact, two of the only judges ever convicted by Germany were Karl Ferber and
Heinz Hoffmann. As it happened, they had been associate judges of Oswald
Rothaug, the Nuremberg defendant who presided over the tribunal that had
convicted an elderly Jew of "racial pollution" on charges that he had had sexual
relations with a younger "Aryan" woman -- an important episode in Abby Mann's
text.

At Nuremberg, the two judges had testified for the Americans against Rothaug. In
the 1960's, German prosecutors prevailed only by showing that the two judges
could not possibly have believed that an interracial sexual affair had occurred.
In other words, the court rejected the Nuremberg theory that monstrously unjust
laws are not binding, and asked instead whether the defendants had violated
German law by convicting someone who had not committed the "crime." Finding that
Ferber and Hoffmann had done so, it convicted them. But not to worry.
Eventually, the proceedings were suspended on grounds of the defendants'
incompetence, even though Hoffmann was actively running a law firm. Call it
professional courtesy, or a judgment on Nuremberg.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: JUDGMENT AT NUREMBERG (PLAY)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Brig. Gen. Telford Taylor, the chief prosecutor at Nuremberg.
(Associated Press)(pg. 10); Abby Mann, the author of "Judgment at Nuremberg."
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)(pg. 27)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); THEATER & DRAMA (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); THEATER (90%); LAWYERS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); TRANSCRIPTS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%);
PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (64%); SUICIDE (50%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND
MINORITIES;  THEATER

PERSON: BUSH, JONATHAN A; MANN, ABBY

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (89%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1149 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Faith-Based Furor

BYLINE:  By Eyal Press; Eyal Press is a contributing editor at Lingua Franca. He
last wrote for the magazine about a Congolese refugee's first year in New York.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 3631 words


The first time Alicia Pedreira heard from co-workers that they had spotted her
picture in a photo exhibit at the state fair in Louisville, Ky., she was
baffled. "I thought: Photograph? What photograph?" Pedreira said recently of the
strange sequence of events that began in August 1998 and would soon upend her
life. "I had no idea what they were talking about."

At the time, Pedreira was working as a therapist at the Kentucky Baptist Homes
for Children, a religious organization that contracts with the state to provide
a range of services for at-risk youth. Pedreira liked her job, and she had a
sterling reputation among her peers. But she wasn't the chattiest person in the
office. On the advice of the man who had hired her, she generally kept her
personal life to herself -- until, that is, her photograph unexpectedly popped
up at the Kentucky State Fair. Taken by an amateur photographer during a 1997
AIDS walk and entered, without her knowledge, in the state-fair art competition,
the image depicts Pedreira, who is 37, in the company of a woman with
short-cropped brown hair whose arms dangle suggestively around Pedreira's waist.
The two women look distinctly like a couple, an impression that Pedreira's tank
top -- which bears a map of the Aegean Sea with an arrow pointing to the "Isle
of Lesbos" -- all but announces.

"The minute I heard what I was wearing," said Pedreira, "I thought immediately,
I've lost my job." She was right. On Oct. 23, 1998, a few weeks after word of
the photograph circulated through the office, Pedreira was fired. A termination
letter explained that Pedreira's "homosexual lifestyle is contrary to Kentucky
Baptist Homes for Children core values."

Pedreira was devastated; several of her colleagues were so angry that they
resigned in protest. Friends urged her to fight back. Last April, Pedreira and
the American Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit in United States
District Court in Louisville, accusing the Kentucky Baptist Homes for Children,
which receives more than three-quarters of its money from the government and is
the state's largest provider of services for troubled youth, of engaging in
religious-based discrimination.

Now, as Congress prepares to consider President Bush's agenda to allow an array
of government-financed social programs to be administrated by religious groups,
her case is being monitored by proponents and opponents alike of so-called
faith-based initiatives. Pedreira's lawsuit may well become the most important
gay rights case since Boy Scouts of America v. Dale -- although the issues it
raises are in fact much broader.

Religious organizations have long been exempted from the provision in Title VII
of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that forbids religious discrimination by employers,
on the grounds that they would otherwise be forced to act against their beliefs
when hiring personnel. But starting in 1996, Congress began passing "Charitable
Choice" legislation allowing religious organizations to discriminate while
accepting public funds for welfare-to-work and, more recently, drug-treatment
programs. And although criticism is mounting, supporters of faith-based
initiatives are attaching similar provisions to a host of additional social
programs, from crime prevention to hunger relief to housing grants. Recently on
"Face the Nation," Stephen Goldsmith, a White House adviser, explained that such
organizations will indeed be allowed to discriminate in their hiring practices,
but only "on the basis of religion."

What Goldsmith did not say is that religion can often bleed into other
categories, like gender, sexual orientation and race. "If you can discriminate
on religious grounds, it doesn't take much imagination to discriminate in other
ways," said Congressman Bobby Scott, a Democrat from Virginia. Indeed, several
courts have ruled that the Title VII exemption would allow Christian schools to
fire female teachers who give birth out of wedlock. Others have determined that
religious institutions can refuse to hire applicants whose views on abortion
differ from theirs. Nor is it clear what courts would say if an organization's
religious tenets mandate differential treatment on the basis of race. In theory,
an organization like Bob Jones University could receive public funds to hire
employees while forbidding them to engage in interracial dating.

Alarmed by the implications, a coalition of civil rights and religious
organizations -- including the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the
N.A.A.C.P., the Interfaith Alliance and Catholics for a Free Choice -- recently
sent a letter to President Bush urging him to oppose "government funded"
discrimination in any form. "It would be unconscionable," the letter states,
"that a want ad for government-supported social services could read, for
example, 'Catholics and Jews Need Not Apply."' But the Bush administration --
which in February established a White House Office of Faith-Based and Community
Initiatives -- is unlikely to change course.

Pedreira lost her job, her lawsuit claims, not on the basis of her performance
but because Baptist Homes determined that she violated the demand (spelled out
explicitly in its employment forms) that employees "exhibit values in their
professional conduct and personal lifestyles that are consistent with the
Christian mission and purpose of the institution."

When the case comes to trial, probably near the end of the year, Pedreria's
legal team plans to raise some pointed questions. If hiring discrimination is
illegal with government jobs, why not with jobs paid for by the government? Does
the public financing of faith-based programs violate the Constitution, whose
Establishment Clause requires government neutrality toward religion? Although
Pedreira's case deals with state rather than federal financing -- and therefore
does not overtly threaten Charitable Choice -- her lawyers say it will set a
precedent for eventually overturning the law. "Charitable Choice authorizes
religious-based employment discrimination in government-funded programs," said
Michael Adams, Pedreira's attorney. "This case, if we prevail, will say, 'You
can't do that, it's unconstitutional."'

Alicia Pedreira lives in a one-story white clapboard house on a quiet
residential street in Germantown, a working-class neighborhood in Louisville.
The matchbox houses on Pedreira's block look more or less the same. Hers,
however, is the only one with a gay-pride flag fluttering above the entrance.

Dressed casually in jeans, running shoes and a wool sweater, Pedreira greeted me
at the door one day in February. She has short black hair and a muscular
physique; she was once a competitive bodybuilder. We went to sit on the leather
couch in her living room, beneath several oil paintings of landscapes adorning
the walls. Pedreira painted them herself, she explained, telling me it was her
passion for art that initially sparked her interest in becoming a therapist --
and led her to the doors of the Kentucky Baptist Homes for Children.

"I had been working various jobs but never found anything I really liked," she
explained in a soft voice that bore the trace of a New York accent, which is
where Pedreira, the daughter of Puerto Rican immigrants, lived as a child. In
1997, roughly a decade after she moved to Louisville to live near her older
sister, Pedreira completed a degree in expressive therapy, a Jungian approach
that aims to help patients explore their emotions through artistic creation.
After working for several months with mentally ill patients at a local hospital,
she was approached about an opening at a place called Spring Meadows, one of the
Louisville branches of the Baptist Homes.

Pedreira was initially skeptical. "I wasn't sure if I wanted to work for
Baptists," she recalled. "I mean, the year before they had boycotted Disney for
offering benefits to gays and lesbians." Still, the idea of working with
teenagers intrigued her, the salary was good and her interviews with Jack Cox,
Baptist Homes's clinical director, went well. Pedreira recalls that Cox asked
her what she would do if one of the children she was treating were gay. Pedreira
said she would try to help the patient work through his or her emotions; she
revealed nothing about her personal identity. At the start of the next
interview, however, she informed Cox that she was a lesbian.

"I said, Look, if this is a problem, don't hire me, because I don't want to work
here six months and then get fired," she recalled. "It was prophetic."

According to Pedreira, Cox (who declined to be interviewed for this article)
assured her she would be fine, provided she kept the matter to herself. It was,
in essence, a "don't ask, don't tell" policy, and Pedreira followed it
faithfully, disclosing her sexual orientation only to a few fellow clinicians.

At the same time, she did not overhaul her daily life to avoid the risk of being
outed. While working there, Pedreira regularly appeared in public with her
girlfriend at the time, Nance Goodman, the woman standing next to her in the
state-fair photograph. And she remained active in the gay political scene in
Louisville, helping to organize marches (as she still does). She simply trusted
Cox's promise that as long as she did not discuss her sexuality in her
therapeutic work, her job would not be in jeopardy.

When she was told of her dismissal, Pedreira felt obligated to provide an
explanation to the teenage boys she had been counseling. "We had a group
session," she said, shaking her head at the memory, "and they were angry. It
takes a long time for these kids to get comfortable with a therapist, and here I
was, one more person being yanked out of their lives." She paused and then said:
"I remember one of the kids said: 'Wait a minute, you're gay and we're boys! So
what's the problem?' We all laughed to keep from crying."

According to Pedreira, Jack Cox, who had praised her "exceptional skills" as a
therapist in his performance evaluations, broke into tears when telling her the
news. A few weeks afterward, Cox himself left the organization.

The Kentucky baptist homes for children refused to answer specific questions
about Pedreira's dismissal, but in published statements the agency has made its
line of defense clear. Pedreira was fired, the agency has said in an official
statement, not on the basis of religious discrimination, but because "homosexual
behavior is not in the best interest of anyone, especially sexually abused and
confused children and youth."

From a legal perspective, focusing on Pedreira's sexual orientation is smart.
There is no federal statute barring discrimination against gay men and lesbians,
nor does the state of Kentucky have such a law.

Michael Adams, Pedreira's attorney, acknowledged this in an interview. But he
pointed out that officials at Baptist Homes have made contradictory statements
about the reasons for Pedreira's firing. On Sept. 23, 1998, the parent of a
child whom Pedreira had treated wrote a letter to Baptist Homes pleading for her
to be retained. "I just can't understand why someone as intelligent and as good
with problem children as Alicia is could be fired because she is different from
many of us," the letter states. In response, Bill Smithwick, the president of
Baptist Homes, explained the agency's reasoning as follows: "To employ a person
who is openly homosexual, living in an adulterous situation, is a chronic abuser
of alcohol or drugs, etc., does not represent the Judeo-Christian values which
are intrinsic to our mission."

Pedreira's legal team sees this letter and other statements by Baptist Homes
employees as clear evidence of religious-based discrimination. "We argue that
you cannot take government money and impose those religious beliefs on
employees," said Adams, "whether the victim is a homosexual -- as in this case
-- or not."

Whose argument will prevail in court remains to be seen. Pedreira's case comes,
of course, on the heels of the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision in Boy Scouts of
America v. Dale, which determined that the Boy Scouts can ban homosexuals
because it conforms to the group's "expressive message." But unlike the Boy
Scouts, which receives little money from Washington, Baptist Homes relies on the
government for the vast majority of its budget.

At the very least, the policy of Baptist Homes runs counter to the trend in
publicly financed employment positions: all federal employees, for example, are
now protected from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Allowing
government-financed groups to disregard this standard has begun to raise
concerns in Congress. "We can't adopt a system here that allows religious groups
to meet a lower standard of civil rights protection than nonreligious groups,"
Senator Joseph Lieberman recently said in a statement.

But this is not the only concern. Because courts have interpreted the Title VII
exemption to include all the "tenets and teachings" of a faith, the door could
be open to a seemingly wide range of government-financed discrimination
practices. Consider what would happen if a state decided to contract out
services to the Nation of Islam. Catholics, Jews or any other group that runs
afoul of the Nation of Islam's teachings might find themselves excluded. This is
not a hypothetical example. Back in 1995, Bob Dole and other Republicans
denounced the Department of Housing and Urban Development after discovering that
federal funds were used to hire a security firm linked to the Nation of Islam.
Despite reports that the firm was effective, HUD promptly revoked the contract.
Yet in 1996, many of these same politicians helped pass the first Charitable
Choice legislation.

Baptist Homes does not hide the fact that its religious tenets prohibit more
than just homosexuality. "We've made it clear as to the values we're looking for
in the staff we hire," said Smithwick. In general, he explained, leadership
positions at the agency must be filled by Baptists. "It's not just a single
issue that brought this whole thing to a head. There are other issues."

One of those other issues, according to Dawn Oaks, who worked at Baptist Homes
for two years, is couples who live together out of wedlock. "When I started
working there, I had a male roommate," Oaks said. "Then we started dating. Now,
I was raised a Baptist, so I knew this would not be accepted." Oaks worried
constantly about being discovered. A co-worker in the same situation, she says,
installed a separate phone line in her home for protection. What if one of the
women had gotten pregnant? Court precedent suggests that they could have lost
their jobs.

Oaks was the first of several colleagues who resigned after Pedreira's firing.
"It was hard, because I really think the agency provides good treatment," she
said. "But a lot of the kids there are dealing with problems like birth control
and sex and sexual identity. What kind of message did this send? I felt I could
not stay." It's a feeling others shared. To show support for Pedreira, the
University of Louisville and Spalding University stopped assigning students to
field placements at Baptist Homes.

None of this has moved the agency to alter its employment policies or any other
aspect of its approach. "Our mission is to provide care and hope for hurting
families through Christ-centered ministries," Smithwick has said. "I want this
mission to permeate our agency like the very blood through our bodies. I want to
provide Christian support to every child, staff member and foster parent." If
forced to change, Smithwick told me, Baptist Homes would rather stop contracting
with the government.

This nearly happened. Last June, the agency declined to renew its state contract
after Viola Miller, head of Kentucky's Cabinet for Families and Children, warned
that it was "very possible" the group's employment policies would lead state
officials to stop sending children there. The dispute was resolved only after
Gov. Paul Patton -- who is reportedly planning to run for Senate one day --
intervened and persuaded Baptist Homes to renew. "As a person raised in the
traditions of the Southern Baptist Church," Patton explained in a subsequent
letter to a Baptist newspaper, "I fully understand the sincere and deeply held
beliefs of the church."

Pedreira's case is not the first of its kind. In 1987, a Mississippi woman named
Jamie Kellam Dodge sued a Salvation Army domestic-violence shelter after she was
fired for her association with the Wiccan religion (a sect that practices modern
witchcraft). Because Dodge's salary was partly financed through a government
grant, a federal judge ruled against the Salvation Army. Citing the
Establishment Clause of the Constitution, the court determined that government
financing of jobs filled in accordance with religious values "clearly has the
effect of advancing religion and is unconstitutional." Dodge received $1.25
million in damages.

In 1995, when Charitable Choice was first being debated in Congress, the
Mississippi case caught the eye of John Ashcroft, then a senator from Missouri
and the legislation's chief advocate. Although the Salvation Army case was not
precedent-setting, committee transcripts record Ashcroft expressing fear that it
would "send a chill" through religious communities and insisting on adding an
amendment guaranteeing religious groups "the ability, frankly, to be
discriminating" when contracting with the government.

Proponents of Charitable Choice view the law's hiring provisions as essential.
Carl Esbeck, a conservative legal scholar, has written that religious
organizations "can hardly be expected to sustain their religious vision without
the ability to employ individuals who share the tenets of the faith." In a
recent article in The New Republic, Jeffrey Rosen echoed this view, noting that,
after all, many secular organizations that receive government funds, like
Planned Parenthood, also hire on the basis of their values.

Pedreira's allies counter that the same argument could be used to justify
lifting the restraints on any form of discrimination. Excluding someone on the
basis of religion is barred under federal law because, like race and sex, this
category of discrimination has proven so persistent and deleterious. Doing so
with public funds is not only deeply offensive to many Americans, the argument
goes, it also highlights a contradiction in the logic behind Charitable Choice.
While proponents argue that faith-based organizations deserve "equal treatment"
when it comes to disbursing public funds, their demand for a Title VII exemption
for religious groups -- an exemption whose limits will be difficult to define --
amounts, opponents say, to a form of preferential treatment.

"In no other government program do we allow such discrimination," said
Congressman Scott. "I think it's turning the clock back to say that in a
government-funded program, we can practice bigotry." A better alternative,
argues Julie Segal, an adjunct government professor at American University who
has written widely on the subject, would be to restrict public financing to
religiously affiliated groups that agree not to discriminate, thus enabling them
to provide social services without violating basic principles of fairness.One
night during my visit to Louisville, Pedreira drove me over to Spring Meadows.
It was her first time back.

"Hey, that was my building," she said as we approached the facility, a series of
large, red-brick cottages situated atop a vast expanse of green lawn. We slowed
to a halt, and Pedreira, who is normally voluble, fell silent. "What gets me,"
she finally said, "is that it had nothing to do with my work. I did good work.
And I cared about those boys."

Though her case is still in the early stages, Pedreira seemed unfazed by the
prospect of a protracted legal battle. "My goal is not the lawsuit; it's
education," she said. "I want people to know this can happen." In Louisville,
where local media coverage has been steady, she has already achieved this
objective. "People walk up to me all the time," she said, "and tell me I did the
right thing."

Pedreira even got the chance to confront Governor Patton, who appeared one day
when she was volunteering for a Democratic Congressional candidate. "He shook my
hand and said, 'Hi, I'm Governor Patton,"' she recalled. "I said, 'Hi, I'm
Alicia Pedreira.' He kept walking, so I squeezed his hand again and said, 'I'm
the woman who got fired from Kentucky Baptist Homes for Children.' He said, 'Oh,
that was a terrible situation for everybody,' but he never looked me in the eye,
which made me think he knew what happened was wrong."

For all the gratifying moments, however, Pedreira has also suffered plenty of
lows. "I've had people throw trash in my yard," she said. "I've been called a
pedophile." And she is still dealing with the aftershocks of a traumatic
experience. "I was depressed, and I didn't work for months," she confessed. "I
felt lost." Since losing her job, Pedreira has not felt inclined to pursue work
as a therapist; at present, she's working as a repair technician for Bell South.
"Before, I had hoped to climb the ladder, maybe even direct my own program one
day," she said. "But I haven't felt ready to go back to that."

Pedreira told me that she has fallen out of touch with the children she once
counseled. But there are certain things she keeps around to remind herself of
what happened. Back at the house, I asked her about the infamous photograph that
caused her troubles. She left the room for a moment, then returned with a manila
envelope. "Here it is," she said, laying the black-and-white still on the table.
"I'd still have my job if not for that photo," she said. Then she smiled. "It is
a lovely photograph. One day, I'm going to have it framed."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Alicia Pedreira was told by the Kentucky Baptist Homes for
Children that her homosexuality made her unfit to work there as a therapist.
(Maude Schuyler Clay); The photograph of Pedreira and Nance Goodman that cost
Pedreira her job. (Jeff Offutt)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); PHOTOGRAPHY (90%); RELIGION (89%);
RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (87%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (87%); SUITS & CLAIMS (86%);
LITIGATION (85%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); VISUAL ARTISTS
(78%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CHURCH
& STATE (75%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
PUBLIC CONTRACTING (70%); LGBT RIGHTS (67%); CIVIL RIGHTS (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (50%)

CITY: LOUISVILLE, KY, USA (93%)

STATE: KENTUCKY, USA (96%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1151 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Fate of Slobodan Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 599 words


Little more than six months ago, few people imagined that Slobodan Milosevic
would soon be forced from power, much less that he would wind up in a Belgrade
prison facing criminal charges within Yugoslavia. But that is where Mr.
Milosevic resides today, following a tense standoff at his villa over the
weekend that ended with his arrest. The determination of the Serbian authorities
to bring Mr. Milosevic to justice is heartening. But as President Bush said
yesterday, the arrest should be a first step toward prosecuting Mr. Milosevic
for crimes against humanity at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Seeing that Mr. Milosevic is eventually transferred to The Hague will require
courageous leadership by the governments of Yugoslavia and Serbia and a
sustained commitment by the United States to bring him to justice. Belgrade and
Washington will be tempted to settle for prosecuting Mr. Milosevic on domestic
criminal charges.

We do not mean to belittle the case against Mr. Milosevic in Serbia or to
suggest that his prosecution there would be politically painless for President
Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia and Zoran Djindjic, the Serbian prime minister.
The weekend struggle over Mr. Milosevic's arrest reflected smoldering disputes
in Belgrade. But the internal charges against Mr. Milosevic are not equal to the
crimes he instigated in the Balkans over the last decade.

The transformation of Yugoslavia from dictatorship to democracy is steadily
advancing. Mr. Kostunica was legitimately elected last year and is committed to
establishing democratic institutions and the rule of law. He has taken a number
of steps to cooperate with the Hague tribunal. Mr. Djindjic is inclined to be
even bolder in clearing away the political and economic vestiges of the
Milosevic era.

Unfortunately, Mr. Kostunica seems unwilling for now to see Mr. Milosevic
prosecuted for crimes committed against non-Serbs. He has yet to release all the
Albanian political prisoners held in Yugoslav jails and is opposed to turning
Mr. Milosevic over to the court in The Hague. Mr. Kostunica ought to reconsider
that position. Both Yugoslavia and its Balkan neighbors can more quickly and
confidently recover from years of ethnic conflict if Mr. Milosevic is held
accountable for crimes against humanity.

Mr. Djindjic, who appears more willing to surrender Mr. Milosevic to The Hague,
can use his considerable influence to speed that outcome. He controls most of
the government machinery in Belgrade, but not the army, which takes its orders
from Mr. Kostunica. The two men should work together to lay the legal and
political groundwork for extraditing Mr. Milosevic.

With the arrest of Mr. Milosevic, there is an understandable desire in the Bush
administration to release millions of dollars in American and international
assistance to Yugoslavia. The White House is expected to decide soon whether
Belgrade, as required by American law, has qualified for that aid by cooperating
sufficiently with the war crimes tribunal and with the 1995 Dayton agreement
that ended the war in Bosnia. We hope Mr. Bush will withhold or delay
certification to maintain maximum leverage, but if he finds in Belgrade's favor,
the president and Congress must set the scale and timing of future financial
assistance to keep pressure on Mr. Kostunica to send Mr. Milosevic to The Hague.
As Mr. Bush himself said yesterday, "We cannot and must not forget the chilling
images of terrified women and children herded onto trains, emaciated prisoners
interned behind barbed wire and mass graves unearthed by U.N. investigators."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL OFFENSES (91%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); POLITICS (76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%)
EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (55%) MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); UNITED
STATES (94%); ALBANIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1155 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Expected, Belgrade Wins 'Cooperative' Seal From U.S.

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 2


After having held out for Slobodan Milosevic's arrest, the Bush administration
certified today that Yugoslavia had met the requirements of an American law on
cooperation with the international war crimes tribunal, freeing up economic
assistance to the ruined nation.

But Secretary of State Colin L. Powell qualified the certification, arguing that
Yugoslavia needed to fulfill its intention to "cooperate fully" with the
tribunal.

He said the administration's support for an international donors' conference
where Yugoslavia is hoping for up to $1 billion to help rebuild would depend on
continued progress by Yugoslavia and Serbia in full cooperation with the
tribunal.

General Powell stopped short of saying Mr. Milosevic's transfer to the tribunal
in The Hague was the definition of full cooperation. But a spokesman for the
State Department, Richard A. Boucher, said: "It remains our goal to see him face
justice in The Hague. We should be absolutely clear that we want that to take
place sooner rather than later."

In essence, Mr. Boucher said, the United States has the power to stop the
conference from going ahead in the early summer if Washington is not satisfied
with Yugoslavia's degree of cooperation with the tribunal.

The certification allows $50 million in nonhumanitarian aid to go to Yugoslavia,
and it opens the way for that government to negotiate a loan with the
International Monetary Fund and to pursue its membership in the World Bank.
Administration officials said last week that they were prepared to go ahead with
certification.

Mr. Milosevic, who ignited four Balkan wars in the cause of a larger Serbia and
for nearly a decade directed forces responsible for the worst atrocities in
Europe since World War II, was indicted nearly two years ago by the tribunal for
crimes against humanity.

According to the indictment, which deals exclusively with his conduct in Kosovo
-- and not during the conflicts in Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia -- Mr. Milosevic
caused the forced deportation of 740,000 ethnic Albanians and the murders of 340
identified Albanians.

In contrast to those charges, Mr. Milosevic was arrested and faces trial on
local charges of corruption and damaging the economy.

On Capitol Hill, the decision to grant certification was greeted with mixed
reactions. One of the two authors of the certification law, which required
Yugoslavia to meet its conditions by March 31, said General Powell had acted
prematurely.

"Certification would have been more constructive if we had waited until the
government surrendered Milosevic to the war crimes tribunal," said the author,
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.

But, Mr. Leahy said, he was pleased that the administration had linked the
donors' conference to progress with the tribunal.

The second author, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, said he was
"not convinced" that the Yugoslav government had established "a consistent track
record of cooperation." But he said Mr. Milosevic's arrest was a step in the
right direction.

The certification law calls not only for cooperation with the tribunal, but also
for Yugoslavia to cut off aid to financial and security institutions in the
Serbian part of Bosnia. The law also says Yugoslavia has to respect minority
rights and the rule of law, a reference to the continued detention of 400
Albanian political prisoners in Serbia.

Mr. Leahy said support for additional aid, including World Bank loans, should be
made specifically dependent on Mr. Milosevic's surrender to The Hague tribunal
and the arrests of others indicted for war crimes.

An estimated 15 to 20 Serbs indicted by the tribunal on charges of war crimes
remain at large, some leading public lives in Belgrade. Among them are Gen.
Ratko Mladic, who led the Bosnian-Serb military and Radovan Karadzic, the
Bosnian-Serb wartime civilian leader.

The current president of Serbia, Milan Milutinovic, was indicted by the tribunal
at the same time as Mr. Milosevic, along with Nikola Sainovic, a trusted
lieutenant of Mr. Milosevic during the ethnic killings in Kosovo. Both men enjoy
parliamentary immunity in Serbia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
ARRESTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (77%); DEVELOPMENT
BANKS (77%); TRENDS (77%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (75%); CORRUPTION (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); WORLD WAR II (72%); DEPORTATION (72%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(70%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (54%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (58%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%) PERLEZ, JANE; BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); ALBANIA (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SLOVENIA (79%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1156 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Charges by Tribunal

BYLINE:  By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 116 words


Following is a summary of the charges against Slobodan Milosevic brought by the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Crimes against humanity, stemming from Mr. Milosevic's crackdown on ethnic
Albanians in Kosovo province, Serbia, in 1999. The tribunal has indicted Mr.
Milosevic and four senior associates on three counts, each of which brings a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment. (The tribunal has no death penalty.)


Violation of the laws and customs of war, an additional charge also tied to
atrocities that Mr. Milosevic reportedly ordered in Kosovo.

Also, investigators are gathering evidence for a possible charge of genocide,
according to Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); EVIDENCE (88%); LAW OF WAR (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (88%); GENOCIDE (88%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); JAIL
SENTENCING (85%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); KOSOVO (93%); ALBANIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1174 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 9, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC LIVES;
A Politician Returns to the U.S. as a Voice for Yugoslavia

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN Milan Protic reopened the embassy of Yugoslavia last month, it was like
stepping into a haunted house, he said. Most of the furniture was in storage and
a thick layer of dust and grime coated the few items that remained: a cheap
phone and an ancient computer.

It was hardly a glorious return to the United States for the first ambassador of
a newly democratic Yugoslavia, which sought to renew ties with Washington after
the long-awaited collapse of the Serbian nationalist government of Slobodan
Milosevic.

Mr. Protic had been waiting -- and working -- for that to happen since 1992,
when he left the University of California at Santa Barbara after studying and
teaching European history there for a decade to become an opposition leader in
the Democratic Party of Serbia.

He remains wistful about his years in Southern California, where he played
basketball, acquired nearly perfect English and, he said, learned the value of
intellectual tolerance. But he voices no regrt at leaving.

"I couldn't imagine sitting back in California, enjoying the nice weather with
my beloved students while such important things were happening in my homeland,"
Mr. Protic said.

Yet for Mr. Protic (pronounced PROH-titch), a lifelong anti-Communist and
opposition leader, selecting new carpets was a welcome diversion from the
diplomatic task immediately thrust upon him: persuading American policymakers
that his government was cooperating with efforts to prosecute Mr. Milosevic and
other former officials at the war crimes tribunal at The Hague.

Within days of his arrival, Mr. Protic staked his credibility on an insistence
that Mr. Milosevic's arrest was imminent. At the end of March, hours after an
American-imposed deadline had elapsed, Yugoslav authorities at last followed
through. Bush administration officials, relieved, immediately certified
Belgrade's cooperation on war crimes and prevented Congress from withholding
about $50 million in much-needed economic aid.

But the Hague tribunal is just the most visible irritant in relations between
Yugoslavia and the United States, Mr. Protic acknowledged. His compatriots feel
lingering resentment toward the West for a bombing campaign to drive Yugoslav
troops out of Kosovo province that many perceived as indiscriminate and
anti-Serbian.

And in Washington, officials from both parties are skeptical that President
Vojislav Kostunica is prepared to come to terms with the exceptionally brutal
policies of ethnic cleansing carried out by the Milosevic government as the
Communist-era Yugoslavia split apart.

In an interview, Mr. Protic, a big-shouldered 6-foot-6 with a gentle manner,
said the West was demanding too much too fast by demanding a trial for Mr.
Milosevic in The Hague. Instead, he said, the deposed president -- one of about
15 war-crimes suspects believed to be in Yugoslavia -- should stand trial at
home.

"We strongly believe it's up to us to deal with Milosevic in the first place,"
he said. "Our people deserve that. It was our people who overthrew him. It
wasn't done by NATO, or even with the assistance of the U.S. government."

Sounding alternately adamant and accommodating, Mr. Protic, 43, is a deft
interlocutor in the uneasy relationship between his nation and the United
States.

He is the great-grandson of Stojan Protic, who served as prime minister of the
Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (which became the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in
1929). He grew up in a family of non-Communist intellectuals and attended law
school in Belgrade before his sojourn in California. Once he returned to
Yugoslavia, as Mr. Protic and his colleagues charted a course of nonviolent
opposition to Mr. Milosevic, the United States and NATO veered between
negotiating with him, rolling back his expansionism and bombing Belgrade.

"I felt it was unfair to bomb our people because they couldn't cut a deal with
Milosevic," Mr. Protic said. "I always felt we were innocent victims because of
a misunderstanding between Milosevic and the international community."

Last October, after Mr. Milosevic tried to manipulate the results of an election
that the opposition seemed to have won, Mr. Protic and hundreds of thousands of
Yugoslavs poured into the streets in protest. With his childhood home just a
stone's throw from City Hall, Mr. Protic said, he was surrounded by familiar
faces, defiant and weeping.

THE police ringed the protesters, and throughout the tense night of Oct. 5, the
only thing that was clear was that a decisive moment had arrived. Mr. Protic
pleaded with the crowds to avoid bloodshed.

"You're either going to prevail and become a part of a great historical victory
for your people, or you're going to disappear or be annihilated," he said.
"Curiously for me, that was a very soothing feeling."

He recalled with pride how his father, a onetime law student who had been
expelled for his anti-Communist activities, had greeted him the day the
opposition triumphed.

"He said, 'Listen, son, I've been waiting for this for 60 years,' " Mr. Protic
said. "He didn't even ask me how I was."

For his part, Mr. Protic was elected mayor of Belgrade, becoming the first
elected official of the democratic government. The city he briefly ran was
filthy and impoverished but still cosmopolitan, and ultimately resilient, he
said.

Now that he has become ambassador, he said, he has promised his wife and
centsfamily that the three years he expects to spend in Washington will be his
last foray into politics.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Milan Protic

GRAPHIC: Photo: Milan Protic (Linda Spillers for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); HISTORY
(77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); PUBLIC
POLICY (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%); BOMBINGS
(64%); BASKETBALL (53%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  FOREIGN SERVICE

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (57%)

MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; PROTIC, MILAN (AMB); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); SANTA BARBARA, CA,
USA (56%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1178 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Looking Ahead to the Winter Olympics, a Terrorist Response Team Trains

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1392 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY


The training script went like this: A terrorist bomb exploded at the airport.
The military, at the request of the local authorities, rushed a convoy to the
scene with supplies. But one of the trucks hit a boy, provoking an angry mob.
What were the troops to do?

In another country, perhaps, the soldiers might have tried to fight their way
past a violent crowd of civilians. But these were fellow Americans. So Lt. Col.
Steve Bullimore, seated behind a computer screen inside a makeshift command
post, turned to the man whose expertise seemed most pertinent, a military
lawyer. His advice? Call the police.

These events unfolded in a four-day training exercise here to prepare the
Pentagon's newest terrorism response team, the Joint Task Force Civil Support,
for next year's Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.

But beyond working out the bugs in their software or the kinks in their command
structure, this exercise had the additional goal of training globe-trotting
warriors to behave more like local firefighters: helpful, courteous and, above
all, nothing like an invading army.

"We don't want to take over," said Col. Richard C. Roten, deputy commander of
the task force. "We only want to be there as long as we are needed."

The task force is at the center of an emerging debate over the military's role,
if any, in responding to major terrorist attacks inside the nation's borders, a
threat that many experts consider all but inevitable.

Many people in Congress, the Pentagon and local government argue that it would
be unconscionable not to exploit the military's immense resources -- from tents
and helicopters to medics and chemical detection teams -- during a nuclear,
biological or chemical weapons attack against the nation.

"They have all the resources we don't," said Gary W. Peyton, deputy fire chief
in Aurora, Colo., which participated in a terrorism training exercise with the
military last year.

But the idea has drawn sharp opposition from many civil libertarians who argue
that soldiers trained for fighting wars are more likely to injure or kill
civilians -- or violate civil rights -- than are civil authorities.

The critics warn that once the armed forces are deployed domestically, they will
come under intense pressure to engage in law enforcement activities, like
detaining looters, questioning suspects or seizing property. Although federal
law sharply restricts such activities by the military, the temptation will be to
suspend those rules in times of crisis, the critics say.

"When it faces conflict, the military engages in mission creep," said Gregory T.
Nojeim, chief legal counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union. "If sent in
to shuffle petri dishes and deliver cots, the mission may evolve into more
law-enforcement-type work when circumstances change. And everyone knows that
circumstances will change."

One indication of Washington's ambivalence on the issue was a bill introduced
last month by Representative William M. Thornberry, Republican of Texas, that
would create the National Homeland Security Agency to coordinate more than 40
federal agencies in preventing and responding to domestic terrorism. Notably
absent from the legislation was any mention of the Department of Defense, whose
role Mr. Thornberry says he is struggling to define.

"We have to be careful," Mr. Thornberry said in an interview. "We do not want
the military to serve as law enforcement officers. And yet that line between
military threats and law enforcement threats is blurry when you talk about
terrorists sneaking nuclear or biological weapons into the country."

Created in 1999, the Joint Task Force Civil Support has already been involved in
security preparations for last year's political conventions and this year's
presidential inauguration. With 82 members and an annual budget of $8.7 million,
it is expected to grow to 121 people by 2003.

Based at Fort Monroe in Hampton, Va., as part of the United States Joint Forces
Command, the task force's job is to locate and coordinate military resources to
help in the aftermath of major terrorist attacks. It can be deployed only at the
request of local or state civilian authorities, and it takes its directions from
federal civilian agencies. In most situations, that would be the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.

In many ways, it has been structured to convey the Pentagon's concerns about
civil liberties. Its commander, Maj. Gen. Bruce M. Lawlor, is a Vermont lawyer
who comes from the National Guard, having never served on active duty before
joining the task force. That experience has given him more contact with local
and state civil officials than many military commanders.

"We are strictly the guests, if you will, of state and local authorities,"
General Lawlor said.

Moreover, task force members do not carry weapons. They have considered not
wearing uniforms. And each member carries a "rules on the use of force" card
stating they must not arrest anyone, seize property or use force, except in
self-defense.

"My mission is to provide assistance to state and local civil authorities to
save lives, prevent injury and restore critical infrastructure," the card says.
"In executing my mission, I will treat all persons with dignity and respect."

The Salt Lake City exercises, conducted indoors at a National Guard base outside
town, did not involve actual troops or military equipment. Instead, it tried to
test the decision-making skills of task force members inside a command post
during a series of simulated terrorist attacks on the Olympics.

The scenario involved Latin American terrorists exploding bombs filled with
radioactive material outside a crowded sports arena, at the airport and in a
hospital. Overwhelmed by the dead and injured, the local authorities request
federal assistance. That is where the task force's work begins.

Throughout the exercise, task force commanders were peppered with requests from
local authorities played by federal officials. One was for help screening people
for radiation sickness. Another was to test drinking water. Others were for
tents, trucks and medical supplies.

Later, the task force was asked to help decontaminate and store 1,400 bodies.
Members immediately huddled to discuss the problem. Where could they obtain that
many body bags? Should they fly in refrigerator trucks? How would they deal with
the burial customs of 60 nations?

Even the task force's public affairs office was thrown a few curveballs. On the
second day, one of the officers was handed news reports depicting soldiers
"standing idly by" while looters plundered businesses. She fired off a statement
under General Lawlor's name saying that the troops were prohibited from making
arrests under the Posse Comitatus Act and were busy "saving as many lives as we
can."

The Posse Comitatus Act of 1878 prohibits the armed forces from engaging in
police activities within the United States without authorization from Congress
or the president. The law has been revised to allow the military to perform such
functions after nuclear, chemical or biological attacks, but only with the
concurrence of the attorney general.

For all its efforts to simulate actual situations, the exercise could not
re-create the blinding confusion, physical stress and sheer panic that would
accompany a major terrorist attack. And those are the forces, civil libertarians
warn, that lead to unintended abuses.

What would happen, for instance, if the military were asked to quarantine an
area after a biological or nuclear attack? Might a panicky soldier shoot a
fleeing civilian suspected of carrying a deadly virus? Or forcibly block a
frightened crowd from entering a contaminated airport?

"It's a sticky situation," Colonel Bullimore said. "If we cordon off -- that
would be the wrong word -- if we set up monitor sites around the airport, we
cannot forcibly prevent anybody from going in there. We would need martial law
before we did any of that."

Task force members say they try hard not to think in traditional military terms,
though it can be difficult. During a briefing on the size of the task force,
Col. Bill Sick, the chief of staff, said, "This is what we go to war with."

Colonel Sick paused and smiled. "Let me think how I said that," he continued.
"Think of this as the war we fight. This is our nation, our culture. These are
the things we can bring to help."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lt. Col. Steve Bullimore relaying an urgent request for
assistance to Capt. Shelia Lydon in a training exercise. (Tom Smart for The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); OLYMPICS (92%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WINTER
OLYMPICS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WINTER
SPORTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); MILITARY TRAINING
(89%); ARMIES (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); FIREFIGHTERS &
FIREFIGHTING (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (78%);
LAWYERS (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%); HELICOPTERS
(73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (73%);
CORPORATE COUNSEL (70%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (70%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%) OLYMPIC GAMES;  TERRORISM;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  OLYMPIC GAMES (2002);  WINTER GAMES (OLYMPICS)

PERSON: DAO, JAMES

CITY: SALT LAKE CITY, UT, USA (93%)

STATE: UTAH, USA (93%); COLORADO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: SALT LAKE CITY (UTAH)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1200 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Powell Assails Israel for Gaza Incursion

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, employing the harshest language against
Israel since the Bush administration took office, assailed Israel today for
using "excessive and disproportionate" force in seizing a part of
Palestinian-ruled territory in Gaza, and urged its forces to withdraw.

Soon after General Powell's statement was read at the State Department, the
Israeli Army publicly announced that it was withdrawing from the positions it
had occupied in Gaza less than 24 hours earlier. Although Israeli generals had
declared earlier that they would hold the positions for "days, weeks and
months," the army said this evening that it had completed its operation.

Israel moved its troops into an area of Gaza that had been transferred fully to
Palestinian civil and military control under the Oslo accords. The assault
followed a fierce Israeli bombardment of Palestinian targets in Gaza, all in
response to a Palestinian mortar attack on Monday against the nearby Israeli
town of Sederot.  Page A8.

In his statement, General Powell said the fighting in Gaza was "precipitated by
the provocative Palestinian mortar attacks on Israel." But his criticism of
Israel was far stronger, especially coming from an administration that had
signaled a hands-off attitude toward the Israeli-Palestinian fray.

"We call upon both sides to respect the agreements they have signed," General
Powell continued. For the Palestinians, he said, that meant renouncing terrorism
and bringing all Palestinian military forces under control. "For the Israelis,"
he added, "this includes respecting their commitment to withdraw from Gaza,
according to the terms of the agreement signed by Israel and the Palestinians.
There can be no military solution to this conflict."

General Powell stressed that the administration was concerned about a broad
range of events over the last four days, including the Hezbollah attack on
Israeli forces at Shabaa Farms, the Israeli retaliatory attack on Syrian
positions in Lebanon, Palestinian mortar attacks against Israel and the Israeli
retaliation last night in Gaza.

In all, he said, the situation was "threatening to escalate further" and posed
the risk of a broader conflict in the region.

A senior administration official said telephone calls from General Powell to
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel and to the Palestinian leader, Yasir
Arafat, had not produced results.

In the last four days, the official said, Israeli military action had become
"qualitatively different," and the time had come to express dissatisfaction with
the Israeli prime minister's change in tactics.

The criticism stood in sharp contrast to the relatively friendly reception Mr.
Sharon received at the White House when he paid his first visit to Washington as
prime minister last month. At the time, President Bush called on "all parties"
to reduce the violence and said the United States, like Israel, was against
direct negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians while violence
prevailed.

There were some questions today about whether Mr. Sharon had left Washington
with the impression that the atmosphere here gave him a free hand in dealing
with the Palestinians. A senior administration official denied this evening that
Mr. Sharon could have received such a message, and said there was a "disconnect"
between what the prime minister did in the last few days and what he said last
month, when he told the Bush administration that he was interested in
"de-escalating" the high tensions between the Israelis and Palestinians.

Nonetheless, administration officials said they were still committed to their
intent not to be as enmeshed in the Middle East as the Clinton administration
was, and insisted that Washington would only "facilitate" talks between the
Israelis and Palestinians, not force them.

After the Israeli Army began to withdraw from Gaza, senior administration
officials insisted that Mr. Sharon had made the decision of his own accord, and
not because of the American criticism.

To support the claim, one administration official said the Israeli ambassador,
David Ivry, informed the National Security Council of the decision to withdraw
about 1 p.m., the hour when General Powell's statement was being read at the
State Department.

In Israel, however, reporters for the state radio said the withdrawal was, in
fact, a response to Washington's pressure. And one advisor to Mr. Sharon, Dore
Gold, was quoted on CNN as saying, "We pay very close attention to what is said
in Washington."

While the criticism of Israel was the strongest since Mr. Bush has been in
office, administration officials took pains to say that the language was
carefully moderated.

They noted that the message did not use the word "condemn" and was not out of
line with anything that was published earlier this year in the State
Department's annual human rights report, in which Israel was criticized.
Further, they said that in calling for the withdrawal of Israel from Gaza, the
United States was only asking that Israel live up to its obligations under the
1994 accord signed with the Palestinians as part of what is known as the Oslo
agreement.

In the last two weeks, the administration has quietly urged Israel and the
Palestinians to resume security talks. In that time, two rounds of talks between
Israeli military officials and Palestinian security officials have been held in
Tel Aviv under American auspices. A third round scheduled for Monday night was
canceled, an Israeli official said.

Over all, the new administration has not matched the intensity of the last one
in dealing with the Middle East. For the most part, General Powell appears to be
the day-to-day overseer of Middle East policy, making phone calls to both Mr.
Sharon and Mr. Arafat.

The administration has abolished the State Department job of special Middle East
co-ordinator held by Dennis B. Ross, and at the White House, the national
security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, does not appear to have as close a hold on
Middle East policy as her predecessor, Samuel R. Berger. The deteriorating
situation in the region confronted the administration with a quandary.

On one hand, President Bush has repeatedly stated that it is up to the
Palestinians and Israelis to find a way themselves to reduce the violence. He
has refused to invite Mr. Arafat to the White House, a signal intended to
persuade the Palestinian to use his influence to cut the violence on his side.

On the other hand, senior officials are aware that leaving the two sides to
their own devices is most likely to increase tensions and therefore create
regionwide instability.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Israel's chief of staff, Shaul Mofaz, looked into the mile-wide
reoccupied region in Gaza yesterday. After indicating that it would stay for
"days, weeks and months," Israel withdrew its troops less than 24 hours later.
(Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ARMIES
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
PRIME MINISTERS (84%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (84%); HEZBOLLAH (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ISRAEL-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  PALESTINIANS;
TERRORISM

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) PERLEZ, JANE; POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (99%); UNITED STATES
(95%); SYRIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1203 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Serb Commander Pleads Not Guilty to Crimes in Bosnia War

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 18


A former Bosnian Serb Army commander, accused of playing a central role in the
biggest massacre of the Bosnian war, pleaded not guilty today to charges of
genocide and other war crimes before the international war crimes tribunal in
The Hague.

The officer, Dragan Obrenovic, 38, was arrested on Sunday in Bosnia by NATO-led
troops. He was both the deputy and acting commander of a brigade in a Bosnian
town, Srebrenica, in July 1995, when thousands of Muslim men and boys were
separated from their families and killed.

In indicting him, United Nations prosecutors charged that the former major had
"participated in a criminal plan," whose purpose was "to detain, capture and
summarily execute by firing squad over 5,000 Muslim men and boys" from the
enclave in eastern Bosnia that was under United Nations protection.

The indictment describes in detail how men of the Zvornik Brigade under Major
Obrenovic's command moved their captives, blindfolded them and gunned them down
with automatic weapons. It says brigade engineers used heavy equipment to dig
mass graves and bury the victims.

Weeks later, according to the indictment, Major Obrenovic and his troops became
part of an extensive effort to cover up the killings by digging up hundreds of
bodies and moving them to other sites.

It was not clear why Mr. Obrenovic had not been indicted earlier. His name has
come up at times in the trial of a superior, Gen. Radovan Krstic, who is being
tried on charges in connection with responsibility for the Srebrenica killings.

Last year, prosecutors stunned the courtroom with a tape of a radio intercept in
which a voice identified as the major's is heard reporting that his troops had
caught additional Muslim refugees, "some with guns and some with mines."

General Krstic's reply was: "Kill each and every one of them. Do not leave a
single one alive."

Tribunal investigators questioned Mr. Obrenovic several times in Bosnia. His
lawyer told Bosnian television that he was shocked by Mr. Obrenovic's arrest
because Mr. Obrenovic had been cooperating. The lawyer said Mr. Obrenovic had
made it clear that he would surrender if an indictment was issued.

But tribunal officials said the indictment, signed by the prosecutor on March 23
and confirmed by Judge Liu Daqun of China on April 9, was kept secret until the
arrest. Florence Hartmann, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor, said the decision
was made to prevent the suspect's escape from his hometown, Zvornik, on the
border with Serbia. Others accused of war crimes are hiding in Serbia.

Mr. Obrenovic and General Krstic have been charged with similar crimes,
including genocide and crimes against humanity, in connection with the killings
at Srebrenica.

Although the proceedings against the two commanders are widely seen as
significant, they are also a reminder that the two main instigators of one of
the most violent episodes of the war are still at large. Although they were
among the first to be indicted, the former political leader of the Bosnian
Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, and the former military commander, Gen. Ratko Mladic,
have not been arrested.

General Mladic, who repeatedly assured the Muslim refugees at Srebrenica that
they were safe before they were led to the killing fields, has been seen in
Serbia. Dr. Karadzic, who once told Serbian television that the taking of
Srebrenica was proof of Serbian superiority, is generally believed to be hiding
in Bosnia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INDICTMENTS (90%); MEN (90%); ARMIES (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); LAWYERS (74%); REFUGEES (73%) WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (58%)

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; OBRENOVIC, DRAGAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1204 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Sierra Leone Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 184 words


To the Editor:

Your April 17 editorial and news article about the Independent Special Court for
Sierra Leone pointed to gridlock on financing the court, a problem also
confronting the planned Extraordinary Chambers in Cambodia to prosecute top
Khmer Rouge leaders for crimes against humanity during the Pol Pot era. The
political work on these courts was completed last year, including the right of
the special Sierra Leone court to investigate Liberia's president, Charles
Taylor.

The return for international justice and long-term domestic tranquillity in
Sierra Leone and Cambodia will be substantial if these courts can begin to
function. In addition to voluntary government financing, the time has arrived
for private benefactors who believe in the cause of justice and victims' desire
for justice to step up to the plate. The United Nations and the United States
could undertake a collaborative effort to fuse public and private funds for
these worthy endeavors.

DAVID SCHEFFER
Washington, April 17, 2001

The writer was ambassador at large for war crimes issues during the Clinton
administration.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%);
WRITERS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) FINANCES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: SCHEFFER, DAVID

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); CAMBODIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); LIBERIA (92%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE;  CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1209 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Halts Book Based on 'Gone With the Wind'

BYLINE:  By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1114 words


A Federal District Court in Atlanta granted an injunction yesterday blocking the
imminent publication of "The Wind Done Gone," concluding that its author, Alice
Randall, plagiarized from Margaret Mitchell's Civil War epic, "Gone With the
Wind."

Ms. Randall set part of her novel on the plantation described in Ms. Mitchell's
book and told the story from the perspective of a slave who was the half-sister
of Ms. Mitchell's leading character, Scarlett O'Hara, and the daughter of Ms.
Mitchell's character Mammy.

The case has captivated lawyers, literary critics and historians alike because
it pits claims about free speech and social justice against arguments about
intellectual property rights and artistic merit. At the heart of the conflict
are legal issues about the blurry boundary between unlawful plagiarism and
legitimate critical reinterpretation. The book's publisher, Houghton Mifflin,
said it would appeal the injunction.

Lawyers defending Ms. Randall's book submitted testaments against the injunction
from a roster of well-known artists and intellectuals including the novelists
Harper Lee, Toni Morrison and John Berendt, the critic Henry Lewis Gates, the
historians Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. and Shelby Foote, and the musician Steve
Earle. Booksellers, librarians and authors' groups all filed briefs in support
of Ms. Randall's First Amendment rights. It is not clear how many of those
weighing in on the book have actually read it.

The core of the argument in defense of the book is that Ms. Randall's book
borrows Ms. Mitchell's scenes and characters to criticize and ridicule "Gone
With the Wind" and its demeaning portrayal of black slaves. Ms. Randall's
lawyers and many experts argued that revisiting the story from a slave's
perspective serves a legitimate public interest partly because of the novel's
unique status as an American icon.

To make the case for suppressing the new work, the Mitchell trusts have enlisted
Martin Garbus, a prominent First Amendment lawyer. Mr. Garbus submitted
testimony from literary critics that Ms. Randall's novel was mediocre,
unoriginal and derived its principal appeal from the popularity of Ms.
Mitchell's book.

In his opinion, Judge Charles A. Pannell Jr. found that Ms. Randall borrowed 15
characters from Ms. Mitchell's book, along with many famous scenes and some
dialogue. He concluded that Ms. Randall repeated much more than necessary for
the purpose of a parody. What's more, he wrote, the true object of the book's
criticism was slavery and racism, not just Ms. Mitchell's novel. He added that
many other writers including Ms. Morrison have found ways to criticize slavery
without taking from "Gone With the Wind."

Explaining his ruling, Judge Pannell responded to rhetorical questions that Ms.
Morrison raised in her statement to the court. Ms. Morrison asked: "Who controls
how history is imagined? Who gets to say what slavery was like for the slaves?"

The judge answered: "The question before the court is not who gets to write
history, but rather whether Ms. Randall can permeate most of her new critical
work with copyrighted characters, plot and scenes from 'Gone With the Wind.' "

In a statement after the decision, Ms. Randall said, "Gone With the Wind" has
"wounded generations of Americans." Ms. Randall, a successful screenwriter and
country music songwriter living in Nashville, describes herself as of mixed
race. This book is her first novel. "I look forward to the day when readers will
be able to judge my book for themselves," she added.

Wendy Strothman, executive vice president of Houghton Mifflin, said in a
statement, "Today's ruling, if allowed to stand, will have a chilling effect on
all those who seek to use free expression and parody to explode myths and
provoke new thinking," adding, "The Mitchell trusts are threatening to re-define
American parody as we know it."

The idea of borrowing another writer's characters and setting is hardly
original. Tom Stoppard, John Updike and other writers have revived characters
from Shakespeare's plays, and Shakespeare himself borrowed heavily from many
writers before him. But literary allusion has grown increasingly contentious in
an era when stories and characters can become the basis for profitable licensing
deals across other media.

In 1994, the Supreme Court re-opened the question of how much borrowing from a
pre-existing creative work is permissible when it considered for the first time
the legitimacy of imitation for the purpose of parody. The court overturned a
lower court's ruling that the rap group 2 Live Crew had plagiarized Roy
Orbison's song "Oh, Pretty Woman" by incorporating portions of its lyrics and
melody into a bawdy reinterpretation.

The Supreme Court found that 2 Live Crew's rap seemed like a legitimate satire
of the original's "naivete," but stopped short of defining how similar to an
original a parody can be.

Since then, the son of the novelist Vladimir Nabokov has filed suit to block the
publication in the United States of "Lo's Diary," a novel by the Italian writer
Pia Pera that retells "Lolita" from the little girl's perspective. (She exults
in her power.) In that case, Mr. Garbus represented Ms. Pera. The case was
settled out of court before a ruling.

In ruling on Ms. Randall's novel, Judge Pannell seemed to find that adopting a
new perspective on another author's book was unlikely to qualify as a legitimate
parody. "If the work tells the same story through different eyes, then it
infringes on the copyright owner's right to create and control derivative
works," he wrote, concluding that Ms. Randall's book was in essence an
unauthorized sequel.

The Mitchell trusts, managed by SunTrust Bank for the benefit of her nephews,
have earned millions of dollars from licensing adaptations and sequels to "Gone
With the Wind."

Judge Pannell found that the publication of Ms. Randall's book would sap the
market for its authorized sequels. "When the reader of 'Gone With the Wind'
turns over the last page, he may well wonder what becomes of Ms. Mitchell's
beloved characters, and their romantic, but tragic world," he wrote, adding that
only the copyright owner can provide answers. In its licensing agreements for
the sequels, the trusts have stipulated that Scarlett O'Hara must not die. In
Ms. Randall's novel, she does.

Lawyers for Ms. Randall argued that her book would not compete with authorized
sequels because its critical perspective would appeal only to different readers.
The writer Pat Conroy, who contemplated writing an authorized sequel, provided a
letter testifying that the trusts asked him to promise not to include
interracial sex or homosexual sex. Ms. Randall's novel includes both.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: WIND DONE GONE, THE (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WRITERS (91%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); LITERATURE (90%);
PLAGIARISM (90%); INJUNCTIONS (90%); HISTORY (89%); LAWYERS (89%); BOOK REVIEWS
(89%); LITERARY CRITICISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SLAVERY (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JUDGES
(78%); BOOK PUBLISHING (77%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW (74%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(74%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (74%); BOOKSTORES (72%); RACE & RACISM (71%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (69%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (69%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (67%) BOOKS
AND LITERATURE;  PLAGIARISM;  COPYRIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO

PERSON: KIRKPATRICK, DAVID D; MITCHELL, MARGARET (1900-49); RANDALL, ALICE

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (90%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1211 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

For an Old Flag, A New Rationale

BYLINE:  By Robert S. McElvaine;  Robert S. McElvaine is a professor of history
at Millsaps College. His latest book is "Eve's Seed: Biology, the Sexes and the
Course of History."

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: JACKSON, Miss.


Can you imagine, in the year 2001, a state actually voting to have a Confederate
symbol as part of its flag? Once again, Mississippi performs its national
service as scapegoat. People across America, no matter how bad racial problems
are in their localities, can once again breathe a sigh of relief and say, "Look
at how horrible those people in Mississippi are!"

Yet Tuesday's vote in Mississippi to retain the Confederate battle emblem is
actually an indication that racism in this state is growing closer to the
national white norm.

There are, to be sure, still more than a few racist yahoos in Mississippi. To
them, the Confederate flag still stands for white domination. Waving it allows
some white men, who feel they have lost too many contests, to reclaim their
manhood and send a message: "This is still a white man's state!"

But there was none of that rhetoric in the campaign run by supporters of the old
flag. Rather, they employed the new mythology that the Confederacy had nothing
to do with slavery -- indeed, that the Confederate cause was a struggle for
freedom. This is, of course, historical nonsense. But it also a clear sign of
progress.

Such organizations as the Sons of Confederate Veterans have woven their own
version of "history" so they can take pride in their ancestry. This
neo-Confederate feel-good history has much in common with the more extreme
claims of Afrocentrism. The reason many white Southerners have developed a
mythologizing approach to the past so similar to that of an oppressed minority
is that the South has long been to American regions (and Mississippi has been to
American states) what blacks have been to American ethnic groups: the most
disrespected. Most white Southerners have been taught by the majority culture to
feel ashamed of their heritage. "Redneck" may be the last of the derogatory
terms for groups of people that is still acceptable in polite company.

This palpable sense of being condescended to has fueled a simmering resentment.
For some, the assertion that the Confederacy was about liberty, not slavery, is
an awkward attempt to say "I am somebody!"

A few decades ago there would have been far less argument from most white
Southerners against the assertion that the "liberty" their ancestors were
defending was the "right" to own slaves. Racism was accepted, and there was no
shame in defending slavery. In 1939, white Southerners raised no objection when
Gerald O'Hara was depicted in "Gone With the Wind" proclaiming: "We've borne
enough insults from the meddlin' Yankees. It's time we made them understand
we'll keep our slaves with or without their approval."

In this revered film depiction of the Old South, it was accepted that the Lost
Cause was about defending slavery.

Since the civil rights movement, however, a new generation of Confederate
descendants has been brought up on mixed messages. Southern whites have come to
understand that racism is wrong. But they are still taught that the Confederacy
is their heritage and should be honored. The easiest way to reconcile the
acceptance that racism is evil with continued veneration of the Confederate past
is to separate the Lost Cause from slavery.

The divorce of slavery and racism from what is honored as part of the Southern
heritage is a huge step forward, even though it has left a sizable number of
people clinging to a pseudo-historical mythology. A majority of white
Mississippians showed on Tuesday that they are not ready to accept the truth
about their history. But the fact that the supporters of the Confederate flag
argued that the flag does not represent slavery and hate indicates that racism
in this state has now taken on the more subtle form in which it is seen in the
rest of the country.

Mississippi today is not as different from the rest of the United States as
those outside the state would like to think.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACE & RACISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (89%); SLAVERY
(89%); ETHNICITY (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (77%); MEN (74%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS
(72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%) FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA;  BLACKS

ORGANIZATION: SONS OF CONFEDERATE VETERANS (55%)

PERSON: MCELVAINE, ROBERT S

CITY: JACKSON, MS, USA (79%)

STATE: MISSISSIPPI, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: MISSISSIPPI

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1214 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
What It Takes to Stop Slavery

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1134 words


FIRST, there were reports of a ship off the coast of Benin carrying more than
200 children into slavery in West Africa. When the ship docked, however, only a
few dozen were on board. There was speculation that the captain had abandoned
the others on some coastal outcrop, or even thrown them overboard.

No clear answers about what happened on the ship may ever be known. But the
case, and the international attention it drew, threw light on a troubling
phenomenon: the modern slave trade.

The current definition of a slave, according to Beth Herzfeld of the London
watchdog group Anti-Slavery International, is someone "forced to work under
physical or mental threat, and where the owner or employer controls the person
completely -- where a person is bought or sold." It includes, she said,
restrictions on freedom of movement, no pay or very little and no say over
hours, holidays or rest.

By that measure, 27 million people or more are enslaved today, said Kevin Bales,
the author of "Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy" and an
adviser to the United Nations on forced labor. In contrast, the trans-Atlantic
slave trade is estimated at about 15 million people over 150 years.

In West Africa, experts say as many as tens of thousands of children are
transported from country to country to fill a demand for cheap labor. Around the
world, the International Labor Organization says, 250 million children who
should be in school are at work instead, many in conditions of slavery in mines,
factories and plantations. With another 500 million young people expected to
enter the labor market in coming decades -- most from the poorest parts of the
developing world -- children will only be more vulnerable.

Mr. Bales and other experts say that unlike those in the 18th and 19th
centuries, today's peddlers of servitude seek out not the strong but the weak:
women and children. Whether providing labor for the sex trade or the carpet
industry, "You want people you can capture easily and conceal easily," Mr. Bales
said. "Child slaves are very, very cheap, and they are disposable."

Benin's mystery ship, brought to world attention by officials there, raises
important questions. What moves societies to take action against a social or
political evil, an industrial danger or even the potential for natural
catastrophe?

Sometimes a single event becomes the catalyst for transforming movements. In
1911, a fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in Manhattan killed 146 workers,
most of them women trapped in a locked, 10th-floor sweatshop. Those who jumped
to escape the flames died on the sidewalk below. Frances Perkins, who became
secretary of labor under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, called it "the torch
that lit up the whole industrial scene." Decades of labor legislation and
reforms followed.

MORE than half a century later, a chemical company's toxic contamination of the
Love Canal neighborhood of Niagara Falls led to Congressional enactment of the
Superfund law. Last year, after concluding that the international sex trade in
women and girls included the trafficking of up to 100,000 women into the United
States each year, the Clinton administration and Congress worked together to
pass the Trafficking and Violence Victims Protection Act.

So-called tipping points are not confined to industry. The recent deaths of 43
South Africans in a soccer-match stampede opened debate there on the safe
handling of crowds at sports events. Similar stampedes have changed laws and
practices in Europe and Latin America. The most recent earthquake in India,
which left nearly 2,000 confirmed dead, prompted calls for an effective
crackdown on the flouting of building codes.

Sadly, calamities do not always cause change. Overloaded ferries sink with
miserable regularity in a dozen poor countries, sometimes killing hundreds.
Shoddy houses, schools and hospitals are still built along known fault lines. A
fire not unlike the Triangle Shirtwaist killed 52 last year in Bangladesh, where
women sew for less than $50 a month. It was only one of the country's many fatal
fires.

What makes the difference between a Triangle Shirtwaist fire and a Bangladeshi
sweatshop fire? Officials at international agencies, who in an age of
globalization now deal with borderless problems, say critical factors include
governmental will, callousness or corruption among local or national officials
and the strength of nongovernmental organizations pressing for change (as well
as the inability of monied lobbies to prevent it).

Sometimes a single person can make a difference. The late Diana, princess of
Wales, focused world attention on the human devastation caused by land mines.
The internationally known Senegalese musician Youssou N'Dour gives concerts
around the world to campaign against child labor. In Thailand, a popular former
government minister, Mechai Viravaidya, did more than anyone to help cut both
rapid population growth and AIDS infections with clever public campaigns to
promote condom use.

"YOU have to move forward in a parallel manner on different fronts, and then one
of them sometimes produces the breakthrough," said Juan Somavia, director
general of the International Labor Organization in Geneva, which is beginning a
campaign to eliminate the worst forms of child labor, with initial programs in
El Salvador, Nepal, Tanzania and West Africa. Most important, he said, is
awareness-raising and community involvement. Legislation, labor courts and labor
inspections are other forces for change. So are the companies that use child
labor themselves, said Mr. Somavia, a former Chilean diplomat. "A basic element
for companies today is image," he said. "That's a leverage."

Add to that market activism. "This has been done in the U.S. traditionally
through shareholder resolutions," he said. "Today it is moving into fair trade
initiatives and socially responsible investment funds." And a related concept is
consumer choice: child labor in India's carpet industry is now monitored by
Rugmark, an organization in Washington supported by Unicef.

"Local N.G.O.'s are key," Mr. Somavia said. "International N.G.O.'s bring
attention to the issue because they have access to global media. But local
N.G.O.'s make it happen."

Opposition to child slavery may be reaching a turning point. From the grass
roots up in Benin, Mali and the Ivory Coast, determination to halt the trade has
been rising.

"Benin is a good example of a country that has made good progress," said Alfred
Ironside, a Unicef spokesman. "They have developed a system of community
watches. The watchdog system has helped to prevent the abduction or spiriting
away of some 3,000 children in the last three years. It may sound like a small
number, but that's 3,000 kids who didn't end up in something like bonded labor."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Slaves in Sudan, the focus of a recent visit by the Rev. Al
Sharpton. (Associated Press); This Indian child earns about 86 cents for every
1,000 bricks she carries. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (96%); CHILDREN (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (87%); EMERGING
MARKETS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FORCED LABOR (78%); SWEATSHOPS
(78%); CHILD LABOR (78%); GLOBALIZATION (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); LABOR
DEPARTMENTS (74%); GARMENT WORKERS (73%); FACTORY FIRES (69%); NATURAL DISASTERS
(66%); CARPET & RUG MILLS (64%); FLOORING (50%) SLAVE LABOR;  CHILDREN AND
YOUTH;  WOMEN;  SLAVERY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%); INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: AL SHARPTON (59%) CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (75%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (93%); SUDAN (92%); UNITED STATES (75%)

REGION: AFRICA;  INDIA;  SUDAN

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1221 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Redemption of Sudanese Slaves

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 583 words


Sudan's 18-year civil war between an Arab-dominated government in the north and
the long-subjugated black African south has claimed two million lives and forced
more than four million southern Sudanese from their homes. It has also
perversely transformed many international efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance into fuel for further fighting. The latest example is a global
campaign to curtail one of the most pernicious symptoms of this intractable war
-- slavery. The efforts of well-meaning foreigners to buy the freedom of captive
southern Sudanese -- a practice known as slave redemption -- may be expanding
the very market it seeks to eliminate.

Slave raids today are conducted almost entirely by government-backed armed
militias in western Sudan. The raids are directed primarily at the civilian
Dinka population. Khartoum's aim in arming the militias has been to wage proxy
counterinsurgency war against the main rebel movement in southern Sudan, the
predominantly Dinka Sudan People's Liberation Army.

The militias often operate with government troops and transport their captives
on military trains. They raid Dinka villages, abducting mostly women and
children for use as domestic slaves and concubines. Thousands have been seized
and taken north, to be sold for as little as $15 apiece.

Since 1995, Christian groups in Europe and America have sought to assist the
Dinka in redeeming their abducted children and female relatives.  Dinka families
have long been paying slavemasters and chiefs to secure the freedom of their
relatives.  Western groups led by Christian Solidarity International, based in
Zurich, began building on this practice, sending representatives into southern
Sudan to buy slaves in large numbers and set them free. In recent years, raising
money for slave redemption has become the focus of well-intentioned efforts in
many public schools, community groups and evangelical churches in the United
States, Canada and Western Europe. Western Christian groups say they have freed
thousands of slaves since 1995, paying an average of $50 per slave.

But slave redemption may be a textbook case of good intentions gone awry. The
financial incentives of slave redemption in Sudan, one of the word's poorest
nations, encourage the taking of slaves. Moreover, the knowledge that foreigners
with deep pockets are willing to pay to redeem slaves reduces the incentive for
owners to set them free without payment. The extent to which redemption has
promoted slave-taking is difficult to document, but there is growing evidence of
fraud in the redemption process, as unscrupulous chiefs, middlemen and rebel
leaders alike "borrow" children who have never been abducted for the purpose of
enlarging groups of slaves and increasing the proceeds from their redemption.

The persistence of slavery in Sudan is but one of many appalling crimes in a war
that has escalated in the last year with the government's scorched-earth
campaign to depopulate areas of southern Sudan surrounding oil production zones.
Tens of thousands have been driven from their homes.  Some three million
southern Sudanese are at risk of starvation this year. Secretary of State Colin
Powell recently told Congress there was "perhaps no greater tragedy on the face
of the earth" than Sudan. Well-intentioned efforts to relieve the symptoms of
that tragedy -- be it famine or slavery -- are bound to fail unless Washington
is prepared to lead a concerted international campaign to end the war itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CHILDREN (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); FUNDRAISING (77%);
OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); FAMILY (77%); RELIGION
(70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (67%); ARMED FORCES (67%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (65%) EDITORIALS;  FOREIGN AID;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
SLAVERY

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (59%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%);
CANADA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

REGION: SUDAN

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1231 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gone With the First Amendment

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 535 words


The constitutional protection of copyrights was not meant to trump the First
Amendment. That is a principle missing from a federal judge's ruling in Atlanta
to stop publication of "The Wind Done Gone," a retelling of "Gone With the Wind"
from a slave's point of view. The right to produce comic parodies of prior works
is well established in law. The estate of Margaret Mitchell is arguing that this
new work is not a parody but an unauthorized sequel appropriating characters
covered under its copyrights.

That is a question we believe will be settled in favor of Alice Randall, author
of "The Wind Done Gone." Fictional and historic characters have been migrating
among literary works since Shakespeare's time. Denying Ms. Randall the right to
produce a novel that is a literary commentary on a well-known work is an undue
restriction on artistic creation, even if Ms. Randall's work is not strictly a
comic parody. But the main point here is that such copyright issues can be
worked out legally without Judge Charles Pannell Jr.'s radical remedy of prior
restraint of publication.

Judge Pannell's casual repeal of the constitutional doctrine against prior
restraint comes 30 years after the Supreme Court's landmark decision in the
Pentagon Papers case. Dismissing government arguments that publication of those
documents would harm national security, the Supreme Court made it clear that
only a showing of concrete, immediate risk to the nation could justify a
judicial order imposing a prior restraint on any kind of publication. An
overblown concern that Ms. Randall's critical take on "Gone With the Wind" and
its demeaning portrayal of black slaves would infringe on the copyright held by
the Margaret Mitchell estate is hardly the sort of monumental risk the justices
had in mind.

Even if higher courts ultimately agree that "The Wind Done Gone" is an
unauthorized sequel that falls outside the recognized exception for parody under
copyright law, the correct remedy is monetary damages, not shutting down presses
in advance of publication. Moreover, while the line between fair use and a
copyright infringement can be blurry, Ms. Randall appears not to have crossed it
simply by revisiting some scenes and characters from "Gone With the Wind."

A relevant 1994 Supreme Court decision, in the course of overturning a lower
court ruling that found plagiarism in a bawdy satire of Roy Orbison's song "Oh,
Pretty Woman" by the rap group 2 Live Crew, recognized that parody requires some
borrowing from the original. Ms. Randall's case is actually stronger because her
novel's critique of slavery and racism is political expression normally accorded
the highest level of First Amendment protection.

This could turn out to be an important test case. In an era when media
conglomerates control the rights to vast amounts of intellectual property,
routine elevation of copyright to a right of censorship could easily squelch
active debate and criticism of important ideas. The 11th Circuit Court of
Appeals has agreed to review the injunction against publication of "The Wind
Done Gone" on an expedited basis, an encouraging sign that the court understands
the damage to free speech each day that it stands.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: WIND DONE GONE, THE (BOOK); GONE WITH THE WIND (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITERATURE (92%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
JUDGES (90%); COPYRIGHT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY LAW (89%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%);
COPYRIGHT LAW (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%);
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT (89%); PLAGIARISM (89%); SLAVERY (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (78%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); LITERARY CRITICISM
(74%); WRITERS (74%); RACE & RACISM (72%); APPEALS (70%); DAMAGES (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); NATIONAL SECURITY (65%); RAP MUSIC (63%); HIP HOP
CULTURE (60%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (60%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  EDITORIALS;
BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  BOOKS AND LITERATURE

PERSON: RANDALL, ALICE; MITCHELL, MARGARET (1900-49); PANNELL, CHARLES JR
(JUDGE)

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (90%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1232 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Attacks Were Up Last Year, U.S. Terrorism Report Says

BYLINE:  By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


The number of international terrorist attacks increased by 8 percent last year,
largely because of a surge in bombings by two rebel groups in Colombia and
attacks by paramilitary groups operating there, the State Department said today.

South Asia remains the focal point for terrorism directed against the United
States, the department's annual report on global terrorism said, with the
Taliban in Afghanistan continuing to provide safe haven for international
terrorists and Pakistan backing terrorist groups as well.

Despite the concerns about Pakistan and Afghanistan, contained in the report for
the second year in a row, they were not added to the list of nations accused of
state-sponsored terrorism. Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria
have long held that designation, which brings with it strict sanctions.

The report is based on data collected in the final year of the Clinton
administration, but officials said the Bush administration had ample time to
review and change the report, and therefore it represents the first view of
global terrorism under the new administration.

"Terrorism is a persistent disease," Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said as
he released the report this afternoon. "Many of you have heard me speak of the
positive side of globalization. But terrorism shows the dark side as it exploits
the easing of travel restrictions, the improvements of communication or the
internationalization of banking and finance, making it easier for terrorists to
do some of their work."

Of the 19 Americans killed in acts of international terrorism last year,
according to the report, 17 died in the attack against the destroyer Cole in
October in the Yemeni port of Aden. Another American victim was one of three aid
workers killed in West Timor. An American journalist was killed when rebels in
Sierra Leone fired at the car in which he and other journalists were riding. The
State Department added the main rebel group in Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary
United Front, to its list of "other terrorist organizations."

Iran continues to top the list of countries accused of state-sponsored
terrorism, backing groups that try to prevent Middle East peace. The report
accused Lebanon of being "unresponsive" to American requests to bring to justice
terrorists who conducted attacks against American citizens and property in
Lebanon.

As far as the escalating violence in the Middle East, the State Department noted
that the Israelis had accused Palestinian Authority security officials of
facilitating terrorist attacks against Israel. But the report stopped short of
accusing the Palestinians of such actions.

Overall, there were 423 terrorist attacks in 2000, compared with 392 the
previous year. Rebel bombing attacks on multinational oil pipelines in Colombia
accounted for much of the increase. Two hundred of the attacks in 2000 were
directed against the United States.

For the first time, the State Department added the United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia, an umbrella organization of paramilitary groups, to its compilation of
terrorist groups. The two main rebel groups are already on the more stringent
list of foreign terrorist organizations.

"I think any group that is tempted to use terrorist tactics in their activity
has to weigh in the balance the likely effect that will have on alienating not
only the United States, but alienating the international community," said Edmund
J. Hull, the State Department's acting coordinator for counterterrorism.

Human rights groups welcomed the inclusion of the paramilitary groups in the
State Department report but they had sought to have them deemed foreign
terrorist organizations, a designation that brings sanctions with it. Rights
advocates argue that those groups have become the most serious destabilizing
force in Colombia because their escalation of violence has damaged peace efforts
between the rebels and the government.

"It's good that they are on the list, but now the United States should increase
the political pressure," said Harvey Suarez of Codhes, a leading rights and
refugee assistance agency in Colombia. "There should be an organized pressure,
increased pressure, on the Colombian state and on the financiers of these
groups."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
GLOBALIZATION (73%); BANKING & FINANCE (50%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (50%)
TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: LACEY, MARC

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); COLOMBIA (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); PAKISTAN (93%);
SIERRA LEONE (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL (92%); MIDDLE
EAST (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); LEBANON (92%); ASIA (91%); YEMEN
(79%); LIBYA (79%); IRAQ (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);
SYRIA (79%); SOUTHERN ASIA (73%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1233 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 2, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The World: International Criminal Court Advances

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 82 words


Thirty nations have now ratified the treaty creating the International Criminal
Court, half the 60 needed to make the court functional.

The court would be the first permanent tribunal to handle cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The United States signed the treaty in the
waning days of the Clinton administration but chances of ratification are slim
since Bush administration officials say they will not send it to the Senate for
action.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); GENOCIDE (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (86%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1234 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 2, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slavery in Sudan

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 180 words


To the Editor:

If there were any empirical evidence that buying the freedom of slaves in Sudan
would foment more murderous slave raids, as you suggest (editorial, April 27),
we would not support Christian Solidarity International's Underground Railroad.

If the Dinka chiefs believed that redeeming their women and children from
bondage would encourage Arab militias to storm their villages for more slaves,
they would stop praising Christian Solidarity International's work and bar them
from southern Sudan.

If the Catholic bishop Macram Gassis, whose people are being killed in slave
raids, thought that redemption encouraged more raids, he would not be urging us
to continue.

Sudan does not have peacetime slave markets where infusions of cash spark
demand. Slaves are taken as part of a religious war. The international community
has failed for nearly two decades to end slavery in Sudan through peace talks.
In the absence of viable alternatives, we cannot, and we will not, fail to
rescue the slaves now.

CHARLES JACOBS
Pres., American Anti-Slavery Group
Boston, April 27, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (79%); RELIGION (72%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (69%); TALKS & MEETINGS (51%);
PEACE PROCESS (51%) SLAVERY;  EDITORIALS

ORGANIZATION: CHRISTIAN SOLIDARITY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

PERSON: JACOBS, CHARLES

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SUDAN

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1235 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Central Asia Braces to Fight Islamic Rebels

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1563 words

DATELINE: SAMARKANDYK, Kyrgyzstan


In the foothills of the majestic Pamir Mountains and in the ageless villages of
the Fergana Valley, spring brings warm days, new leaves in the apricot orchards
and deep fears about another season of violence and tension.

Across a vast swath of Central Asia, former Soviet republics have tried to
strengthen their armies in anticipation of what have become annual attacks by
radical Islamic insurgents financed from Afghanistan and operating with ever
greater precision and sophistication from remote mountain bases.

These shadowy rebels, known as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, have mounted
deadly raids into Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, aiming to put these shaky states on
the defensive and to carry their cause gradually eastward, toward the repressed
Muslim minorities of western China.

These guerrillas are the latest armed band to emerge from the ruins of the
deadly conflict between American-backed rebels and the Russians in Afghanistan.
The eventual coming to power of the Taliban united Washington and Moscow in
determination to isolate Kabul's new brand of radical Islamism.

The rebels' leader is a 32-year-old Uzbek, Juma Namangani, who became
radicalized during his service as a Soviet paratrooper in Afghanistan and
trained opposition soldiers in the civil war that tore apart Tajikistan from
1992 to 1997.

For the leaders of this region's wobbly and young democracies, the rebels -- and
their goal of carving an Islamic state from the territory of some Central Asian
countries -- cast a large, menacing shadow.

"This is the most serious type of threat, and we will continue to face this
danger for many years," said President Askar Akayev of Kyrgyzstan, a mountainous
country of 4.5 million people.

Estimates of the guerrillas' strength range from a few hundred to several
thousand. There are sketchy but widely circulated stories that the militants are
trained by the Taliban and receive money from drug traffickers and from Osama
bin Laden, the exiled Saudi accused of leading an international terrorist group.

For now the biggest fear is that expanded fighting will create thousands of
refugees, increasing ethnic tensions among Kyrgyz, Tajiks and Uzbeks who live
side by side in this border area and further straining the limited resources of
the governments.

"There is a serious threat here," said Kathleen Samuel, the political officer
for Osh, in southern Kyrgyzstan, for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

"There is a belief that the fighting will be stronger" this year because the
rebels need to build support, she said. "Last year," she explained, "the
fighting was contained in sparsely populated areas. If it moves into more
populated areas it will be dangerous to stability."

While taking the danger of Islamic insurgency seriously, Western diplomats
suspect that the Central Asian governments exaggerate the present danger to
justify harsh restrictions on religious freedom in a part of the world where
democracy has barely taken root. The repression may well feed extremism in
future.

In the Soviet era, religion was strictly controlled until the more relaxed
policies of Mikhail S. Gorbachev made the creation of small Islamic groups
possible. After independence in 1991, the five Central Asian countries tried to
maintain control over the revival and prohibited Islamic political parties.

By the late 1990's, thousands of people had been beaten and imprisoned in
Uzbekistan, where the government imposed tight restrictions on unofficial
religious groups, saying they advocated creating an Islamic state.

The Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan came into public view in August 1999 when its
members kidnapped four Japanese geologists in the Pamir Mountains. They were
freed after the Japanese government paid a reported $6 million ransom.

The insurgents are demanding the overthrow of the Uzbek government and creation
of an Islamic state in the fertile Fergana Valley, which covers territory in
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.

Last summer the insurgents entered the valley from several directions and
clashed with soldiers in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, resulting in 100 or more
deaths. Fighting came within 60 miles of the Uzbek capital, Tashkent.

The State Department put the Islamic movement on its list of international
terrorist organizations last year and stepped up military assistance to Central
Asian states.

Uzbekistan, the region's most populous country with 24 million people, called up
more troops in March and is trying to develop a better-equipped, more mobile
force to counter rebel incursions. "If they make another attempt, they must be
tracked down and eliminated," Defense Minister Kadyr Gulamov said last month.

Kyrgyzstan increased its military budget this year and now spends 13 percent of
its national budget on defense. But its 12,000-man army still suffers from low
pay, low morale and poor equipment. Three soldiers lounging in an orchard near
the Tajikistan border the other day wore surplus uniforms from the United States
and Russia.

Mr. Akayev said an elite force had been trained for mountain combat and provided
with communications and night-vision equipment from the United States.

But observers do not regard the Kyrgyz and Uzbek armies as a match for the
Islamic insurgents. "Namangani did not go further in 1999 and 2000 because he
didn't plan to," said a foreign government official in southern Kyrgyzstan.

The rising tension offers Russia an opportunity to regain a foothold in
territories where its influence declined as the independent states aligned
themselves with the West.

Russian military officers and members of its internal security force took part
in anti-terrorist exercises throughout April in southern Kyrgyzstan. In
Tajikistan, Moscow is setting up a military base and stationing 12,000 Russian
troops to patrol the border with Afghanistan.

So far, Moscow's offers to send soldiers to combat the insurgency have been
rejected by Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan and spurned by Kazakhstan, which has
remained free of fighting so far but doubled its military spending to $171
million this year and dispatched the bulk of its troops to the southern border
with Uzbekistan this spring.

After years of relative tolerance, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan have responded to
what they perceive as the Islamic threat by drafting legislation to impose new
controls on religious activities.

The measures provide broad latitude to ban religious organizations and impose
criminal penalties, prompting Western diplomats to object strongly in private to
government officials of both countries.

The diplomats say they are warning that the steps could lead to a backlash,
increasing discontent and building support for the extremists in regions where,
so far, there is little outward sympathy for the insurgency.

In Samarkandyk, a village not far from some of the fighting of the last two
summers, the mud-brick mosque has been under construction for three years. The
village is poor and there is no money to finish the work, said the mosque's
leader, Matraim Moldo Saparov.

Mr. Saparov, a leather-faced man with a wispy beard, was reluctant at first to
speak with visitors, noting that the government had ordered religious leaders
not to speak to outsiders without permission and advising the visitors to return
at Friday Prayers when policemen and officials would be present.

Eventually Mr. Saparov relented and, sitting cross-legged on the mosque floor,
outlined his view of the Islamic fighters.

"We understand that these rebels want to establish an Islamic state," he said,
"but this is not the way to do it. Muslims do not take up arms against Muslims.
There is no support here for these rebels."

Fighting and the threat of renewed violence, he said, cut off access to mountain
pastures and trade routes and thus make life even harder for shepherds and
farmers in a country where international organizations say 80 percent of the
people live in poverty.

Uzbekistan, which accuses Tajikistan of harboring Islamic terrorists and asserts
that Kyrgyzstan is too weak to stop rebel movements, has built a barbed-wire
fence and placed Russian-made land mines along its southern borders. Neighboring
countries tightened their own border controls in response.

While there is no evident fervor for Islamic rebellion here, there is a sense
that people are running out of patience in the face of stubborn poverty and the
inability of their governments to help.

Rumors are rife that many young men from the area have joined the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan. Their motives are economic or religious, depending on
who is describing them.

An official with an international agency said six young men had left one village
near Batken. But no one admits knowing anyone who has joined the rebels, despite
the noticeable absence of young men in many villages.

"My husband went to Bishkek to look for work, and sometimes he sends money
home," Zarakan Koshoeva, a 25-year-old mother of two, said as she sat with
several other women at a roadside stand in the village of Kara-Bak, 50 miles
east of Samarkandyk.

"There are no jobs, and no one helps us," Mrs. Koshoeva said, to the affirming
nods and murmurs of the crowd.

Someone said they had heard that a Frenchman had offered small loans to
residents. They are called microcredits, another person said.

"Yes," Mrs. Koshoeva agreed. "We missed him, but we heard he might come back
some day."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Stubborn poverty in villages like Kara-Bak, in Kyrgyzstan, has
left residents frustrated and impatient with the lack of government aid. (Staton
R. Winter for The New York Times)(pg. A1); Matraim Moldo Saparov, the leader of
the mosque in the impoverished, sleepy village of Samarkandyk in southwestern
Kyrgyzstan, says the local people do not support insurgents who are fighting to
establish an Islamic state. "Muslims do not take up arms against Muslims," he
said.; Central Asian nations, fighting Islamic rebels, are tightening security.
Soldiers checked visitors' papers in southwestern Kyrgyzstan last week.
(Photographs by Staton R. Winter for The New York Times)(pg. A8) Map of
Kyrgyzstan highlighting Samarkandyk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); TERRORISM (77%); ARMIES (77%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); ARMED FORCES (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(70%); POPULATION DENSITY (70%); REFUGEES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ISLAM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (83%) ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF
UZBEKISTAN

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (72%) FRANTZ, DOUGLAS; NAMANGANI, JUMA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (96%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); KYRGYZSTAN (95%); UZBEKISTAN (95%);
CENTRAL ASIA (94%); TAJIKISTAN (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); CHINA (79%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS;  KYRGYZSTAN;
UZBEKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN;  TAJIKISTAN;  RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1237 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Old Disagreements Emerge In Election Reform Hearing

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


Senator Joseph I. Lieberman opened a Congressional hearing today on election
reform saying he did not want to revisit the 2000 presidential election.

But the mere presence of Mr. Lieberman, the losing Democratic vice-presidential
candidate, and the presence of Senator Jean Carnahan of Missouri -- whose
husband was elected to a Senate seat after his death, resulting in her
appointment to office -- gave the hearing a strange cast. It then devolved into
an occasionally tense standoff between the parties over the problems revealed by
the election and the means to fix them.

Republicans insisted that fraud was the chief problem; Democrats maintained that
the disenfranchisement of millions of voters was the problem. Republicans
proposed that everyone bring photo identification to the polls; Democrats wanted
so-called provisional ballots, allowing those whose eligibility is in question
to vote but delaying the count of their ballots until their status is resolved.

The hearing, before the Government Affairs Committee, focused for some time on
problems in Missouri, but they seemed a proxy for the presidential election.

"This hearing is not about last year's election outcome," Mr. Lieberman, a
Connecticut Democrat, said at the outset. "Nor is this hearing about Florida. It
is about a much larger problem that we stumbled upon on Election Day 2000
concerning the voting process nationally. The fact is, countless Americans were
disenfranchised last year."

The senator put the number at 2.5 million voters nationwide.

While civil rights groups have filed suits asserting that faulty voting
equipment disproportionately affected black voters, there is fierce debate over
whether discrimination occurred and whether it was intentional. Pressed at
today's hearing as to whether problems in St. Louis were a deliberate effort to
discriminate against blacks, Representative William Lacy Clay, Democrat of
Missouri, said he could not prove it.

"I can't sit here and tell you I have evidence to suggest this was a scheme to
disenfranchise," Mr. Clay told Senator Robert F. Bennett, Republican of Utah.

Mr. Bennett invoked what he called the most celebrated cases of vote fraud, all
involving Democrats -- Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (92%); VOTERS & VOTING (92%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%); DISCRIMINATION (86%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES
(78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(70%) ELECTIONS;  FRAUDS AND SWINDLING;  MINORITIES (US)

PERSON: JOE LIEBERMAN (90%); JOHN F KENNEDY (79%); ROBERT BENNETT (59%); WILLIAM
LACY CLAY JR (58%) SEELYE, KATHARINE Q

CITY: SAINT LOUIS, MO, USA (77%)

STATE: MISSOURI, USA (94%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1249 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yugoslav Leader Backs Law on Cooperation With Hague Tribunal

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 400 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 8


President Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia reaffirmed here today that he wanted
his country's laws amended to allow the government to cooperate with the Balkan
war crimes tribunal in The Hague, but he stopped short of saying whether the
former president, Slobodan Milosevic, would be turned over to the court.

Mr. Milosevic, a Serbian nationalist who is in prison in Yugoslavia on
corruption and abuse of power charges, is also under indictment by the Balkans
war crimes tribunal for attacks on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo in 1999. He has
also been held responsible by many Bosnians for supporting the "ethnic
cleansing" of Muslim and Croatian regions. In the past, President Kostunica has
rejected a foreign trial for Mr. Milosevic while saying that Yugoslavia must
cooperate with the tribunal.

Speaking to reporters after a meeting today with Secretary General Kofi Annan to
discuss the political future of Kosovo, now under United Nations administration,
Mr. Kostunica was asked if it was possible that Mr. Milosevic would be sent to
The Hague.

"What is a possibility -- and I would say even more than possibility, a future
reality -- is that I would facilitate and support enactment of a law on
cooperation with the Hague tribunal," he replied, adding that such a law was now
working its way through the federal Parliament. Without such legislation, he
said, "it would not be possible to have normal and developing relations with the
Hague tribunal."

On Kosovo, Mr. Kostunica said he had stressed in his talks with Mr. Annan that
Yugoslavia was most concerned about the protection of minority rights in a
Kosovo dominated by ethnic Albanians.

United Nations officials are now working on a legal framework for an autonomous
but not independent Kosovo.

President Kostunica said his government had freed all but 265 ethnic Albanians
in Yugoslav jails. Of those, he said, 180 were "common criminals" and the
Supreme Court was dealing with the other cases.
 --------------------

Yugoslavia Rejoins World Bank

WASHINGTON, May 8 (Reuters) -- Yugoslavia rejoined the World Bank today, eight
years after being expelled for its involvement in Balkan wars, paving the way
for loans to help economic recovery.

Yugoslavia was cut off by the International Monetary Fund in 1992 and by the
World Bank in 1993. It rejoined the I.M.F. in December 2000, two months after
the former leader, Mr. Milosevic, was ousted.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); LEGISLATION
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (86%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS
(86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); POLITICS (79%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CORRUPTION
(72%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (60%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: KOSTUNICA, VOJISLAV (PRES); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1267 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gender and Citizenship

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 180 words


To the Editor:

Re "In Egypt, Law of Man Creates a Caste of Shunned Children" (front page, May
14):

The law in Egypt that denies citizenship to children of Egyptian mothers and
non-Egyptian fathers has an analogue in United States law.

The Immigration and Nationality Act sets forth different entitlements to and
requirements for citizenship of children born overseas, depending on whether the
children are born to American mothers or American fathers.

Had the Egyptian-born woman featured in your article had children with an
American man, their offspring might under some circumstances be denied United
States citizenship to which the children of an American woman and an Egyptian
man would be entitled. The constitutionality of this law is currently under
review by the Supreme Court.

The American law, like the Egyptian law, is based on gender stereotypes of
mothers' and fathers' roles and responsibilities as parents. The stereotypes are
somewhat different, but the discrimination is the same.

TAINA BIEN-AIME
New York, May 14, 2001

The writer is general counsel for Equality Now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CITIZENSHIP (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); PARENTAL DUTIES & RIGHTS (88%); CITIZENSHIP LAW
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(73%); WRITERS (73%); LAWYERS (72%); SUPREME COURTS (67%); IMMIGRATION (56%)
CITIZENSHIP;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

ORGANIZATION: EQUALITY NOW (82%)

PERSON: BIEN-AIME, TAINA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EGYPT (94%)

REGION: EGYPT

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1272 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Attack on the International Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 485 words


Unhappy that President Clinton signed the global treaty creating an
international criminal court, some officials in the Bush administration and some
members of Congress are trying to get Washington to pressure other countries to
reject it. This effort would strain America's already uneasy relations with its
allies and limit the administration's flexibility on important national security
matters. The Bush administration would better serve American interests by trying
to change the provisions of the court it considers harmful.

The international criminal court will be able to prosecute those accused of
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes. The treaty establishing the
court has been signed by 139 nations, and so far 31 have ratified it. When 60
countries ratify, which is likely over the next few years, the court will begin
work.

Several top Pentagon officials fear that American troops serving in countries
that have ratified the treaty might be arrested on false charges and sent to The
Hague for trial. While it is important to guard against politically motivated
prosecutions, the court already has numerous safeguards to ensure that it deals
only with the most serious cases, is staffed by respected and reasonable judges,
and would take jurisdiction of a case only after a suspect's own national court
system had exhausted its own options.

Opponents of the court would like an ironclad guarantee that the court would
never try an American. Absent such a commitment, they want to block creation of
the court by pressing countries not to ratify the treaty. This position may
prevail in the administration, although more moderate officials would prefer to
see Washington simply renounce its own signature of the treaty. The House, for
its part, recently passed a bill that would require America to cut off military
aid to most countries that ratify the treaty, unless they pledge never to
surrender an American to the court. The bill also authorizes Washington to use
force to rescue Americans -- even from the Netherlands, where the court will be
based.

The administration's wisest course is not to try to undermine the court. It
probably cannot stop 29 more nations from ratifying the treaty, and to attempt
to do so would further alienate allies that are already wary of President Bush's
desire to build a missile shield and his decision to withdraw the United States
from the Kyoto agreement on global warming.

America would also lose its remaining influence in shaping the court, and there
are upcoming decisions that matter to Washington, such as the definition of new
crimes and selection of judges. The international criminal court is going to be
a reality. If the Bush administration feels the safeguards protecting Americans
from show trials are inadequate, it should try to strengthen them, not waste
global influence in a futile attempt to prevent the court's establishment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); GLOBAL WARMING (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%);
ARRESTS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (65%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%); BILL CLINTON (73%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CLINTON,
BILL

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); NETHERLANDS (70%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1274 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Yorker Has Low Hopes for New Peru Trial

BYLINE:  By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1416 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 20


It is Sunday at the high-security women's prison in the grimy neighborhood of
Chorrillos. Visitors bring corn on the cob, spicy rice dishes and stories from
home to relatives and friends, many of whom have been convicted of terrorism.
Sweet love songs play on radios and there are laughter and hugs in the
courtyard.

It is a happy time for the prisoners, relatively speaking. And the most famous
prisoner of all, Lori Berenson, is in an effusive mood, giggling about her
daydreams.

"I think about walking by the ocean, everything to do with being free, even
taking the New York City subway," Ms. Berenson said with a wide dreamy smile
that made her look much younger than her 31 years. "I think about whether I'll
have kids."

For the last five and a half years, this native New Yorker could only dream of
such things. In 1996 she was convicted and sentenced to life in prison by a
secret military antiterrorism court, accused of playing a leading role in a
terrorist plot to take the entire Peruvian Congress hostage. The Peruvian press
still characterizes her as a member of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, a
rebel group known for bombing and kidnapping.

After years of pressure from the United States government for a new civilian
trial, a tribunal that was widely believed to have taken orders from former
President Alberto K. Fujimori gave in last year. A short time later, he fled
Peru for Japan, to resign and escape corruption charges. Now Ms. Berenson has a
second chance in a new trial on lesser charges, but she and her family say the
three judges are prejudiced and under popular pressure to convict her again.

"I've had a lot of bad luck," Ms. Berenson said in the deadpan voice of someone
who might be explaining why she missed an appointment. "I have 10,000 reasons
not to feel good about anything. But when I look around and see how much people
have suffered, been tortured, are never visited, I realize that I have had a
privileged life."

Ms. Berenson appeared healthy today, except for the reddened, swollen fingers
that she says began bothering her during her years spent in an unheated prison
cell 12,000 feet up in the Andes.

She wore a fashionable blue cotton knit sweater brought to her by her mother,
Rhoda, and she spoke of playing the guitar and reading Latin American fiction
during her free time in prison, when she is not doing clean-up and kitchen duty.

Her jailers say her bright disposition is part of being a disciplined, hardened
cadre of the Tupac Amaru. But she had another explanation: "I think if I wasn't
cheery, I'd be miserable, and I don't know how people can last when they are
miserable. Strangely enough, being in jail has gotten me more interested in
Peruvian culture."

Ms. Berenson's life has been an odyssey of sharp, unexpected turns.

She is the daughter of two college professors. When she was a child and a
teenager, her interests leaned heavily toward science and music. She attended
public school in Manhattan and in junior high school had top roles in
productions of "Jesus Christ Superstar" (she played Jesus), "Annie" and "Auntie
Mame."

She was a straight-A student at the La Guardia High School of Music and Art and
the Performing Arts, and then went off to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

"She was every teacher's pet," her father, Mark Berenson, a retired statistics
professor, said in an interview in Lima last week.

Her political involvement began with her work as a research assistant for an
anthropology professor at M.I.T., studying immigration policy for Latin American
refugees. She dropped out of M.I.T. in 1989, after three semesters, and traveled
to Nicaragua and then to El Salvador. She became the private secretary of a top
commander of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front during peace talks
that ended the Salvadoran civil war.

"I would definitely, probably, say I am a leftist," she said in the prison
courtyard. "I'm probably not the best example of someone with a coherent
political point of view, but I believe there is too much inequality and that
definitely has to change."

It was Ms. Berenson's involvement with the Salvadorans that forms a vital piece
of the Peruvian government's case against her. How is it possible, judges and
prosecutors have asked, that someone with her background in Central America
could have rented a four-story house for nearly a year that was simultaneously
used by the Tupac Amaru rebels as a terrorist base without suspecting what was
going on.

And how is possible, they ask, that she did not know that the photographer she
hired in Lima just happened to be the wife of a senior rebel leader. The
prosecution contends that Ms. Berenson posed as a journalist covering the
Congress to case the building for an attack she knew was coming. Ms. Berenson
says she planned to write for two small American journals and never knew the
true identities of her photographer or the people with whom she shared the
house.

"Instead of watching that your tenants did not destroy your home, you allowed
them to cover the windows with wood and nails and to bring strangers to spend
the night there," Presiding Judge Marcos Ibazeta said to her during this trial.
"Under those circumstances, it is impossible for you to maintain that you never
saw or heard anything."

Ms. Berenson said she never went up to the fourth floor of the house where about
20 members of the group were training and were storing a large stock of dynamite
and other ammunition.

"I recognize it is a coincidence that makes me less believable," she said today.
She added that she had no intention of condemning the rebel group or of asking
to be moved from her cellblock, which is inhabited by the group's members, since
that would mean she could be placed among people who have collaborated with the
police.

"I really don't like to deal with snitches," she said. "There is a moral
question there." She added in the interview that if she had known what the group
was planning she would have ended her involvement with the house, but not called
the police.

The prosecution case against Ms. Berenson is predominately based on the same
evidence employed by the secret military antiterrorism court that tried her in
1996. The judges then wore hoods, and her lawyer did not have the right to
cross-examine witnesses. Critics say it is a case that an American jury well
might conclude is riddled with the holes that come from sloppy police work six
years ago.

The principal witness against Ms. Berenson is Pacifico Castrellon, a Panamanian
architect who rented the house with her, who was also sentenced to a long prison
term by a military court, and who is about to be retried on terrorism charges.
He said she introduced him to Nestor Cerpa Cartolini, a top leader of the group,
in Quito, Ecuador, before she and Mr. Castrellon traveled to Peru together. Mr.
Castrellon said the rebels paid for their rent, food and car.

Mr. Castrellon's story seems to have some gaps. He has painted himself as a
reluctant and frightened collaborator with the rebels, afraid to run away
because he believed that it would put his family in danger. But the rebels
trusted him enough to give him his own apartment, where his job was to build a
model of the Congress and to draw a detailed map of the streets around the
building.

In a summary of his 1995 testimony to the police, Mr. Castrellon reportedly said
that Ms. Berenson entered the fourth floor of the house hooded to serve food to
the terrorists. But in recent testimony, at the new trial, he contradicted his
earlier testimony on that point.

The other vital piece of the prosecution's case is a diagram of the
congressional seating plan allegedly drawn by Ms. Berenson as well as
corrections on several guerrilla documents that the prosecution says were
scrawled by her. Ms. Berenson's lawyer questions the impartiality of the experts
who determined that it was her handwriting, since they are all police officials.
Ms. Berenson suggested in court that any markings that appear to be hers are
forgeries.

She said that if she is convicted, in the next few weeks, she believes that
human rights groups will finally come to her aid since the evidence offered
against her in court has been so thin. "I doubt I will be spending 15 more years
in jail," she said.

As for the future, Ms. Berenson said she has no interest in writing a book about
her case. "I probably haven't had a normal life so people would have trouble
understanding it," she said, "and I would have trouble explaining it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lori Berenson, serving a life sentence as a terrorist, dreams of
freedom, plays guitar and cleans the high-security women's prison. (Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); SENTENCING
(78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); HOSTAGE TAKING (77%); TORTURE (76%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (73%); MUSIC
(72%); BOMBINGS (72%); STRINGED INSTRUMENTS (72%); CORRUPTION (67%) BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PERU-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT (PERU)

PERSON: BERENSON, LORI; KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); LIMA, PERU (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); ANDES (75%)

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (72%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1281 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Another Step Toward Criminal Court

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 64 words


Croatia has become the first Eastern European country to ratify the treaty
creating the International Criminal Court, the first permanent tribunal for
trying individuals for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Thirty-two nations of the 60 required to put the court into operation have now
ratified the treaty; 139 countries have signed it.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); GENOCIDE (87%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

COUNTRY: CROATIA (93%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1308 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Calls for Slavery Restitution Getting Louder

BYLINE:  By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1792 words


It has been more than a century since Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman ordered that
the coastlands confiscated in the Civil War be divided into 40-acre plots and
distributed to thousands of former slaves.

After Abraham Lincoln's assassination, Andrew Johnson rescinded the order and
took back the land that had been distributed. Since then, the idea of
compensating African-Americans for the sins of two and a half centuries of
slavery has hovered in the background, far from reality. But now the movement
for reparations is gaining steam.

As a political matter, reparations has been a nonstarter: every year since 1989,
Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, has introduced
legislation calling for a comprehensive study of reparations, and every year the
legislation has stalled.

But as a social and legal movement, the call for reparations has taken on
substantial force this year. Black professionals and scholars are taking up a
cause that used to engage mostly working-class blacks. And beyond the
longstanding efforts to seek government restitution, there is a new focus on
winning reparations from corporate targets that once profited from slavery.

The new momentum is apparent on many fronts:

*A California law that took effect this year requires every insurance company
licensed in the state to research its past business, and that of its predecessor
companies, and report to the state whether it ever sold policies insuring slave
owners against the loss of their slave property, and if so to whom.

*A team of prominent African-American lawyers has announced plans to file
lawsuits early next year seeking damages from the federal government and
companies that profited from slavery. The team is part of the Reparations
Coordinating Committee, led by Charles Ogletree, a professor at Harvard Law
School, and Randall N. Robinson, the founder of TransAfrica, a lobbying group.

*In March, the Oklahoma Commission to Study the Race Riots of 1921 recommended
that survivors and their descendants be paid reparations for the uprising in
which thousands of whites stormed a prosperous black neighborhood, destroying
homes and businesses and killing at least 40 people.

*Aetna formally apologized in March 2000 for having written policies for slave
owners on the lives of their slaves. Three months later The Hartford Courant,
which had run a front-page article about Aetna's apology, made a front-page
apology of its own, for having run advertisements for the sale and capture of
slaves.

*Advocates of reparations are fighting to make compensation for slavery an
official theme of the United Nations World Conference Against Racism in August,
and hoping to win a declaration that slavery is a crime against humanity for
which reparations should be paid.

*Last month, The Philadelphia Inquirer published two full-page editorials urging
the creation of a national reparations commission.

The idea of reparations raises tangled questions about who should pay the money
and who should receive it -- and, more profoundly, about the relative merits of
affirmative action and restitution.

The Reparations Coordinating Committee's litigation is unlikely to get into such
particulars. The first task, lawyers say, is to establish a legal wrong that
must be remedied.

"The history of slavery in America has never been fully addressed in a public
forum," Mr. Ogletree said. "Litigation will show what slavery meant, how it was
profitable and how the issue of white privilege is still with us. Litigation is
a place to start, because it focuses attention on the issue."

Some blacks still dismiss the reparations movement as a digression from the
issues that matter. "If the government got the money from the tooth fairy or
Santa Claus, that'd be great," said Walter E. Williams, chairman of the
economics department at George Mason University. "But the government has to take
the money from citizens, and there are no citizens alive today who were
responsible for slavery. The problems that black people face are not going to be
solved by white people, and they're not going to be solved by money. The
resources that are going into the fight for reparations would be far more
valuably spent making sure that black kids have a credible education."

Reparations remain a divisive idea, opposed by the vast majority of whites but
widely supported by African-Americans. "There is now no major black organization
that does not support reparations," said Mr. Robinson, whose book "The Debt:
What America Owes to Blacks" is a steady seller in black bookstores.

The legal argument, he said, is compelling: "When government participates in a
crime against humanity, and benefits from it, then that government is under the
law obliged to make the victims whole. That's recognized as a principle of law."

Certainly, reparations payments have become an increasingly familiar concept.
The United States government has paid reparations to Japanese-Americans interned
in World War II, and to several Indian tribes. Holocaust survivors who were used
as forced laborers have won reparations from European countries. Mexican
braceros who worked in the United States during World War II have filed a
class-action lawsuit for reparations.

Stuart E. Eizenstat, who as a senior official in the Clinton administration
negotiated settlements under which Holocaust victims would receive $8 billion in
reparations from the governments of Germany, France and Austria and from Swiss
banks, said that he viewed those cases as different from the African-American
claims, because Holocaust reparations are going largely to surviving victims,
while slavery reparations would go to descendants generations removed.

"For slavery qua slavery, I think the appropriate remedy is affirmative
government action in general, rather than reparations," said Mr. Eizenstat, who
is now in private life. "And if 100 years from now the great-great-grandson of a
Holocaust laborer asked for reparations, I don't think that would be
appropriate, unless there was some specific property that had been confiscated
that they wanted to recover."

Those campaigning for reparations say that they are prepared to prove that
African-Americans today continue to suffer from the legacy of slavery -- and,
after slavery, another century of legal discrimination.

"We are not raising claims that you should pay us because you did something to
us 150 years ago," said Adjoa Aiyetoro, a legal consultant to the National
Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America, which is preparing its own
lawsuit against the federal government and working with the coordinating
committee. "We are saying that we are injured today by the vestiges of slavery,
which took away income and property that was rightfully ours."

Part of the new momentum in the reparations movement comes from efforts to win
restitution not just from the federal government, but also from companies that
profited from slavery. "I started doing research about the possibility of a
lawsuit against the government," said Deadria Farmer-Paellmann, a lawyer. "But I
turned to corporations, after finding how difficult it would be to win a claim
against the government, given sovereign immunity, the statute of limitations,
and an opinion by a relatively liberal court rejecting the idea. If you can show
a company made immoral gains by profiting from slavery, you can file an action
for unjust enrichment."

Historians say that slavery was so central to the economy in the early days of
America that almost every business benefited from it. "The entire economy of
this country was based on slavery, North as well as South," said Eric Foner, a
professor of history at Columbia University. "New York had a stranglehold on the
cotton trade, which made up half the total value of U.S. exports in 1850. Brooks
Brothers supplied a lot of clothing to plantation owners. Merchants,
manufacturers, everyone felt the economic ripples."

Government benefited, too, often using slaves to build public works. Slaves
helped build the United States Capitol -- and their owners received $5 a month
for their labor.

Ms. Farmer-Paellmann, who found the documents about Aetna's slave policies, is
pursuing other companies that profited from slavery. Among her discoveries was a
1906 history of the New York Life Insurance Company, which explained that "among
the first 1,000 policies issued, 339 were upon the lives of negro slaves in
Maryland and Virginia."

Spurred by the California legislation, New York Life is now reviewing its
archives, to find out to what extent the company may have sold insurance to
slave owners.

Although no lawsuits have been filed, some old-line companies have reportedly
begun to worry about their exposure. Owen Pell, a New York lawyer who
represented several companies in Holocaust-related litigation, has spoken
informally with several companies about the possibility and potential shape of
claims relating to African slavery.

Ultimately, insurance companies may not be the most important defendants. The
ripest potential defendants, some lawyers say, may be municipal governments,
which do not have the same sovereign immunity as the federal government, and
tobacco companies or railroads -- even those that declared bankruptcy after the
Civil War, since the old bankruptcy code did not wipe out any debts or
liabilities that were not specifically declared.

Often the connection to slavery is mentioned in company histories: a history of
the Arkwright Manufacturing Company, now owned by the Dutch company Oce,
describes how James DeWolf, a slave trader, "invested his slaving profits in the
textile mills" Arkwright operated in Rhode Island.

To be sure, it is a long stretch from a 19th-century slave trader to a
21st-century Dutch company that makes copying machines, and Oce officials seemed
baffled by any possible connection to the slave trade. "This is the first I've
heard of it," said Karen Fitt, a company spokeswoman.

Still, Ms. Farmer-Paellmann says, companies built on the profits from slavery
may become strong advocates for reparations from the government, as opposed to
the private sector.

"My interest in this is to get these corporations, once they are aware of their
own connections, to be our chief lobbyists in Washington for other forms of
restitution," she said. "Apologies aren't enough."

If the idea of paying reparations for slavery makes Americans uneasy, Mr.
Ogletree of Harvard said, it is probably partly because, for most whites, it is
a new idea, based on a history they do not understand. "The uneasiness that some
express about reparations is the same uneasiness that we had about integration,
about women's right to choose," he said. "We've gained some important mainstream
viability, but these things take time."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Randall N. Robinson is a leading advocate of reparations for
slavery, from the government and from businesses that once profited from the
slave trade, like the insurance company that took out the advertisement below.
(Currier & Ives, 1884); (Susana Raab for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
RACE & RACISM (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); LEGISLATION (88%); LAWYERS (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); DAMAGES (72%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%);
LITIGATION (69%); LOBBYING (69%); LAW SCHOOLS (68%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(65%); RIOTS (64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (63%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (62%) SLAVERY;  REPARATIONS

ORGANIZATION: TRANSAFRICA (ORGN)

PERSON: JOHN CONYERS (54%) OGLETREE, CHARLES (PROF); ROBINSON, RANDALL; LEWIN,
TAMAR

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1314 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slavery, Justice and Reparations

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 97 words


To the Editor:

Re "Calls for Slavery Restitution Getting Louder" (news article, June 4):

It may be true, as Randall N. Robinson, an advocate of reparations, suggests,
that the United States government participated in a crime against humanity when
it sanctioned slavery. But it is also true that the United States government and
its people acted decisively to end slavery, at the great cost of civil war.

If we are to pay reparations to the heirs of slaves, must we not also pay
reparations to the heirs of those who lost their lives ending slavery?

ALAN MILES
New York, June 4, 2001


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) SLAVERY;  BLACKS

PERSON: MILES, ALAN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1315 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgian Jury Convicts 4 in '94 Rwanda Massacre

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 281 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, Friday, June 8


In a ground-breaking case, a court in Brussels early today found four Rwandans,
including two Catholic nuns, guilty of taking part in the 1994 massacres in
Rwanda.

A 12-member jury found the defendants guilty on most of the 55 counts against
them, stemming from their involvement in the events between April and July 1994,
when ethnic Hutu extremists killed more than half a million Tutsi and
politically moderate Hutu before a Tutsi rebel front seized power in the central
African country.

All four defendants, Rwandans who are now Belgian residents, were tried under a
1993 law that allows Belgium -- the former colonial power in Rwanda -- to try
Belgian residents, whatever their nationality, for crimes against humanity, even
if committed abroad.

The verdict marks the first time that a jury of 12 ordinary citizens of one
country had been asked to judge people accused of war crimes committed
elsewhere.

Also, because two of those convicted are Catholic nuns -- Sister Gertrude, 42,
and Sister Maria Kisito, 36 -- the case has brought further embarrassment to the
Roman Catholic Church, which had already come under heavy criticism over its
equivocal role during the massacres.

The two others convicted were a college teacher, Vincent Ntezimana, 39, and a
factory owner and former minister, Alphonse Higaniro, 51.

All the defendents were accused of participating directly or indirectly in the
massacres. According to the indictment, Sisters Gertrude and Kisito handed over
5,000 to 7,000 people who had been sheltering in their convent complex to the
extremist militia.

The presiding judges were to spend today deciding on sentences for the four, who
could face life imprisonment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (92%); JURY TRIALS (92%); RELIGION (91%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (91%); VERDICTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
JUDGES (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (51%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  NUNS

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (91%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (92%)

REGION: RWANDA;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1320 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Eve of His Execution, McVeigh's Legacy Remains Death and Pain

BYLINE:  By RICK BRAGG,  TERRE HAUTE, Ind., June 9

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1530 words


His legacy, no matter how many psychiatrists and criminal experts investigate or
dissect the events, relationships and disappointments that shaped him, will
always be calculated in simple numbers. Timothy J. McVeigh killed, by the
cowardly means of a truck bomb, 168 people -- 149 adults and 19 children.

His death, until a little more than a month ago, was to be one of simple
retribution, carried out in the clinical atmosphere of a prison's death chamber
here after he was found guilty of the crime in a dignified federal court.

His surviving victims, both those who lost family members and the many others he
scarred and maimed in Oklahoma City in April 1995, would then go on with their
lives, with the satisfaction that the system -- the very system that Mr. McVeigh
hated and tried to destroy -- still works.

But then came the Federal Bureau of Investigation's admission that it had failed
to provide thousands of pages of evidence to the court and to Mr. McVeigh's
lawyers, and the bomber's legacy shifted, if only slightly.

His death, scheduled for Monday, now, more than ever, serves his own purpose --
at least to those who believe, like him, in the evil of the government. Inmates
in the prison with him have said that he has been dieting so as to appear thin
and gaunt -- like a Holocaust victim -- when they strap him down to die.

The government, by fumbling a case that so needed to be perfect, "has knocked
him off his monster's perch," said Bud Welch, whose daughter, Julie, 23, died in
the blast.

As the clocked ticked down to the execution, news that Mr. McVeigh had finally
offered an apology to the victims was reported on national television. But it
turned out to be little satisfaction to the people in Oklahoma City.

"I am sorry these people had to lose their lives," Mr. McVeigh wrote in one of a
series of letters to be published Sunday in The Buffalo News. "But that's the
nature of the beast. It's understood going in what the human toll will be."

In the letters, he continued to say that the bombing was necessary in his war to
protect the personal freedoms of Americans, and to take revenge for government
raids at Waco, Tex., and Ruby Ridge, Idaho. He called the bombing "a legit
tactic."

Perhaps the most chilling legacy left by Mr. McVeigh is his ordinary life story:
the son of a travel agent and an auto worker who found few prospects after high
school, who joined the Army and won medals in the gulf war before washing out of
training for the elite Special Forces, a failure that led to his creeping anger
toward the government.

Like countless others, he failed to find a niche when he returned from military
service, working for low wages, failing to build any lasting relationships -- or
even many fleeting ones -- with women, finally moving back in with his father
and sleeping on the couch.

It is an American story, if not a happy one. "It is so fearful because he was so
all-American," at least on the surface, said Samuel Gross, a law professor at
the University of Michigan and an expert on executions. "He was not a demented,
crazy person like Ted Kaczynski. He had led an ordinary life, just an ordinary
ex-G.I., come home. There was nothing about him that would stand out at a church
picnic in Oklahoma City."

Mr. McVeigh's father, Bill, said there was nothing in his son's boyhood that
foretold this tragedy. Fellow soldiers said he was a racist, but a lot of people
talked the way he did. Only as he neared the end of his service, as he came to
read the literature of hate groups, to stockpile guns and to begin talking to
others in racist, antigovernment rhetoric, did he seem extreme, said people who
knew him then.

But that, too, was just a facade. There was a meanness, a zeal in him, that was
hidden still.

Mr. McVeigh has tried to manipulate his legacy, through the book "American
Terrorist," in which he admits his guilt but tries to rationalize it, and
through letters and carefully selected interviews.

In an April letter to Rita Cosby of the Fox News Channel, Mr. McVeigh wrote that
the bombing was a "retaliatory strike," and he described federal agents as
soldiers. "Additionally, borrowing a page from U.S. foreign policy," he wrote,
"I decided to send a message to a government that was becoming increasingly
hostile, by bombing a government building and the government employees within
that building who represent that government. Bombing the Murrah Federal Building
was morally and strategically equivalent to the U.S. hitting a government
building in Serbia, Iraq or other nations."

But it was the federal government that gave Mr. McVeigh -- ultimately -- the
greatest means by which to justify his antipathy, with its own mistakes, said
experts on the law and hate groups, and some of the people he hurt with his
bomb.

"At its root," it creates distrust of the agency that was charged with upholding
the law, said Leonard Zeskind, the founder of the Institute for Research and
Education on Human Rights in Kansas City, Mo., who has studied hate groups for
20 years.

Any credibility that Mr. McVeigh gains is a slap to his victims.

"It's stupid for us to execute him now," said Mr. Welch, who has opposed the
death penalty for Mr. McVeigh from the beginning, in part because he sees no
good in one more death, in part because he fears that it will erase any chance
of finding others who may have been involved.

But now Mr. McVeigh's execution may do the one thing that Mr. Welch and others
here cannot abide. It gives people like him evidence that the federal government
did not properly prosecute Mr. McVeigh.

"In many ways, they win," Mr. Welch said. "There is no question about his guilt,
but now it's tainted."

Experts on the law and on hate groups said that despite the smudge on his
prosecution, Mr. McVeigh was still seen as a monster who brutally murdered old
people, babies, mothers and fathers.

He is still seen as a perversion, still regarded as a sick and distorted version
of what an American soldier is supposed to be. Most of his victims, those still
alive, have said they regret this latest development, but still want him to die.

He remains, as Jannie Coverdale, the grandmother of two children who died in the
bombing, has described him, "the devil in a Ryder truck."

But he has his believers.

"I shudder to think that people like Mr. McVeigh will have any legacy," Mr.
Gross said. He said that the only people who would buy, publicly and
wholeheartedly, this latest of American conspiracy theories were "a tiny, crazy
fringe of people."

"Among that extremely small group," Mr. Gross said, "the sequence of events
leading up to his execution will reinforce their beliefs." That will not be
thousands of people, he said, but a few hundred.

But, he pointed out, the frightening fact is that it took only a few people to
design and build the bomb. And it only took one, Mr. McVeigh, to drive the truck
to the front of the building.

In the way that Mr. McVeigh was affected by the government's actions near Waco
will the cloud over Mr. McVeigh's execution convince other extremists of the
government's corruption and conspiracies?

Mr. Welch and others in Oklahoma City fear that it may.

"If we had given him a life sentence, he would not be tormenting anyone now,"
Mr. Welch said. "Terry Nichols isn't tormenting anyone," he said, referring to
Mr. McVeigh's co-conspirator, who is serving life in prison.

But even with the government's inadvertent help in lending a smidgen of
credibility to Mr. McVeigh's war on that government, his ultimate legacy is one
of fire and pain.

In "American Terrorist," by Lou Michel and Dan Herbeck, Mr. McVeigh referred to
the children killed in the blast as "collateral damage" and said that, when he
first saw television pictures after the blast, his first feeling was regret for
not bringing the whole building down.

His efforts to remake himself, to form his legacy, had been mostly laughed at or
ignored. When he said he was not a racist, that it was the gun control aspects
of a racist novel, "The Turner Diaries," that moved him, that he joined the Ku
Klux Klan only because he wanted one of its T-shirts, both the public and
experts on militias and hate groups just shook their heads.

"You don't need to join to get the T-shirt," Mr. Zeskind said.

Mr. McVeigh will die an enigma, said many who have followed his case, never
fully explaining why he did what others only talked about doing. Even his
writings give no real clue to his character.

His motives for the bombing were addressed, but hardly made clear, in letters to
friends and others. In those letters, he seemed to be quoting from
antigovernment pamphlets.

In a letter to Robert Popovich, a former neighbor of Terry L. Nichols's, Mr.
McVeigh wrote: "It was at this time, after waiting for nonviolent checks and
balances to correct ongoing federal abuses and seeing no such results, that the
assault-weapons ban passed, and rumors subsequently surfaced of nationwide
Waco-style raids scheduled for the spring of 1995 to confiscate firearms. It was
in this climate then that I reached the decision to go on the offensive, to put
a check on government abuse of power, where others had failed in stopping the
federal juggernaut run amok."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Timothy J. McVeigh, escorted to court by a United States marshal
in 1996, has tried to shape his legacy through interviews and letters.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); CHILDREN
(77%); FAMILY (77%); LAWYERS (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%);
HOLOCAUST (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%); DESERT
STORM (60%); ARMED FORCES (60%) TERRORISM;  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%)

PERSON: MCVEIGH, TIMOTHY JAMES; BRAGG, RICK

CITY: OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (93%)

STATE: OKLAHOMA, USA (93%); IDAHO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: OKLAHOMA CITY (OKLA)

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1322 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
Arafat Is the Leader, But Who's In Charge?

BYLINE:  By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1092 words


ISRAEL'S prime minister, Ariel Sharon, makes it sound simple: If Yasir Arafat
wants peace, he must halt the suicide bombings and other acts of terror and he
must do it by arresting the several dozen Islamic militants on a list Israel has
handed him.

But, as always in the long Israeli-Palestinian struggle, the reality is much
murkier.

As American and European envoys struggled feverishly last week to hold together
an exceedingly shaky, bullet-punctuated cease-fire, Israeli officials publicly
focused their ire on Mr. Arafat as a kind of supreme puppet-master. They did it
to such an extent that it spurred speculation they had run out of patience and
might somehow try to oust him.

"It has been proven categorically that Arafat controls what goes on in the
field," said Maj. Gen. Amos Malka, the chief of military intelligence. Reuven
Rivlin, the communications minister whose thinking is close to Mr. Sharon's,
added bluntly: "Arafat is the brunt of the problem."

But others, including some in Shin Bet, Israel's domestic intelligence service,
paint a more complex picture of political infighting among the Palestinians . In
the end, these analysts say, Mr. Arafat and the Islamic fundamentalists in Hamas
and Islamic Jihad have starkly opposing, irreconcilable goals: Mr. Arafat,
having achieved international recognition as the Palestinians' leader on the
basis of the Oslo peace accords, wants to salvage what he can from the faltering
agreement; the Islamicists want to wreck it.

"The basic relationship is one of rivalry," said Rashid Khalidi, a University of
Chicago professor. "It's a competition for power and support, for who can appeal
to the vast Palestinian middle. These are people who are not in the same
ballpark as far as their objectives. They're like oil and water, it's a basic
polarity."

At the moment, the Islamic forces are in the ascendancy, for several reasons.
The eight-month-old second intifada, in which more than 484 Arabs and 108
Israelis have died, is directed not only at the Israelis and the frustrated
hopes raised by the Oslo accords, but also, to a large extent, at Mr. Arafat's
Palestinian Authority.  Many in the West Bank and Gaza Strip see the authority
as corrupt, high handed and dominated by cronies Mr. Arafat brought back with
him from exile in Tunis.

Palestinian anger and bitterness has been fed by the draconian measures with
which Israel has tried to suppress the uprising, including the use of snipers
and targeted assassinations. A virtual state of siege has crippled what little
is left of the Palestinian economy. Palestinian stone throwing demonstrations
have turned into low-level guerrilla warfare, with roadside ambushes and bombs;
Israel has responded with tanks, helicopter gunships and even an F-16 air raid.

Feelings have now hardened on both sides: After Hamas conducted a suicide
bombing of a Tel Aviv nightclub, killing 20 teenage Russian immigrants, there
were cries for "blood" and "war" even from Israelis who had voted for the dovish
parties of the left. Many had come to doubt that Mr. Arafat ever intended to
make a real peace. And a recent poll by the Palestinian Center for Public
Opinion showed that 75 percent of Palestinians supported armed revolt, including
suicide bombings, and 80 percent thought Israel was not serious about seeking a
halt to the violence. Similar polls showed drops in Mr. Arafat's already low
approval rating.

With his people feeling that way, it appears politically impossible for Mr.
Arafat to arrest the militants; he would be seen as a lackey doing Israel's
work.

It was not always so. Dr. Khaladi, the descendant of a distinguished family of
Jerusalem intellectuals who has long studied the Palestinian movement, noted
that during the first years of the Oslo agreement, Hamas tried hard to disrupt
the peace process but in the prevailing optimism found little support and
abandoned the effort. After a resumed wave of bombing in early 1996, Mr.
Arafat's security services began hounding the Islamic forces and continued until
last summer, when about 300 Hamas and Jihad members were in jail.  Human rights
groups say about 20 Islamic fundamentalists died under torture in Palestinian
prisons.

But when the intifada started last fall, the 300 prisoners were released. It is
members of this group that Israel is now demanding be re-arrested.

The current public mood is one of frustration and rage, however, and when Mr.
Arafat's police tried to arrest a militant in Gaza's Jabaliya refugee camp two
months ago, they were met with an open revolt.

One of the more curious aspects of the tit-for-tat violence is that Israel's
response has largely been directed at the Palestinian Authority's security
units, rather than at the Islamicists themselves. It has hit, for example, the
headquarters of a police force in Nablus much disliked for reining in
demonstrations. The two heads of Mr. Arafat's preventive security forces who had
been most effective in cracking down on militants in the past, Mohammed Dahlan
in Gaza and Jibril Rajoub in the West Bank, are said to fear they are targets of
assassination after having come under Israeli gunfire.

On the other hand, both Israelis and Palestinians are looking over their
shoulders at the court of international opinion. Mr. Sharon declared his
cease-fire late last month after his F-16 attack was followed by urgent calls
from the United States to reduce the violence. Mr. Arafat's cease-fire
declaration was virtually dictated to him after the Tel Aviv bombing by Terje
Rod-Larsen, the United Nations envoy, and the German foreign minister, Joschka
Fisher. But the Palestinians are less a tight command structure than a
hodgepodge of forces. And even though the level of violence did fall markedly
during the week, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the Hamas spiritual leader, immediately
announced: "The resistance will continue. Whatever agreements Arafat makes are
not binding on us." Islamic Jihad added: "The martyrdom seekers will continue
their missions."

The Israeli army has let it be known that it is readying a massive response, or
as Defense Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezar put it, "fingers are ready on the
trigger." The leading newspaper Ha'aretz reported last week that the bombing had
interrupted plans for a large operation to "stamp out terror" by invading the
Palestinian-controlled areas to remove "suspects and heads of hostile extremist
organizations," destroy some Palestinian Authority buildings and seize weapons.

All of which leaves the initiative in the hands of the next, inevitable, suicide
bomber.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A member of the military wing of Hamas shouldered a mortar at a
rally last month in the Gaza Strip. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); HAMAS (89%); MIDDLE
EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (79%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); ASSASSINATION (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); SHOOTINGS (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
STADIUMS & ARENAS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (68%); HELICOPTERS
(50%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%); HEZBOLLAH (55%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (55%)

PERSON: KIFNER, JOHN; ARAFAT, YASIR

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (54%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (54%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); NORWAY (79%);
UNITED STATES (54%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1331 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Toward an Era of Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 146 words


To the Editor:

In "Criminal Justice on a Global Scale" (Op-Ed, June 13), Bruce Broomhall
suggests that "what the United States needs to do is engage in the
international-court process to clarify its concerns."

Yet I don't see how this type of discussion process could be successful at
present without the strong support of American officials, most notably our
president, who has discouraged the progress of the formation of an international
criminal court.

It looks as if the court will be a reality, operational "within two years'
time." One hopes that between now and then, our president can put his personal
interests behind him and support that which looks to be best for the entire
world. I want to believe that the United States will eventually lead the way
into an era of justice and prevention of future crimes against humanity.

ALEXANDRA FRIEDMAN
New York, June 13, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CRIME
PREVENTION (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); FRIEDMAN, ALEXANDRA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1333 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Genocide on Trial

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 164 words


To the Editor:

"Mother Superior Guilty in Rwanda Killings" (news article, June 9) noted that
"it was the first time a jury of ordinary citizens was asked to sit in judgment
of war crimes in another nation."

This "universal jurisdiction" is the best way to ensure that the Rwandan
genocide does not go unpunished.

The Belgian Parliament integrated the United Nations Genocide Convention and the
Geneva Convention into Belgian criminal law, a step that could be taken in the
United States and elsewhere.

In addition, Belgium and France have conducted painstaking parliamentary
investigations into their roles in the genocide. The two most prominent
international players that have not assessed their involvement are the Roman
Catholic Church and the United States. Washington bears a major responsibility
for pushing for the withdrawal of United Nations forces, which allowed the
massacres to take place.

ALAIN DESTEXHE
Brussels, June 14, 2001

The writer is a member of the Belgian Senate.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HOMICIDE (88%); LAW OF WAR (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); CIVIL
WAR (87%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (81%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); CRIMINAL LAW (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); RELIGION (66%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (52%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: DESTEXHE, ALAIN

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); BELGIUM (91%); FRANCE (77%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1340 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Yugoslavia: Genocide Acquittal

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 85 words


A Bosnian Serb accused of commanding a notorious detention camp where hundreds
of Muslims and Croats were killed, tortured and raped was acquitted of genocide
at The Hague, the second such acquittal by the Yugoslavia war crimes tribunal.
The trial of Dusko Sikirica, 37, who is said to have commanded Keraterm camp,
will continue on other charges, including crimes against humanity and violating
the laws or customs of war. He was the first camp commander in Bosnia to face
the tribunal on a genocide charge.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ACQUITTAL (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); TORTURE (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); VERDICTS (87%); LAW OF WAR (87%); RELIGION (85%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%) INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: SIKIRICA, DUSKO

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); CROATIA (92%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (87%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1345 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1569 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

Former Spy Chief of Peru Is Captured in Venezuela
Vladimiro Montesinos, the former Peruvian spy chief and longtime C.I.A. agent
wanted on charges of gun running, money laundering and collaborating with drug
traffickers, was captured Saturday night in Venezuela with crucial help from the
F.B.I. after an eight-month international manhunt.   A1

Hard Road for Pope in Ukraine
John Paul II drew small crowds in Kiev and the largest Orthodox church in
Ukraine ignored his interfaith gathering, a reminder that reconciliation of
faiths may be a distant goal.   A6


Pinochet Prosecution Is Fading
The legal battle of Augusto Pinochet, the former leader of Chile who faces
charges that he covered up the murders of dissidents in 1973, is drawing to a
slow procedural death as the defense argues that he has memory problems caused
by strokes, according to legal experts and human rights specialists.   A3

Milosevic Resists Trial in Hague
Lawyers for former President Slobodan Milosevic said they would challenge a
Yugoslav government decree that committed the authorities to hand over indicted
war criminals like Mr. Milosevic to the international tribunal in The Hague.
A3

Shaky Cease-Fire in Macedonia
A partial cease-fire was accepted by the Macedonian government and ethnic
Albanian rebels, after three days of heavy fighting just six miles from the
capital, Skopje.   A3

Blast Kills Palestinian Militant
A Palestinian militant was killed when the public telephone he was using
exploded in the West Bank city of Nablus. The man, Osama Jawabri, was a member
of the Aksa Martyrs Brigade, which has claimed responsibility for the killings
of Jewish settlers during the current uprising, and was long sought by the
Israelis, Palestinian activists said.   A9

Vessels Clash in Korean Waters
North Korean fishermen fired flares at two approaching South Korean patrol boats
before fleeing in their boat after the South Koreans fired nine warning shots,
the military command said. It was the most serious skirmish in the waters near
the demilitarized zone that divides the countries in two years.   A8

SCIENCE/HEALTH

AIDS, Lies and Myanmar
An American expert on AIDS in Southeast Asia says that the military government
of Myanmar is falsifying statistics to hide evidence that the disease has
reached epidemic levels there, and a study by the specialist supporting his
accusation is to be presented today during a special United Nations General
Assembly session on AIDS. The study by Chris Beyrer of the Johns Hopkins School
of Hygiene and Public Health in Baltimore concludes that 3.46 percent of adults
in Myanmar have H.I.V., making the country traditionally known as Burma the
region's second-worst case, after Cambodia.   A6

NATIONAL   A10-15

Political Donation Battle Starts Tug of War in House
The struggle over money in politics has turned into an unlikely tug of war for
the support of a pivotal bloc of discontented blacks, Hispanics and liberals as
the drive to overhaul the campaign finance system moves to the front of the
House agenda.   A1

Death of an American Dream
One of the enduring American myths is that of the pioneer who heads West and
strikes it rich. Michael C. McGuckin's story is the opposite. He went to Idaho
with everything and lost it all, leaving behind a penniless family that so
mistrusted outsiders that his children barricaded themselves inside their
squalid house for five days before surrendering to the authorities. It was an
unlikely ending for a man who had started out in Boston with money, charm,
status and an elite education.   A1

Showdown Over Shipbuilding
The first test of President Bush's plan to eliminate government financing of
numerous business-related programs is a loan guarantee program for commercial
shipbuilding. The administration wants no new money spent on the program, under
which two cruise ships are being built in Mississippi, the home state of the
Senate minority leader, Trent Lott. A bipartisan group of 38 senators has signed
a letter circulated by Mr. Lott saying they want to triple spending on the
program to a record $100 million.   A1

Putting Limits on Suburbia
The sacred American principle of home rule is at stake in the battle against
suburban sprawl, contends a Maryland commissioner who is challenging a campaign
by Gov. Parris N. Glendening to restrict rezoning of farmland for housing. Mr.
Glendening, the chairman of the National Governors Conference and a leading
anti-sprawl advocate, supports so-called smart-growth restrictions, which have
been approved in 24 states in the last year. "Smart growth is a word that's
overworked," retorted the commissioner, Donald I. Dell, "and it's getting me
nauseated when I hear it."   A10

Missile Shield Report
A Defense Department study that members of Congress plan to make public this
week concluded last year that testing on the national missile defense program
was behind schedule and unrealistic, and had suffered too many failures to
justify deploying the system in 2005.   A14

Religious Group Elects Leader
The Unitarian-Universalist Association, a liberal religious body with a
predominantly white membership, has for the first time chosen an
African-American minister as its president, the Rev. William Sinkford, 55, of
Cambridge, Mass.   A14

Pilgrims and Progress
A replica of the Mayflower sailed 43 miles from Plymouth to Boston. As much as
possible, everything about the Mayflower II and its voyage were authentic, but
there were modern twists: the costumed Pilgrims and crew had Coast Guard boats
to protect them and handheld G.P.S. instruments to determine their exact
location.   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Federal Welfare Is Ending For Thousands of Families
A federal welfare cutoff looms for 38,800 New York City families in December,
when they reach the five-year lifetime limit on cash aid. But the stories of
three of those families suggest that the universe of such cases is more complex
than champions and critics of time limits expected -- on the whole, they are
neither the most recalcitrant nor the least resourceful of the poor.   A1

Dime Deal Is Seen
Dime Bancorp, the parent of Dime Savings Bank, is expected to announce today
that it has agreed to be acquired by the nation's largest savings and loan,
Washington Mutual, for about $5 billion in cash and stock, executives close to
the talks said.   B6

Memorial for Dying Man
About 100 people gathered in Morristown, N.J., to celebrate the life of Marty
Geltman, an elementary school teacher for 34 years who has a malignant brain
tumor. He is expected to die within months. His wife dreaded a memorial service
after his death, so the couple decided to have it beforehand. It is hard to tell
whether living memorials are becoming common but they have found a place in the
public consciousness.   B1

Battle Fought With Cars
A low-budget documentary film about the Battle of Brooklyn, one of the bloodiest
but most overlooked episodes of the American Revolution, uses rented red cars to
represent British troops.   B4

EDUCATION

School Construction Delay
Board of Education staff members have proposed delaying the construction of six
new schools in Queens and postponing most major school renovations in the five
boroughs for two or more years because of soaring construction costs, according
to board documents. The delays, which could begin as soon as the next school
year, are part of a plan being considered by school officials to deal with a
growing shortfall in the school construction budget.   A1

ARTS   E1-8

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-8

Golf Grand Slam
Karrie Webb, 26, of Australia became the youngest player to complete a L.P.G.A.
career grand slam, but her moment of triumph came wrapped in anguish over a
stroke suffered by her grandfather.   D1

OBITUARIES   B7

Yvonne Dionne
A member of the first recorded set of quintuplets to survive more than a few
days, she was 67.   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Ruling Lifts NextWave Buyers
When a federal appeals court ruled that the government had illegally confiscated
NextWave's share of the wireless spectrum, the celebration extended beyond the
company's offices in Hawthorne, N.Y. A number of investors who focus on troubled
companies, including some who had invested in recent weeks, more than doubled
their money on shares that were once nearly worthless.   C1

German Bank Merger
Two of Germany's rival cooperative banks, DG Bank and GZ Bank, agreed to merge,
creating Germany's sixth-largest bank by assets, with about $257 billion. The
deal is the latest turn in the fitful consolidation among Germany's financial
institutions.   C2

Faster Transistor
I.B.M. plans to announce today what it calls the fastest silicon-based
transistor, saying the device would drive the highest-performance communications
systems to speeds of 100 gigahertz within two years.   C6

Fox Tries Real-Time Thriller
The early talk among advertisers, agents and network executives is that "24," a
Fox drama, is the hot new show to watch. The story line, which traces the
efforts of a C.I.A. agent, played by Kiefer Sutherland, to thwart a plot to
assassinate a presidential candidate, will play out in 24 episodes, each
representing an hour of a day in real time.   C9

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Next test for finance reform; the White House and the Mideast; no
pay, no work in Albany.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E6
Public Lives   A10
Crossword   E7
TV Listings   E8
Metro Diary   B2
Weather   B8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (89%); AIDS & HIV (89%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (79%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); MURDER (77%);
INDICTMENTS (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%); MONEY LAUNDERING (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); EVIDENCE (75%); JEWS & JUDAISM (75%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%); POLITICS (72%); LAWYERS
(71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); STROKES (68%); MARINE VESSELS (68%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (64%); EPIDEMICS (61%); POLITICAL DONATIONS &
FUNDRAISING (60%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (57%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (58%)

CITY: KIYEV, UKRAINE (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE
FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%); BALTIMORE, MD, USA (66%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (66%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MYANMAR (94%); VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (94%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (92%); UKRAINE (92%);
MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ALBANIA (79%); ASIA (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (79%); ISRAEL (79%); CHILE (79%); CAMBODIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1346 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Fights Transfer To Hague Trial

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 24


Lawyers for former President Slobodan Milosevic said today that they would
challenge a government decree that commits the authorities to hand over indicted
war criminals like Mr. Milosevic to the international tribunal in The Hague.

Mr. Milosevic, who is being held in the central jail in Belgrade, is wanted by
the tribunal for crimes against humanity committed in Kosovo during the war in
1999. Government officials have suggested that he could be transferred to The
Hague in days or weeks, depending on the time needed for court procedures.

But supporters have promised to rally thousands of protesters to the gates of
the jail on Tuesday, and vowed to contest the decree and any attempt to
extradite Mr. Milosevic. But only a small number gathered outside the jail
today.

Toma Fila, Mr. Milosevic's chief lawyer, said he intended to challenge the
validity of the government decree passed on Saturday on the ground that
Montenegrin ministers in the cabinet did not vote. He also said he would fight
any attempt to send his client for trial outside the country, since extradition
is forbidden under Yugoslavia's criminal law. The government contends that
international covenants outweigh national law in this case.

"I visited Slobodan Milosevic today," Mr. Fila said, "and as you know, he thinks
the tribunal is an illegitimate body and that our Constitution prohibits laws on
cooperation that include extradition.

"Therefore he thinks the decree brought by the incomplete government contravened
the Constitution," Mr. Fila said, the Belgrade radio station B92 reported.

"We will demand an assessment of the decree's constitutional validity and we
will ask for the implementation of the decree to be suspended until its
constitutional validity is assessed," he said.

Mirjana Markovic, Milosevic's wife and head of the Yugoslav Left party, also
visited her husband in prison today. In a statement, her party condemned the
decree as an "amoral, anticonstitutional, illegal and anti-Serb" measure that
transforms the country into a "NATO colony."

Mr. Milosevic has been quoted in the Belgrade press as telling his guards that
he is in jail because he stood up against NATO during the alliance's bombing
campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999.

His party, the Socialist Party of Serbia, described the decree as
unconstitutional and said it was "not a decree on cooperation with the
international community but a decree to capitulate."

Ministers were noncommittal today about when any transfers or further arrests
would be made. The decree came into force today when it appeared in the official
gazette.

"The decree was adopted yesterday, today is Sunday and let's await tomorrow,"
said Dusan Mihajlovic, the interior minister of Serbia. But he hinted that some
action would be taken this week, ahead of the international donor conference for
Yugoslavia, to be held on Friday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); EXTRADITION (91%); LAWYERS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
PRISONS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%);
BOMBINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO
(93%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1350 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgrade Begins Process of Sending Milosevic to The Hague

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 25


The Yugoslav government took the first legal steps today to hand over the former
president, Slobodan Milosevic, to the international war crimes tribunal in The
Hague, raising expectations that he might be transferred this week before an
international conference that could bring aid to Serbia.

The Justice Ministry forwarded a request from the tribunal for Mr. Milosevic's
transfer to a Belgrade district court today, in keeping with a decree on
cooperation with the tribunal adopted on Saturday, the official Tanjug news
agency reported. The request established "concrete" proof, the agency said, of
the government's willingness to hand over indicted war crimes suspects.

The government ignored a legal challenge by Mr. Milosevic's lawyers calling the
decree unconstitutional and asking that it be suspended.

The Constitutional Court convened today but did not announce any ruling. Justice
Minister Momcilo Grubac, who drafted the decree, appeared unperturbed by the
challenge and said he did not expect the court to find the decree
unconstitutional.

Mr. Milosevic, who has been in detention in Belgrade's city jail since April 1
under investigation for corruption, is wanted in connection with crimes against
humanity in Kosovo during the war in 1999. Four of his senior officials were
indicted with him, but they remain at large, while Mr. Milosevic's transfer
appears increasingly certain. The district court has to act on the request by
the Justice Ministry within three days.

The international conference of donors will convene in Brussels on Friday.
Government ministers are hoping to raise more than $1 billion at the conference,
money badly needed to rescue Yugoslavia's crippled economy. The United States
has linked its participation to Yugoslavia's cooperation with The Hague, and
officials have said they want to see concrete steps in addition to the decree,
namely arrests and transfer of indicted war crimes suspects.

Today, European Union officials said they would go ahead with the conference,
and urged the United States to take part. American officials have yet to decide
whether they will do so.

In Belgrade it is becoming increasingly clear that Mr. Milosevic's days in
Serbia are numbered.

President Vojislav Kostunica told a delegation from Mr. Milosevic's Socialist
Party that his extradition was the "lesser of two evils," the Belgrade radio
station B92 reported. A party delegation met with Mr. Kostunica to protest the
transfer, saying it represented national surrender, but he told them it would be
a "lesser evil than what would happen to the country if we did not do it."

The deputy prime minister, Miroljub Labus, said Saturday that the government
intended to extradite all 16 suspects indicted by the tribunal who are thought
to be in Yugoslavia.

The Serbian interior minister, Dusan Mihajlovic, backed that promise with a
challenge. "Do you doubt Mr. Labus will keep his word?" he asked.

And even as they tried to fight off the decree, Mr. Milosevic's lawyers showed
signs of exasperation and resignation. "We do not think the transfer will
happen," Toma Fila, Mr. Milosevic's chief lawyer, said at a news conference. "We
are going to do everything we can to fight it."

But a lawyer in his office later admitted that he expected Mr. Milosevic to be
in The Hague by Friday.

There remains some uncertainty about the appeal process under the new decree.
Mr. Milosevic may be allowed to appeal a court order for his transfer, in which
case he may have two or three weeks' reprieve.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
CORRUPTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); POLITICS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%); TRENDS
(70%); ECONOMIC NEWS (64%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT;  FOREIGN AID

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM
(54%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%); BELGIUM (69%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (54%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1351 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contraceptive Coverage

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 162 words


To the Editor:

The New York Senate effort to reach a compromise over legislation mandating
health insurance for contraception (news article, June 19) is flawed because it
broadly exempts employers and insurers who invoke a religious objection to
contraception.  Federal law does not allow this.

As you reported (news article, June 13), a federal court ruled that an
employer's failure to cover contraception as part of a prescription plan
violates Title VII, the federal antidiscrimination law, because it provides
unequal health benefits for male and female employees.

The decision should put an end to efforts to carve a gaping religious loophole
in proposed requirements for contraceptive coverage. With narrow exceptions, all
employers must comply with discrimination laws. Enterprises whose primary
purpose is commerce or human services -- not religion -- are not exempt.

DONNA LIEBERMAN
Interim Executive Director
New York Civil Liberties Union
New York, June 22, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONTRACEPTION (93%); PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); HEALTH INSURANCE
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WOMEN WORKERS (88%); INSURANCE (88%); RELIGIOUS
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (88%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT
(88%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (88%); LITIGATION (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%);
DENTAL VISION & PRESCRIPTION INSURANCE (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WOMEN
(73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (70%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (66%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1352 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 27, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Affirmative Action Foe Picked for Rights Post

BYLINE:  By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


The Bush Administration has nominated Gerald A. Reynolds, a lawyer and staunch
opponent of affirmative action, to head the Department of Education's Office of
Civil Rights, the division responsible for protecting the civil rights of
minorities, women and disabled people from kindergarten through graduate school.

Mr. Reynolds, senior regulatory counsel at Kansas City Power and Light, is the
former president of the Center for New Black Leadership, a conservative
nonprofit organization that opposes mainstream civil rights groups on issues
like minority set-asides, quotas and affirmative action. He has also served as
counsel to the Center for Equal Opportunity, a Washington organization with a
long history of attacking affirmative action and government-mandated advantages
for minorities and women.

Though not highly visible, the Office of Civil Rights plays a powerful,
behind-the-scenes role on matters of race for the nation's public schools and
universities. It is charged with enforcing all laws dealing with discrimination
based on race, nationality, disability, sex or age. Last year, it received 6,000
complaints of discrimination, many of them through a dozen regional offices Mr.
Reynolds will oversee in his new job.

Lindsey Kozberg, a spokeswoman for the Department of Education, said Mr.
Reynolds, who is 38, would make no public comments until after his confirmation
by the Senate. But the Center for New Black Leadership, on whose board Mr.
Reynolds sits, released statements and articles he has written in recent years.

In 1997, Mr. Reynolds called for a return to affirmative action "as it was first
proposed in the 1960's -- aggressive and affirmative outreach to increase the
participation of minorities in educational settings and the workplace." In Mr.
Reynolds's view, quotas and minority set-asides are distortions of affirmative
action that are "exacerbating racial tension in America."

The division issued guidelines in December warning states and universities
against tests that would hurt minority students.

For the moment, those guidelines have been shelved by the Bush administration.
Civil rights advocates said today that they were not hopeful that the
guidelines, which were several years in the making, would be upheld under Mr.
Reynolds.

Bill Taylor, vice chairman of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, noted
that the Center for Equal Opportunity was on record as opposing much government
enforcement of civil rights laws. He said he was concerned that Mr. Reynolds's
resume showed scant experience in government or education, and that what
experience he did have suggested hostility to the regulations he will be charged
with upholding.

"We now have some evidence that the Department of Education is a parking place
or a dumping ground for ideological right-wingers," Mr. Taylor said.

Roger Clegg, who replaced Mr. Reynolds as general counsel at the Center for
Equal Opportunity, said that during his tenure, Mr. Reynolds filed Freedom of
Information Act requests to public colleges and universities for a project
publicizing racial preferences in admissions.

While the center had frequently clashed with the Office of Civil Rights, Mr.
Clegg predicted smoother days ahead. "My hope is that the administration will
return to the original meaning of the civil rights laws, which is to guarantee
equal opportunity for everyone, regardless of race, and reject policies that
favor some races over others," Mr. Clegg said. "I believe that Jerry agrees
that's the right approach."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (95%); CIVIL RIGHTS (93%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN
EMPLOYMENT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
MINORITY BUSINESS ASSISTANCE (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); RESUMES & CURRICULA
VITAE (87%); BUSINESS LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MINORITY
BUSINESS CONTRACTING (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (77%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%);
CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); DISABLED PERSONS (72%);
CONSERVATISM (71%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (60%) APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE
CHANGES;  CIVIL RIGHTS;  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  BLACKS

COMPANY: KANSAS CITY POWER & LIGHT CO (58%)

ORGANIZATION: EDUCATION DEPARTMENT

INDUSTRY: SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (58%)

PERSON: REYNOLDS, GERALD A; SCHEMO, DIANA JEAN; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1360 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE HANDOVER OF MILOSEVIC: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Milosevic Trial: Test on Many Levels

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1289 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 28


Slobodan Milosevic is finally being brought to trial for crimes against humanity
he is accused of committing during the war in Kosovo, providing a new system of
international law the major test it has demanded.

A trial of Mr. Milosevic could last for years, especially if he is later
indicted in connection with his role in the wars in Bosnia and Croatia, and his
testimony is likely to embarrass a number of the Western leaders who negotiated
with him and coddled him for much of his rule.

The West later turned against Mr. Milosevic and went to war with Serbia over
Kosovo, and Western leaders today were swift to applaud Mr. Milosevic's
ignominious transfer to the tribunal and to promise new aid to Belgrade. As one
Serbian government adviser said tonight, "Milosevic became too expensive to
keep."

But the manner and haste of the transfer of Mr. Milosevic to The Hague today
will also have significant repercussions for the democratic reformers who
defeated him in elections last October and arrested him in early April.

Their decision to shed themselves of Mr. Milosevic in the face of international
pressure, on the eve of an international donors' meeting to pledge aid to
Belgrade, may break the democratic coalition apart and cause the new federal
government to fall, forcing early elections.

The Montengrin members who opposed Mr. Milosevic's surrender are saying that
they will quit their posts, with some suggesting that the fragile Yugoslav
federation of Montenegro and Serbia may now finally disintegrate.

Today is Vidovdan, the 612th anniversary of the battle of Kosovo, when the Serbs
found a national myth in their glorious defeat by the Turks. Gavrilo Princip
killed Archduke Ferdinand on this day, setting off World War I, and Mr.
Milosevic rode Serbian nationalism to power, making the most important speech of
his career on this day in 1989 in Kosovo, promising to defend the Serbs there.

For Westerners, the day will mark a fitting and ironic arc for Mr. Milosevic's
career, with his manipulation of patriotism bringing blood and death to many
thousands, in Bosnia, Croatia and finally in Kosovo itself. But for many Serbs,
Mr. Milosevic's transfer will only underline his reputation as their defender,
who is suffering martyrdom for the beleaguered nation as other heroes have done.

On one level, the transfer of Mr. Milosevic is a crucial and necessary step
toward the reconciliation of Serbia with the rest of the world, let alone with
the rest of the region, broken apart in the wars of Yugoslav secession.

But on another level, the quick transfer of Mr. Milosevic by the Serbian
government, in defiance of a Constitutional Court ruling and without bothering
to inform the elected federal president, Vojislav Kostunica, will be seen by
many Serbs as a craven response to international blackmail, further undermining
the country's independence and damaged legal system.

It is not that too many Serbs will shed any tears for Mr. Milosevic, whom they
once revered. They voted against him in large numbers in October, in part
because they were sick of the isolation and penury he had brought them. And
recent disclosures about mass graves in Serbia containing Albanian bodies
spirited from Kosovo have made it harder for Serbs to pretend that they did not
commit any of the crimes for which the world has condemned them.

But the transfer is likely to be seen by many as less about justice than about
money, and the way large, victorious nations get their way over small, defeated
ones. It is money that the desperate Serbian economy needs, and it is money that
the Serbian government must have to try to dampen criticism that its electoral
victory has brought few tangible benefits to ordinary people.

Yugoslavia is seeking $1.3 billion in aid on top of more than $400 million
already committed, including more than $140 million in budget support, to pay
salaries, pensions and unemployment benefits.

"We sold him for money, and we won't really get very much money for it," said
Aleksa Djilas, a Belgrade historian and political scientist. "The United States
is the natural leader of the world, but how do you lead? This just feeds the
worst American instincts, reinforcing this bullying mentality."

But some will also see the transfer of Mr. Milosevic, before there could be a
domestic trial on charges of corruption and abuse of power, as a kind of easy
washing of hands. Let Mr. Milosevic and a few of his cronies pay the price of
Serbia's guilt, they will say, and be scapegoats for a nation's responsibility,
avoiding any larger process of national self-examination or investigation.

Mr. Djilas also shares that view. "This is also disastrous for Serbian
self-flagellation, which is also necessary," he said. "In a way we avoid
responsibility for what we have done. We should have put him on trial here
first, and dug out all the evidence ourselves, in both the literal and
metaphorical sense."

For the tribunal, the transfer of Mr. Milosevic is a major victory, but also a
challenge. Mr. Milosevic has not been indicted on charges of genocide, but on
lesser charges, and not for Bosnia, where many more people lost their lives in
the bombardment of Sarajevo and the massacres like Srebrenica. Is the chain of
evidence there to convict him? How much might it depend on secret intercepts
from the very governments that bombed Serbia? Will this be real justice or
victor's justice?

No NATO commander has been indicted for the use of cluster bombs and other
munitions, and no Kosovar Albanian has faced charges for the killings and
expulsions of Serbs from Kosovo. And how to defend a trial when the United
States government itself is so adamantly opposed to an international court that
might one day try Americans?

Mr. Milosevic is the first elected president to be indicted and transferred to
international justice, and he is likely to be alone there, with the peaceful
death in office in 1999 of Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian leader, with whom Mr.
Milosevic conspired to carve up Bosnia, and who was never indicted for Croatian
crimes against Muslims and Serbs.

"From the Serbian point of view, Milosevic will be the only leader from all
these rascals to face the tribunal," Mr. Djilas said.

"Tudjman not only died peacefully in his bed but had cancer treatment at Walter
Reed Hospital in Washington; "so did his defense minister, Gojko Susak," Mr.
Djilas said. And, he added, William Perry, the former American defense
secretary, went to Mr. Susak's funeral "and quoted Shakespeare"

"People will feel that if Milosevic had just signed the treaty in Rambouillet
he'd be getting treatment for his high blood pressure in Washington, too,
instead of going to The Hague," he said.

Also troubling to some is the way the Serbian government acted today in defiance
of the Milosevic-appointed Constitutional Court, fearing further delays in the
transfer.

Mr. Kostunica, a constitutional lawyer, had failed to get a law on the transfer
of Mr. Milosevic passed through the federal Parliament, reverting to a decree
instead. While Mr. Kostunica had promised during his election campaign that he
would never allow Mr. Milosevic to be sent to the tribunal, he had finally
reconciled himself to Mr. Milosevic's transfer to The Hague, a court he has
deeply criticized. But Mr. Kostunica believed that even Mr. Milosevic had the
right to a legal process of appeal.

That is the main reason the Serbian government of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic
choose not to inform Mr. Kostunica of its decision to transfer Mr. Milosevic,
just as Mr. Djindjic waited until Mr. Kostunica was out of the country last
March to initiate Mr. Milosevic's arrest.

If Mr. Djindjic today looks amoral and calculating to some, Mr. Kostunica looks
weak and ineffectual.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); THIS DAY IN
HISTORY (89%); ELECTIONS (88%); WORLD WAR I (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); EXTORTION
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); TESTIMONY
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); ARRESTS (73%);
ANNIVERSARIES (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: ERLANGER, STEVEN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (76%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); CROATIA (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); KOSOVO (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;
CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1362 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A First Step to Balkan Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 114 words


To the Editor:

Re "Milosevic Is Given to U.N. for Trial in War-Crime Case" (front page, June
29):

Every war is a crime against humanity. Therefore, the handover of Slobodan
Milosevic, the major player in the Yugoslav wars, to The Hague is a step in the
right direction.

But Mr. Milosevic was not a single actor in the Yugoslav tragedy. The Hague war
tribunal did not pass the initial test, because the other major participants
were not summoned to justice. Among them are Croatian and Bosnian Muslim
leaders, the rebel warlords from Kosovo and Macedonia, and those who sent
instructors and other military support to various factions in the Balkans.

RAJKO IGIC
Chicago, June 29, 2001


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (85%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (52%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA (79%);
MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1363 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Tribunal Aide Denies Genocide Charge

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 77 words


A former investigator for the Rwanda war crimes tribunal who has himself been
accused of genocide and crimes against humanity pleaded not guilty at the court,
based in Arusha, Tanzania.

The former investigator, Simeon Nshamihigo, 42, had been working under an
assumed name when he was arrested in May. He is accused of taking part in
genocidal attacks on ethnic Tutsi and Hutu politically opposed to the Hutu-led
government in 1994.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ARRESTS (86%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: RWANDA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1365 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Premier of Yugoslavia Resigns in Protest

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 29


The handing over of Slobodan Milosevic to the United Nations war crimes tribunal
prompted the Yugoslav prime minister to resign today, bringing down the Yugoslav
government and opening the first cracks in the alliance of democratic reformers
who removed Mr. Milosevic from power eight months ago.

Mr. Milosevic's transfer to The Hague was the talk of Belgrade today as
photographs of the former leader being escorted to a military helicopter on
Thursday afternoon hit the newsstands.

Several thousand Milosevic supporters rallied in front of the Yugoslav
Parliament this evening. Leaders of the ultranationalist Radical Party and Mr.
Milosevic's Socialist Party called for new elections and the removal of
politicians they accused of betraying a Serbian hero.

But the small size of the demonstration by recent Belgrade standards and the
fact that the crowd dispersed within a couple of hours suggested the diminishing
strength of Mr. Milosevic's supporters.

The well-informed Belgrade weekly Nedeljni Telegraf ran a detailed witness
account of Mr. Milosevic's transfer from his Belgrade jail cell to a helicopter
pad at a Security Service base in the city. The article appeared under the
initials of Natasa Mijatovic, the daughter of the Security Service chief, Zoran
Mijatovic.

At the base he was told that an official from the Hague tribunal was in charge.
"What tribunal?" Mr. Milosevic was quoted saying. "I do not recognize this. I
will not talk to them." But when no one else would talk to him, he turned to the
tribunal official, who, speaking through an interpreter, read him his rights and
then the indictment accusing him of committing crimes against humanity in Kosovo
in 1999.

The official asked Mr. Milosevic if he had anything to say, and he was quoted as
replying: "The Hague tribunal is not a court at all. This is a political circus
whose aim is to endanger the Serbian people until it destroys them completely. I
am not afraid of the Hague tribunal. This is a complete charade. The Hague
tribunal confused the address -- the right address for the criminals is NATO."

He went on to issue a threat of his own, the newspaper reported: "And I'll tell
you one more thing -- you are not bringing me to The Hague; in fact you
kidnapped me, and that is a particular criminal offense for which you are going
to be held responsible. Don't even think that all of you are going to go
unpunished, because even for you there exists a Hague."

By the end, after a body search and a request for his identification papers, Mr.
Milosevic grew impatient and urged the group to get going. As he walked toward
the helicopter, he turned around and waved to the stone-faced Serbian policemen.
"Hey, goodbye and congratulations on a job well done," he said.

The political fallout from Mr. Milosevic's transfer will be complicated. The
prime minister of Yugoslavia, Zoran Zizic, announced his resignation after
meeting with President Vojislav Kostunica and warned that "Yugoslavia is at the
beginning of a crisis." Mr. Zizic led the Montenegrin faction in the Yugoslav
government, formerly allied with Mr. Milosevic.

The resignation automatically brought down the Yugoslav government, although
ministers will continue working as a caretaker government until a new one is
formed, or until parliamentary elections are called. Mr. Kostunica's position as
president, a directly elected office, is unaffected.

It is not clear how Mr. Kostunica will resolve the political crisis, but he
announced that he would appoint a prime minister-designate on Monday, someone
who would continue the same program of reform.

Mr. Zizic said his Montenegrin party would not take part in a future government
but said he had asked Mr. Kostunica to work to preserve Yugoslavia.

The Yugoslav government and Parliament, with members from the two republics that
make up Yugoslavia, Serbia and the much smaller Montenegro, increasingly seem
like unworkable anachronisms.

While Mr. Kostunica's personal popularity and authority remain strong, the
Yugoslav federation in many ways does not function because the government in
power in Montenegro, which includes a pro-independence faction, does not take
part in federal institutions.

Mr. Milosevic's transfer has also revealed new fissures in the political
alliance that brought Mr. Kostunica to power last fall. The president's party
announced today that it was breaking away from the alliance's parliamentary
blocs in the Serbian and Yugoslav Parliaments.

That move will not bring any immediate change, but it showed the differences
that are growing between Mr. Kostunica's party, which opposed the handing over
of Mr. Milosevic, and the rest of the reformers, led by the prime minister of
Serbia, Zoran Djindjic, who pushed it through.

In a radio interview this morning, Mr. Djindjic forcefully defended his
government's action to transfer Mr. Milosevic to the United Nations war crimes
tribunal. "Any other solution except cooperation would lead the country to
disaster," he said.

He said he had discussed the issue with Mr. Kostunica and had warned that his
government could not respect an order from the Constitutional Court -- packed
with Milosevic-era appointees -- barring Mr. Milosevic's transfer.

After the court's decision, he said, it was clear that the Serbian government
had to take responsibility.

His action was backed by all the ministers in the Serbian and Yugoslav
governments, except the Montenegrins and the ministers from Mr. Kostunica's
party. But while they defended their decision to override the Constitutional
Court and give Mr. Milosevic up, they appeared wary of a backlash from his
supporters.

Government ministers moved to calm speculation that more transfers to the
tribunal were in store. Goran Vesic, an assistant minister in the Yugoslav
government, said that now that Mr. Milosevic had been delivered to The Hague,
the government would try to arrange with the tribunal for other war crimes
suspects to be tried in Serbia.

"By this act we showed we are capable of cooperating," Mr. Vesic said. "We think
it is time for The Hague to give us the credibility by allowing us to try people
here."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%);
MILITARY HELICOPTERS (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); KOSOVO
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1371 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
A Time to Judge What Began and Ended in Kosovo

BYLINE:  By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 571 words


FROM the moment he declared to a delirious crowd at Kosovo Field in 1989 that
Serbs "never conquered or exploited others," Slobodan Milosevic sought to shroud
his deeds in a fog of myth and denial. He had only one theme: Serbian victimhood
and self-defense. The specters changed -- Croatian "fascists," reincarnated
Ottomans in Bosnia, Kosovo Albanians bent on "genocide" against the Serbs. But
the disavowal of any Serbian responsibility for the repetitive bloodshed of
Yugoslavia's destruction did not.

In the mind-set of the former Serbian leader, the consistency of Serbian
brutality -- from the leveling of Vukovar to the massacres at Srebrenica -- was
a mere invention of the West. He could not be responsible because he knew
nothing of it; indeed, there was nothing to know because the "killing" was
largely a fabrication in yet another plot against the long-suffering Serbs.
Concentration camps for Muslims in Bosnia in 1992? An invention. Mortar attacks
against Muslims in Sarajevo and Tuzla in 1995? Self-inflicted. Atrocities in
Kosovo in 1998? NATO propaganda.

A trial is held to render justice. That is its core purpose. But the trial of
Slobodan Milosevic at the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague will
inevitably have wider significance. Robert Kempner, who was a prosecutor at the
Nuremberg trials, called those proceedings "the greatest history seminar ever
held." The Hague and Mr. Milosevic are unlikely to be far behind.

Indeed it is precisely because the Serbian strongman so consistently disavowed
any responsibility for, or knowledge of, the slaughter that the trial seems
poised to play a central role in shaping Balkan history.

The evidence offered by prosecutors to support charges of crimes against
humanity can serve as documentary material of pivotal importance. Suppressed or
distorted history has long fed the Balkan gyre of violence; perhaps this trial
may help to break that cycle by laying out the facts.

For Western governments, and particularly the United States, much is at stake.
Mr. Milosevic was always a craven bully, and his signature is unlikely to appear
on any seriously incriminating documents. If the case against him should prove
less than solid, the court's credibility and the justification for NATO's
bombing campaign in Kosovo will be diminished.

Throughout the trial, the West may also face questions about its long
temporizing with him. If it was legitimate, after Bosnia, to shake Mr.
Milosevic's hand in Dayton in 1995, what about him changed to turn him into the
indicted criminal of 1999?

No trial will bring back the more than 200,000 people who have died since Mr.
Milosevic set Yugoslavia to unraveling. But the proceedings in The Hague may do
much to prize open a Serbian society long seduced by Mr. Milosevic's nationalist
propaganda and recently shocked by the broadcast of a BBC documentary on the
massacre of Muslims at Srebrenica. For as this shock suggests, Serbs in general
have yet to face their responsibility for the decade of crimes.

Beyond Serbia's borders, in a still deeply unstable Balkan region, the sight of
justice being done may assuage wounds and begin to foster reconciliation. In a
recent book on Holocaust-related trials titled "The Memory of Judgment,"
Lawrence Douglas quotes Elias Canetti as saying that the dead "are nourished by
judgment." By this standard, the Balkan dead of the past century have been
singularly undernourished.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kosovo, 1989 -- Slobodan Milosevic fires Serb passions, setting
the stage for calamity. (Thomas Petemek/Gamma); Kosovo, 1999 -- Yugoslavia's
disintegration culminates in the Kosovo war, during which Albanian refugees like
these flee Serb shellings. (Andrew Testa); Vukovar, 1991 -- After Slovenia
secedes, Croatia's efforts to follow it set off extremely bitter fighting, in
which Serb forces destroy much of the Croatian city of Vukovar. (Srdjan
Ilic/Associated Press); Bijeljina, 1992 -- After a truce calms fighting in
Croatia, war erupts in Bosnia when Muslims and Croats seek independence. Here a
Serb fighter kicks a dying Muslim. (Ron Haviv/Saba); Trnopolje Camp, 1992 --
Serb forces hold captured Bosnian men at prison camps where their guards are
accused of starving and mistreating them. (Ron Haviv/Saba); Sarajevo, 1994 --
Under Serb siege, Bosnian children brave sniper fire to gather food. (Javier
Baulez/Associated Press); Dayton, Ohio, 1995 -- The Bosnian war ends with an
accord brokered by the United States's Richard Holbrooke, right, and guaranteed
by Mr. Milosevic. (Associated Press); Kravice, Bosnia, 1996 -- Human remains are
found in woods not far from Srebrenica, where Muslims were massacred in 1995.
(Staton R. Winter/Associated Press); Kukes, Albania, 1999 -- When NATO
intervenes in Kosovo, Serbs push huge numbers of Kosovars into Albania, where
they huddle in refugee camps and eat communally. (Joel Robine/Agence
France-Presse); Kosovo-Albania Border, 1999 -- The flood of refugees from Serb
retribution for the bombing in Kosovo await the outcome of the NATO campaign and
a chance to go home. (Louisa Gouliamaki/Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (76%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); RELIGION (72%); INDICTMENTS (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); BOMBINGS (68%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (68%);
TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (63%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (91%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (56%) MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; COHEN, ROGER

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%);
DAYTON, OH, USA (65%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (50%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA (96%);
ALBANIA (95%); CROATIA (95%); KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); SLOVENIA (79%); GERMANY (50%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1374 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 2, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Room for Religion

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 154 words


To the Editor:

In referring to the recent federal court decision concerning contraception
coverage in health insurance plans, a June 26 letter writer asserts that federal
law does not broadly exempt "employers and insurers who invoke a religious
objection to contraception."

In fact, the courts have yet to rule on the issue of whether religious employers
may be exempt from such mandates.

The federal law in question includes a religious exemption clause. I disagree
with the implication that the bill recently passed by the State Senate, which
includes conscience protection for religious employers, would not pass muster in
federal courts.

New York State has a long history of accommodating religious belief and
practice. Religious exemptions appear in many state laws, including the human
rights, public health and civil rights laws.

JOHN M. KERRY
Executive Director
New York State Catholic Conference
Albany, June 26, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
CONTRACEPTION (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); HEALTH INSURANCE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); INSURANCE (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%) BIRTH CONTROL AND FAMILY PLANNING;  HEALTH
INSURANCE

ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK STATE CATHOLIC CONFERENCE; ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (68%) KERRY, JOHN M

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK STATE

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1376 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic to Represent Himself at His Arraignment Today

BYLINE:  By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1467 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, July 2


Signaling contempt for the international tribunal that has indicted him,
Slobodan Milosevic indicated today that he would refuse legal counsel and face
his accusers alone in court on Tuesday.

"Due to the fact that he does not recognize the tribunal, he is not going to
call any lawyers to appear before the tribunal," said Zdenko Tomanovic, a
Belgrade lawyer who arrived here today to represent Mr. Milosevic. "We will not
appear before the tribunal tomorrow."

He was speaking after a meeting with Mr. Milosevic, the former president of
Yugoslavia and of Serbia, at the Scheveningen detention center, where he has
been held in solitary confinement since he was spirited out of Belgrade last
week.

A second lawyer, Dragan Krgovic, said, "I suppose he will appear by himself."

During his 10 years in power, Mr. Milosevic regularly kept his opponents off
balance, and this decision appeared to be yet another example.

Equally in character was the statement conveyed by Mr. Tomanovic that Mr.
Milosevic believes that the tribunal is pursuing a campaign of "genocide"
against the Serbs. In the past, Mr. Milosevic has described international trade
sanctions against Serbia as "genocide" and the high birth rate of Kosovo
Albanians as "demographic genocide" against the Serbs.

When he appears in court, Mr. Milosevic will be called on to plead "guilty" or
"not guilty" to charges of crimes against humanity in Kosovo, including the
forced deportation of 740,000 Kosovo Albanians and the killing of hundreds.

If he declines to enter a plea, which seems possible if he does not accept the
jurisdiction of the court, he will be granted 30 days to do so. After that, in
the continuing absence of any word, a plea of "not guilty" will be entered on
his behalf.

"If he wishes not to be represented at the arraignment, that is his right," said
Jim Landale, a spokesman for the court. Many months will elapse before the
trial, and Mr. Milosevic will have a long time to reflect on how and with whom,
if anyone, he will eventually conduct his defense.

In court, Mr. Milosevic will hear an amended indictment that contains one
conspicuous change: any mention of the NATO bombing of Kosovo has been relegated
to the penultimate page in a section called "additional facts." The original
indictment, two years ago, noted at the beginning that NATO had begun "launching
air strikes" on March 24, 1999 -- before the occurrence of almost all the crimes
with which Mr. Milosevic is charged.

Officials at the tribunal today dismissed as insignificant the change made in
the new indictment, handed down last week by Carla Del Ponte, the chief
prosecutor. But as the pretrial maneuvering gathered pace, it seemed likely that
the nature and consequences of NATO's war would stand at the center of any
eventual defense that Mr. Milosevic adopted.

Associates of Mr. Milosevic, who presided over the four wars of Yugoslavia's
slow unraveling, say he views the court as a lackey of NATO, a political
institution engaged in an attempt to humiliate a loser and justify the acts of
Western powers in the Balkans, including the bombing.

This is also the opinion of his wife, Mira Markovic, who has played a central
role in screening lawyers as offers accumulate from around the world, including
one from Ramsey Clark, the former United States attorney general.

"We know that Milosevic will try to portray the tribunal as the victors' court,
a political court without jurisdiction or validity," said a senior NATO
official. "At the very least, he will aim to go down as another Serbian martyr,
the victim of the NATO powers."

It would be very much in character for Mr. Milosevic to view the court as part
of a conspiracy against him and the Serbs.

Throughout the wars of Yugoslavia's destruction, and in the face of largely
consistent Serbian brutality, he always maintained that Serbs were merely
victims -- of Croatian "fascism," Islamic "fundamentalism" in Bosnia, NATO
"imperialism," Albanian "genocide."

The amended indictment includes an expanded appendix listing 200 more names of
Albanians who are said to have been killed in Kosovo by forces ultimately under
Mr. Milosevic's command. In all, the list of people killed now numbers about
600.

With the exception of 46 killed by Serbian forces at Racak on Jan. 15, 1999, all
those listed were killed between March 24 and June 10, 1999 -- the period in
which NATO was bombing Kosovo and Serbia.

It appears probable that Mr. Milosevic may try to portray the NATO bombers as
the true villains, and the NATO bombs that went astray and killed Serbian
civilians are almost certain to gain prominent mention.

In response, Mrs. Del Ponte and the prosecution will try to demonstrate that in
the words of the indictment, Mr. Milosevic "planned, instigated, ordered,
committed or otherwise aided and abetted in a campaign of terror and violence
directed at Kosovo Albanian civilians."

The indictment argues that far from the chaos of war, the acts of Yugoslav and
Serbian military and police forces in Kosovo constituted the planned murder of
men, women and children, slaughtered on account of their Albanian ethnicity
alone.

For example, the indictment says that on March 25, 1999, Serbian forces entered
Belka Crkva. As villagers huddled under a bridge, "a Serbian police patrol
opened fire on them, killing 12 persons, including 10 women and children."

Men in the village were then ordered to strip, and their valuables were robbed.
They were gathered in a stream bed. "After they complied," the indictment
continues, "the police opened fire on the men, killing approximately 65 Kosovo
Albanians."

Such methods would be consistent with those used by Serbian military and
paramilitary forces during the Bosnian war of 1992-95, when wide areas of Bosnia
were "cleansed" of Muslims through eviction and selective killing.

The bodies of Kosovo Albanians recovered in recent months from the Danube at
Batajnica, where they were apparently taken by truck during the Kosovo war, have
been found at the same time as dozens of bodies around Visoko, in Bosnia.
Thousands of Kosovo Albanians and Bosnian Muslims have disappeared, according to
lists compiled by the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The indictment says that "actions similar in nature" to those described in
Kosovo "took place during the wars in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina between
1991 and 1995." But for now, Mr. Milosevic has not been charged with any crimes
in conflicts outside Kosovo.

Mr. Landale, the court spokesman, said Mrs. Del Ponte, a 54-year-old Swiss
lawyer and chief prosecutor who will face Mr. Milosevic in court, was determined
to expand the case to Bosnia and Croatia. But he said this would have to be
balanced against the Yugoslav's "right to an expeditious trial."

A central issue for the prosecution will be to tie the killing and evictions in
Kosovo to Mr. Milosevic himself. As president of the truncated Yugoslavia,
consisting by 1999 of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Milosevic was president of the
country's Supreme Defense Council. Kosovo is technically a province of Serbia.

In this position, he commanded the Yugoslav Army "in compliance with decisions
made by the Supreme Defense Council," the indictment says, before noting that
the state of war declared on March 24, 1999, in Yugoslavia also gave Mr.
Milosevic "command authority over republican and federal police units."

In general, the indictment argues that Mr. Milosevic held de facto control over
all the key institutions of Serbia's police and military apparatus, and
progressively extended such control to "federal, republican, provincial and
other institutions."

But in the almost certain absence of written commands signed by Mr. Milosevic
ordering specific actions in Kosovo, it will be up to the prosecution to present
a convincing argument that military and police units were pursuing a systematic
plan laid out by the high command, rather than engaging in erratic acts of
vengeance and persecution.

What is clear is that several hundred thousand Albanians were driven from their
homes in a short period of time and have offered concurring accounts of the
Serbian brutality that led them to flee or try to flee.

Although the indictment accuses Mr. Milosevic of having "committed" a "campaign
of terror and violence," it adds that the prosecutor does not intend to suggest
that the accused "physically perpetrated any of the crimes charged, personally."

Mr. Landale said Mr. Milosevic had been cooperative since being placed in the
detention center, where he has undergone a thorough physical and mental
examination.

"This will be a very big day in the tribunal's history, a turning point," Mr.
Landale said. "This institution was set up to investigate and prosecute people
at the highest level. So we are very satisfied that Mr. Milosevic is here."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two Belgrade lawyers, Dragan Krgovic, left, and Zdenko
Tomanovic, arriving yesterday at the jail in The Hague where Slobodan Milosevic
is being held. He has rejected their services for his arraignment today. (Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JURISDICTION (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (73%); CIVIL WAR
(72%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); BOMBINGS (69%); BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (66%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  DEPORTATION

PERSON: COHEN, ROGER; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); ALBANIA (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1377 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Milosevic Faces the Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 459 words


It took years of legal perseverance and international cooperation to bring
Slobodan Milosevic before the war crimes tribunal in The Hague today to answer
charges of crimes against humanity involving the mass deportation and murder of
ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Securing his conviction will require a similarly
determined effort. Prosecutors have abundant evidence showing that these brutal
crimes were committed. To prove that Mr. Milosevic ordered them, prosecutors
must reconstruct the chain of command through which specific orders and
approvals were transmitted.

Establishing this will be easier if the court gains access to official documents
now in the possession of the Serbian and Yugoslav authorities and intelligence
intercepts and analysis from the United States and other NATO countries.
Washington, Belgrade and other governments should help the tribunal by turning
over as much of this material as possible. American intelligence agencies will
argue that some of the information they possess cannot be disclosed without
compromising undercover agents and collection methods. But President Bush should
make clear to them that he considers cooperation with the Hague tribunal an
important national security interest.

A year or more could transpire between today's initial appearance by Mr.
Milosevic and the start of his trial. Both sides need time to assemble their
cases. Although the original indictment for war crimes in Kosovo was handed down
two years ago, an expanded indictment on Kosovo was filed last week, and further
charges are expected soon related to war crimes in Croatia and Bosnia. One
challenge for prosecutors will be to demonstrate that the massacres carried out
by the Bosnian Serb government of Radovan Karadzic were approved and assisted by
Mr. Milosevic in Belgrade. Mr. Milosevic, who is expected to appear before the
tribunal today without a lawyer, may try to blame NATO for the bloodshed in
Kosovo as well as for his indictment and trial.

Beyond determining and punishing guilt, the Hague proceedings are an opportunity
to educate the public, including the Serbian people, about the ethnic violence
unleashed in the Balkan wars of the 1990's and Mr. Milosevic's role in
instigating the conflicts. The prime minister of Serbia, Zoran Djindjic, bravely
delivered Mr. Milosevic to The Hague, but many of his countrymen still do not
recognize Belgrade's responsibility for the wars.

Last week, Western countries rightly conditioned their pledge of more than $1
billion in economic aid to Belgrade on the delivery of records about Mr.
Milosevic's rule that are sought by the international tribunal. They ought to be
equally willing to turn over material in their own secret archives bearing on
this historic case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); DEPORTATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); APPROVALS (76%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (64%); MURDER (58%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  EDITORIALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); NETHERLANDS (94%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(93%); UNITED STATES (93%); ALBANIA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); CROATIA
(79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1378 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MILOSEVIC IN COURT: THE OVERVIEW;
AT ARRAIGNMENT, MILOSEVIC SCORNS HIS U.N. ACCUSERS

BYLINE:  By ROGER COHEN with MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1741 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, July 3


Slobodan Milosevic appeared today before an international tribunal that has
accused him of crimes against humanity, and he dismissed the court with disdain
as an "illegal organ."

Jutting chin raised contemptuously, Mr. Milosevic sat flanked by two guards
before seven empty chairs intended for his lawyers. The former Serbian leader,
who plunged the Balkans into four brutal ethnic wars, chose to appear without
counsel and to deliver his own rebuttal, in English: "I consider this tribunal
false tribunal and indictments false indictments." Text, Page A7.

Mr. Milosevic's isolation today, 12 years after the wave of Serbian nationalist
sentiment that he had ignited swept him to power, gave added drama to the
courtroom confrontation as he sat facing a black-robed prosecution team led by
Carla Del Ponte. The battle between the West and its longtime Balkan nemesis was
stripped to its essentials.

On one side was Mrs. Del Ponte, a Swiss lawyer who has accused Mr. Milosevic of
three counts of crimes against humanity, including murder; on the other, the
bristling Serbian nationalist mocking "this so-called tribunal." Between them
sat a British judge, Richard May, seeking to remind the accused of procedure.

For a long time, Mr. Milosevic bent Serbia to his whim. Today, largely rejected
by a country he impoverished and led into wars that left 200,000 people dead, he
stood as the first head of state indicted before an international court for
crimes committed while he was in office.

Outright contempt greeted all the requests from Judge May for answers to his
questions. Asked if he wanted to exercise his right to have the 54-page
indictment read to him, Mr. Milosevic shot back, "That's your problem." The
indictment was not read.

When asked if he would enter a plea of guilty or not guilty to the charges of
crimes against humanity in Kosovo in 1999, Mr. Milosevic switched to Serbian
from his heavily accented English and replied, "This trial's aim is to produce
false justification for the war crimes of NATO," a reference to the bombing of
Kosovo and Serbia in 1999.

After repeating the question, Judge May declared, "We treat your response as a
failure to enter a plea and we shall enter a plea of not guilty on each count on
your behalf."

In this way, the 12-minute proceedings, held in a small gray-carpeted room
behind bulletproof glass, moved toward their conclusion. Three times, Judge May
cut off Mr. Milosevic, the former president of both Yugoslavia and Serbia, its
largest republic, in midsentence, once commenting, "Mr. Milosevic, this is not
the time for speeches."

Today's action, while intense, seemed to frustrate the dark-suited Mr. Milosevic
by its brevity. Looking at his watch as he was escorted out, he said to a guard:
"Hmm, 10 minutes."

The brief arraignment set the scene for what is certain to be an intense battle
between opposing views of the world: nations and groups that are determined --
after what Isaiah Berlin called "the most terrible century" -- to combat crimes
it regards as intolerable through the extension of international law, versus a
man who sees this campaign as little more than a cloak for American imperialism.

The confrontation will also bring Mr. Milosevic face to face with acts he has
repeatedly disavowed. The indictment includes charges that Yugoslav or Serbian
units ultimately under Mr. Milosevic's control drove 740,000 Kosovo Albanians
from their homes in 1999 and killed several hundred in cold blood. He also faces
one charge of breaching the Geneva Conventions on the conduct of war.

In addition, Mrs. Del Ponte, 54, said in an interview published today in the
French daily Le Monde that she envisages bringing charges of genocide against
Mr. Milosevic for Serbian crimes in the Bosnian and Croatian wars. The current
indictment refers only to Kosovo; it contains no genocide charge.

Outside the court today, one young woman waved a Bosnian flag. She said that she
was from Zenica, in central Bosnia, and that her family had been killed by
Serbian forces, one small reminder of the ways in which Mr. Milosevic's trial
may bring some comfort to thousands of anonymous bereaved.

Given the time it will take to prepare any further indictment, and the time Mr.
Milosevic -- with or without lawyers -- will need to prepare himself to face the
charges, it is almost certain that the trial itself will not begin until next
year. Once under way, it is expected to last at least a year.

Mr. Milosevic's approach in court was consistent with that of a man who has
always refused to admit the existence of things he does not like. Throughout the
wars of Yugoslavia's destruction, he waved away the desolate villages and
desperate camps where the dead mounted up, far from his remote Belgrade offices.

The Serbian concentration camps for Muslims in Bosnia in 1992 were dismissed as
inventions. Serbian massacres -- from Vukovar in Croatia in 1991, to Srebrenica
in Bosnia in 1995, to Racak in Kosovo in 1999 -- were always the fabrications of
Western or NATO propaganda.

Today, in effect, Mr. Milosevic declared that he did not acknowledge the
existence of the court in which he stood.

This attitude prompted a sharp reminder from Judge May, 62, who started to work
at the United Nations Tribunal here in 1997 and has a reputation for keeping
tight control of his courtroom. "Mr. Milosevic," he said, "you are now before
this tribunal and you're within the jurisdiction of it. You will be tried by
this tribunal."

That much, at least, does seem clear. With or without lawyers, Mr. Milosevic
will face the prosecution's case in the court where he sat today.

Graham Blewitt, the deputy chief prosecutor, said the court would like to see
Mr. Milosevic defended by the "best available legal defense there is in the
world."

But, he added: "If the accused decides to stand mute and not say anything
throughout the course of the trial, then it makes no difference. Because
throughout the trial the prosecution bears the onus of establishing guilt beyond
reasonable doubt. At no time does the onus shift to the accused to prove that he
is innocent."

The court may appoint a lawyer if Mr. Milosevic continues to decline to select
one, but he would have no obligation to cooperate or even communicate with that
lawyer.

Even before he decides on his tactics, Mr. Milosevic's broad approach appeared
clear today. His allusion to the NATO bombing was consistent with a line that
Mira Markovic, his wife, has urged on him: seek to portray the true criminal in
Kosovo as NATO, which bombed Mr. Milosevic into submission in 1999.

In this particular Serbian vision, the tribunal is no more than the political
court where the victors seek to justify their actions by branding as a criminal
the man who led the state being bombed. Almost all the crimes imputed to Mr.
Milosevic in the indictment occurred during the NATO bombing.

"As I have said, the aim of this tribunal is to justify the crimes committed in
Yugoslavia," Mr. Milosevic declared in his last statement before being cut off
by Judge May. "That is why this a false tribunal, and illegitimate." He added,
somewhat obscurely, that the court was "illegal, being not appointed by the U.N.
General Assembly."

In fact, the tribunal was created in 1993 by the Security Council, which obliged
all United Nations members to "take any measures necessary under their domestic
law to comply with the tribunal."

Moreover, Mr. Milosevic implicitly recognized the tribunal when he signed the
1995 Dayton accords ending the war in Bosnia: the agreement required the
signatory states to cooperate with the court, and as a member of the United
Nations, Yugoslavia had an obligation to cooperate and hand over Mr. Milosevic,
who was spirited out of Belgrade last week.

"The aspiration of the world after World War II was for some form of universal
jurisdiction for a limited number of crimes, including genocide," said Owen
Fiss, a professor of law at Yale. "But it is only in the decade of the 1990's
that this aspiration has been given some substance, and Mr. Milosevic's trial is
the culmination."

The corollary is the erosion of national sovereignty, a development that Mr.
Fiss called "the most significant phenomenon of the end of the 20th century."
But many countries -- including the United States, which has declined to ratify
a treaty setting up a permanent international criminal court -- have
reservations about this trend.

Mr. Milosevic, it seems clear, will argue that the extension of "international
law" in fact equals the bending of that law and its application across the world
to suit the political and strategic designs of the dominant powers, particularly
the United States.

Beyond questions of jurisdiction, a focus of the trial appears likely to be
whether Mr. Milosevic, as president of Yugoslavia, exercised an effective
command function over the forces marauding through Kosovo.

Statutes of the court imbue "superiors," including heads of government, with
criminal responsibility if they "knew or had reason to know that the subordinate
was about to commit such acts, or had done so and the superior failed to take
the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts, or to punish the
perpetrators thereof."

The acts in question include murder, deportation, extermination, torture and
rape. Mrs. Del Ponte will have to convince the court that Mr. Milosevic "knew or
had reason to know" about such occurrences.

If convicted, Mr. Milosevic faces life imprisonment.

After the arraignment, the chief prosecutor met with Mr. Milosevic for about 45
minutes. Their exchange, the first between them, was described as "correct" by
two court officials who declined to give further details.

A further hearing has been set for Aug. 27 to assess what progress has been made
in the preparation for a trial.

Mr. Milosevic, who was brought to the tribunal building shortly after 7 a.m.,
three hours before the arraignment began, to avoid his being seen by the press,
returned later to the Scheveningen detention center, where he is being held in
solitary confinement behind high red-brick walls.

The last time before these proceedings that he made such a public and closely
watched appearance in the West was when he was praised in Dayton, Ohio, and then
at a signing ceremony in Paris in 1995, as the man with the power to deliver
peace to the Balkans. At the time he seemed impregnable, not least because
Western governments were determined not to view him as a criminal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Slobodan Milosevic at the war crimes tribunal yesterday in The
Hague, flanked by United Nations guards. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
LAWYERS (78%); JUDGES (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); BOMBINGS (71%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: COHEN, ROGER; SIMONS, MARLISE; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; MAY, RICHARD (JUDGE)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); KOSOVO
(92%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1380 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Appeals Court Bars Firing of Transsexual

BYLINE:  By MARIA NEWMAN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 618 words


A New Jersey appeals court said yesterday that transsexuals were protected by
state laws against discrimination, as it ruled in the case of a doctor who was
fired after he began dressing as a woman in preparation for a sex change.

A three-judge panel of the state's Appellate Division ruled that the doctor, who
is now a woman, could sue her former employer, a South Jersey clinic, for
wrongful termination under the state's bias laws.

"It is incomprehensible to us that our Legislature would ban discrimination
against heterosexual men and women, against homosexual men and women, and
others, but would condone discrimination against men or women who seek to change
their anatomical sex," the judges wrote in a lengthy decision.

Civil rights advocates called the decision significant because it broadened the
definition of the characteristics or conditions protected by laws that bar
discrimination based on sex.

Matt Coles, director of the lesbian and gay rights project for the American
Civil Liberties Union, said many courts around the country had addressed,
piecemeal, issues of gender identity, like whether a male employee can be fired
for wearing a dress.

"This court looked at the whole thing and said that gender identity of every
sort is protected against discrimination," said Mr. Coles, whose group has
offered to join in the lawsuit. "It said in effect that everything from being a
little too masculine if you are a woman, or being a little too feminine if you
are a man, to someone's actually physically changing their gender, is protected
against discrimination."

The court reversed a decision by a Superior Court judge in Camden that had
dismissed a lawsuit by Dr. Carla Enriquez, born Carlos Enriquez, against West
Jersey Health Systems, which ran the West Jersey Center for Behavior, Learning
and Attention. That center, whose location was not disclosed in court papers,
fired Dr. Enriquez as its medical director in October 1997 after learning of the
doctor's plans to undergo surgery to become a woman.

The Superior Court judge, E. Stevenson Fluharty, found that transexualism was
not a recognized mental or physical disability, and noted that Dr. Enriquez did
not consider herself gay and did not face discrimination as a gay person.
Therefore, the judge said, she was not entitled to protection under state bias
laws, which say it is unlawful for an employer to dismiss someone based on the
person's sex or "affectional or sexual orientation."

The appellate court disagreed; it ruled that Dr. Enriquez's condition, known as
gender dysphoria, was a handicap covered by the state law, and ordered the case
back to Superior Court.

Calls to Dr. Enriquez's lawyer were not returned. A spokeswoman for Virtua
Health, a nonprofit health system that now owns West Jersey Health Systems,
would not comment on the ruling. Virtua was created two years ago when West
Jersey merged with Memorial Hospital of Burlington County.

According to court papers, Dr. Enriquez was in the private practice of general
and developmental pediatrics from 1974 to 1995. As Carlos Enriquez, he was hired
in November 1995 as medical director for the West Jersey clinic. Less than a
year later, he began preparations for a sex change, including shaving his beard
and growing breasts.

Dr. Enriquez contends that in early 1997, executives of West Jersey, including
John Cossa, the vice president, expressed their discomfort with the changes and
that Mr. Cossa said, "Stop all this and go back to your previous appearance."
That October, Mr. Cossa gave Dr. Enriquez a letter of dismissal.

The doctor, who had a sex change operation in 1998, is also suing for breach of
contract and interference with economic opportunity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION (92%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (91%); APPEALS COURTS (91%);
LITIGATION (91%); APPEALS (91%); GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS
(90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DISMISSALS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
JUDGES (89%); GENDER IDENTITY DISORDER (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); WRONGFUL
TERMINATION (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); VERDICTS
(78%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (77%); BUSINESS TORTS (76%); SURGERY &
TRANSPLANTATION (73%); EMPLOYMENT (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (69%); DISABLED
PERSONS (60%) TRANSSEXUALS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

PERSON: NEWMAN, MARIA

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: NEW JERSEY

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1382 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MILOSEVIC IN COURT: THE VICTIMS;
Albanians Say Trying Top Leaders Isn't Enough

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo, July 3


Slobodan Milosevic was on the television, defiant. An old man drinking bitter
tea looked down at a bowl of sugar.

"Look how small the grains are," the man, Halim Hajrizi, 68, said today, sitting
with two friends in a cafe here. "If you ground Milosevic into even smaller
pieces, it still wouldn't make up for what he did."

It is impossible to overstate the anger Albanians in Kosovo feel for the man who
is charged with crimes against humanity in the Kosovo war.

But pleased as they are that Mr. Milosevic is before the international criminal
tribunal, many Kosovo Albanians said today that it was still not enough for the
atrocities committed in Kosovo by Serbian forces in 1999.

"It's a start," said Hajrullah Gashi, 63, a friend of Mr. Hajrizi's, looking at
one of the first of many news updates on the court appearance. "But it's a small
thing, Milosevic himself. He wasn't the only one."

In handing over their former president to the tribunal last week, the leaders of
the new government in Serbia talked about "personalizing guilt." This is the
idea that trying Mr. Milosevic at The Hague, and perhaps others who have been
indicted but not yet handed over, will prove that it was distinct leaders, not
all Serbs, who were guilty of war crimes.

But scratch the surface of conversation here, and many Albanians say they hold
all Serbs accountable. That does not bode well for the dream of Western
governments overseeing the peacekeeping operation in Kosovo that Serbs and
Albanians will one day live in relative harmony. Nor does the fact that most
Serbs have fled north from Kosovo to Serbia proper.

Many Albanians here have their own take on the government's concept of
personalizing guilt. They say they already know which Serbs were responsible for
abuses in their hometowns and want to see them punished, not just the national
leaders.

Sanije Jahaj, 51, who lives in the southern town of Suva Reka, said her own
neighbors showed up beside paramilitary forces on March 28, 1999, and ordered
the family to leave for Albania.

"All our Serb neighbors, on both sides, were in uniform at the entrance of our
building," she said. And it was Serbs from another part of town, she said, who
ordered their car to stop on the way out of town and began talking angrily to
her husband, Vehbi, 51, an engineer.

"I know they asked him: 'Are you thinking about coming back to live here or work
in this place?' " she remembered. "Then one of them started to kick him. I was
standing right next to him. The other man just pulled out a machine gun and
sprayed him in chest. It was me there, his mother, my son's wife and our
daughter." The family fled as he lay dying on the ground.

Watching the man she holds ultimately responsible in court today was not easy.

"What I can I say about him?" she asked. "The things he says just get on my
nerves so badly I can't even watch the television."

Their daughter, Albulena, 13, who watched her father die, could not stay in the
room as Mrs. Jahaj spoke.

Naser Basha, 37, who also lives in Suva Reka, was listening to the news of Mr.
Milosevic's first court appearance on the radio.

"Let's not say it makes us happy," he said. "It is a relief to have someone who
committed such crimes face the law." In this town, where some of the worst
massacres of the war were carried out, it is all personal: Mr. Basha took out a
pencil in the hardware store he owns and started tallying up the 52 dead he
knew: for a start, Nexhmiden Berisha, his brothers, Sedat and Bujari, all their
wives and children.

"Maybe there's not a direct line," he said, from the killings here all the way
to Mr. Milosevic. "But Milosevic gave the green light. He freed their hands to
act any way they wanted to."

In Pristina, people watched Mr. Milosevic on television, listened on the radio
or logged on in the city's several dozen popular Internet cafes.

Avni Krasniqi, 29, and his coworkers at a photo store were watching on small
television behind the counter.

"It was a pleasure to see him," he said, not long after the court appearance,
carried live on satellite television. "It shows you that whatever you do,
justice will win."

A friend walked in, and Mr. Krasniqi described what he saw:

"He even came out in a suit," Mr. Krasniqi said. "Still feeling cool -- he
thinks."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Halim Hajrizi, left, Hajrullah Gashi, right, and a third Kosovo
Albanian talked in a cafe in Pristina, Kosovo.; Slobodan Milosevic's court
appearance in The Hague on was on the TV screen at the Tushi Cafe, as at many
other businesses in Pristina. (The New York Times); Sanije Jahaj's husband,
Vehbi, was killed by Serbs in Suva Reka in 1999 as she, her daughter, Albulena,
and other family members watched. (Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INDICTMENTS (75%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%);
PEACEKEEPING (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(70%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); KOSOVO (97%); ALBANIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (88%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1400 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Charities Are Denied Bias Law Exemption

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 124 words


The Bush administration declined a request from the Salvation Army to exempt
religious charities that receive federal money from local laws that bar
discrimination against homosexuals.

The decision came on the same day that a Salvation Army document was made public
asserting that the administration had made a commitment on the issue to the
Salvation Army, a claim that outraged some civil rights groups and lawmakers.

Although administration officials initially said they were considering the
request, the White House later announced that it had decided to deny it. The
announcement followed a flurry of meetings and telephone calls between Mr.
Bush's senior aides, who said they had not been aware of the charity's request.

Article, Page A15.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); CHARITIES (91%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); GAYS & LESBIANS (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (85%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: THE SALVATION ARMY (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1402 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zero-Tolerance Policy Is Challenged

BYLINE:  By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 869 words


In a lawsuit that could affect subsidized-housing policies nationwide, several
civil rights and women's rights groups yesterday challenged, as a form of sex
discrimination, an Oregon zero-tolerance policy allowing the eviction of the
entire household after a domestic assault.

The case involves an Oregon woman who was threatened with eviction after filing
a restraining order against her husband.

"This is absolutely a case of blaming the victim," said Lenora Lapidus, director
of the American Civil Liberties Union's Women's Rights Project. "A woman's
assaulted by her husband, she gets a protective order from the police, and when
she goes home, they move to evict her. This is the first case challenging these
policies, but we're starting to hear that this is happening at public housing
around the country."

Over the last decade, housing authorities nationwide have adopted zero-tolerance
policies, first for drugs, then for violence. Housing authorities in California,
Colorado, Louisiana, Massachusetts and Michigan have policies similar to the one
under challenge in Oregon.

The Oregon lawsuit says Tiffani Ann Alvera was assaulted on Aug. 2, 1999, by her
husband, Humberto Mota, in their home in Seaside, Ore.

She went to the hospital, and he was jailed. That day, Ms. Alvera obtained a
temporary restraining order against him, which she gave to the resident manager
of Creekside Village Apartments. The 40-unit complex for low-income tenants is
subsidized by the United States Department of Agriculture's rural development
program.

Two days later, Ms. Alvera received a notice to vacate the apartment within 24
hours. The notice said, "You, someone in your control, or your pet, has
seriously threatened immediately to inflict personal injury, or has inflicted
substantial personal injury upon the landlord or other tenants," and specified
an assault by her husband.

Ms. Alvera tried to have her husband taken off the lease and requested a move to
a one-bedroom apartment, since she would be a single-person household. But the
resident managers refused to accept her rent, and, until a lawyer become
involved several months later, refused to give her a one-bedroom apartment.

"It wasn't my fault," said Ms. Alvera, who is now living in North Caroina where
she hopes to go to nursing school. "I'd gotten the restraining order. My face
was badly battered, and it was two to three months before it healed. I lost lots
of hours of work, which meant lots of hours of pay. I didn't feel like I could
go looking for a new place to live."

Ms. Alvera has had no contact with her husband since the incident.

In administrative proceedings on Ms. Alvera's complaint, the Department of
Housing and Urban Development found on April 13 that she had reasonable cause to
sue.

In the HUD investigation, Creekside Village's supervising property manager said
the policy of evicting the entire household when anyone in the household had
been a batterer was designed to protect tenants from witnessing recurring
domestic fights if the restraining order is defied.

"The reason we take such a hard stance on the issue of violence is to maintain a
peaceful living environment for all tenants," said Inez Cronevsky, the
supervising property manager.

A spokesman for the CBM Group, which manages the property, said yesterday that
it had no comment on the lawsuit.

Ms. Alvera's lawsuit, filed in federal court in Oregon, is a sex-discrimination
claim under the Fair Housing Act, which prohibits discrimination in housing.

The HUD findings said there was reasonable cause to believe that the
zero-tolerance policy violates the Fair Housing Act by discriminating against
women. Evicting all members of a household after a domestic assault, HUD said,
"regardless of whether the household member is a victim or a perpetrator of the
domestic violence, has an adverse impact based on sex, because of the
disproportionate number of women victims of domestic violence."

HUD quoted national statistics, finding that women are five to eight times more
likely than men to be victimized by an intimate, and Oregon studies finding that
one in eight women in the state had been victims of physical abuse by an
intimate in the prior year.

"Because domestic violence affects women disproportionately, this kind of
zero-tolerance policy hurts women far more than men," said Ms. Lapidus, whose
group is bringing the case along with Legal Aid Services of Oregon, NOW Legal
Defense and Education Fund, and Advocates for Victims of Domestic Violence.
"It's particularly difficult for low-income women who are depending on
subsidized housing to find stable living arrangements, and when they're in the
crisis of domestic violence, it's all the more difficult."

The interplay between domestic violence, poverty and housing is complicated, she
said.

Justice Department data shows that women in families where the household income
is less than $10,000 -- women most dependent on subsidized housing -- are five
times more likely to experience domestic abuse as women in families with incomes
over $30,000.

And in a December study by the United States Conference of Mayors, most of the
cities surveyed cited domestic violence as a primary cause of homelessness.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tiffani Ann Alvera and her son, Adrian, relaxing in North
Carolina. She says in a lawsuit that an apartment complex in Seaside, Ore.,
tried to evict her in 1999 after she got a restraining order against her
husband. (Jim Stratford for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOUSING ASSISTANCE (91%); LITIGATION (91%); PUBLIC HOUSING (91%);
HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); EVICTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); RESTRAINING
ORDERS (90%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (90%); DOMESTIC OFFENSES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY
(90%); WOMEN (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%);
RENTAL PROPERTY (78%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (78%); LOW INCOME PERSONS
(77%); ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE (71%); NURSES & NURSING (70%); RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(70%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (69%); AGENCY ADJUDICATION (64%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (61%); CITIES (60%); GOVERNMENT GRANTS &
SUBSIDIES (58%) HOUSING;  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE;  EVICTIONS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;
WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION;  PUBLIC HOUSING;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
(54%) HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT

PERSON: ALVERA, TIFFANI ANN; LEWIN, TAMAR

STATE: OREGON, USA (96%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (79%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: OREGON

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1406 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Overcome by Slavery

BYLINE:  By Ira Berlin;  Ira Berlin is author of "Many Thousands Gone: The First
Two Centuries of Slavery in North America."

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


On January 1, 1863, Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation
declaring slaves forever free, but the subject remains very much alive. On the
big screen we have had "Glory," "Amistad," "Shadrach" and "Beloved." On
television, the four-part series "Africans in America" was followed by Henry
Louis Gates Jr.'s controversial sojourn through Africa, during which he
confronted African complicity in the slave trade. Such programs have come hard
on the heels of new monuments and miles of freedom trails, dozens of exhibitions
and the building of museums dedicated to slavery.

In the past year, some 50 scholarly works on slavery have been published. Add
dozens of Web sites, children's books and novels and at least one parody, "The
Wind Done Gone." And, if that was not enough, there was the DNA confirmation of
Thomas Jefferson's relationship with Sally Hemings.

The resonance of the Jefferson-Hemings affair provides a reminder of how much
slavery has become part of contemporary politics. Bill Clinton realized this
early on; hence the debate over The Apology and his appointment of the
Commission on Race and Reconciliation. Congress has also gotten into the act,
mandating that Civil War battle sites supervised by the National Park Service
address slavery. Disputes over the Confederate flag and Confederate History
Month have roiled politics in South Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi and Virginia,
and California has required insurance companies to divulge if they have ever
insured slave property. Finally, there is the matter of reparations, which has
found advocates in some of the nation's prominent litigators.

It would be comforting to conclude that recognition of slavery's importance to
the development of our economy, politics and culture has driven Americans to a
consideration of the past. But there clearly is more to the current interest in
slavery. There is a recognition that American racism was founded in slavery, and
a general, if inchoate, understanding that any attempt to address race in the
present must also address slavery in past.

This attempt has become imperative as American society perceptibly grows more
segregated, the benefits of economic growth are unevenly and unfairly
distributed among races, and a previous generation's remedies for segregation
and inequality are discarded as politically unacceptable.

In short, behind the interest in slavery is the crisis of race. The confluence
of the history of slavery and the politics of race reveals that slavery has
become a language, a way to talk about race, in a society in which blacks and
whites hardly talk to each other at all. In slavery, Americans have found a
voice to address some of their deepest hurts and the depressing reality of how
much of American life -- jobs; housing; schools; access to medical care, to
justice and even to a taxi -- is controlled by race.

But while slavery serves as an entry point for a dialogue on race, it is not an
easy one. For slavery carries with it deep anger, resentment, indignation and
bitterness for some, embarrassment, humiliation and shame for others. The
complications can be seen in the introduction of slavery into what had been a
lily-white representation of Colonial Williamsburg -- by staging a slave
auction. The local chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People objected, finding the re-creation insulting to people of African
descent -- a painful reminder of what no one wanted to have recalled. The
director of the project, Christie Coleman, refused to retreat, insisting that
slavery was an integral part of the history of colonial Williamsburg. The
N.A.A.C.P. conceded Ms. Coleman's point.

The presentation of slavery at Colonial Williamsburg has since become routine,
and the results have been astounding. Visitors get caught up in the
re-enactments. Some offer to help slaves escape. Others protect slaves from
abusive masters. Some turn on slaveowners, and not merely to debate the issue;
several visitors have had to be physically restrained. Lest it be thought that
it is only the visitors who forget they are witnesses to a re-enactment, the
actors -- mostly young black men and women -- have been caught up in it as well.
They report that while playing slaves they were often treated as slaves, not
merely by visitors but by others as well, setting in motion nightmarish
fantasies.

Viewing the present through the lens of the past is useful, necessary and
perhaps inevitable. But it is also dangerous. If the re-enactment in
Williamsburg and the new interest in slavery show how the past can illuminate,
they also show how the differences between past and present can become blurred
rather than clarified.

At the beginning of the 21st century, almost a century and a half after
Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, Americans are again struggling with
slavery, and in so doing hope to vanquish slavery's legacy: the burden of race.
The films, re-enactments, museums and books, as well as the politics, are part
of that struggle. In turning to the past to understand the present, it has
become evident that Americans will not be, in Lincoln's words, forever free
until they have mastered slavery as slavery once mastered them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); HISTORY (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (76%); EMERGING
MARKETS (76%); NATIONAL PARKS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES
(74%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (71%); INSURANCE REGULATION & POLICY (71%); MUSEUMS &
GALLERIES (70%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE (69%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (68%);
INSURANCE (64%); LITIGATION (64%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (63%) SLAVERY;  BLACKS;
DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL PARK SERVICE (55%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (55%) BERLIN, IRA (PROF); LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (1809-65)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1417 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 16, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jedwabne Massacre: A Search for Healing

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 147 words


To the Editor:

A July 11 front-page article about the massacre of the Jews of Jedwabne by their
Polish neighbors on July 10, 1941, focuses on the attitude of many Poles who
still seek to deny their complicity in this horrific act.

Why is it that the perpetrators of this crime have gone unpunished? Why has it
taken more than 50 years for Polish authorities to begin an investigation into
what took place?

Full acceptance into the Western family of nations should be denied to any
Baltic or former Eastern European-bloc country that does not demonstrate a
complete repudiation of the crimes against humanity perpetrated by its
countrymen in World War II. This would require bringing criminal charges against
all those involved in, for example, the massacres at Jebwabne, at Babi Yar in
Ukraine, Kovno in Lithuania and Riga in Latvia.

(Rabbi) ZEV FRIEDMAN
Lawrence, N.Y., July 11, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); WORLD WAR II (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD
JEWS AND MINORITIES

PERSON: FRIEDMAN, ZEV (RABBI)

CITY: RIGA, LATVIA (68%)

COUNTRY: POLAND (90%); EUROPE (90%); UKRAINE (79%); LATVIA (73%); LITHUANIA
(73%); EASTERN EUROPE (57%)

REGION: POLAND;  JEDWABNE (POLAND);  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1418 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 16, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Links in Khmer Rouge Chain of Death

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


During their first year in power a quarter of a century ago, senior Khmer Rouge
leaders ordered the arrest and execution of thousands of Cambodians who they
were convinced would undermine their brutal revolution, and demanded detailed
secret reports to show that the orders had been carried out.

In one such report, discreetly copied to Nuon Chea, the second in command in the
regime, a Khmer Rouge prison guard gave an itemized account of the steps taken
to torture Man San, one of the thousands of Cambodians killed at Tuol Sleng
prison in Phnom Penh.

"In the evening, we tortured him with about 20 to 30 wire lashes," wrote the
prison underling identified as Comrade Pon in a report dated Sept. 25, 1976.

Mr. Pon wrote that the victim was then subjected to further beatings with a
rattan whip. He was then told that his family had been arrested and would be
tortured if he did not confess to betraying the revolution.

"Do you realize that your wife and child are here?" he was asked. "Do you know
the state of their health?"

The report continued, "At about nearly 10 p.m. we were about to use our bare
hands when he confessed." Then the victim was executed. His wife and child were
also killed.

This report, along with 1,000 other newly discovered telegrams and documents
sent to senior Khmer Rouge leaders, provide the first concrete evidence of their
direct involvement in the killings of nearly one million Cambodians and the
death of another million from disease and starvation during the Khmer Rouge
regime, from 1975 to 1979.

Even though there had been plentiful proof of the crimes themselves, including
numerous mass graves, millions of pages of documents and haunting photographs
and confessions from the torture chambers, the newly disclosed documents open a
window on the leaders' direct responsibility, often covered in minute detail, in
the chain of command that led to the massacres.

The documents are contained in a report by the War Crimes Research Office of the
American University College of Law. The report, to be released on Monday,
presents the evidence against seven of the most senior living Khmer Rouge
leaders, including Mr. Nuon Chea, the second-highest figure in that government;
Ieng Sary, the former foreign minister and Khieu Samphan, the former head of
state.

Unlike some other former leaders accused of crimes against humanity, these three
men still live comfortably in their own country, safe so far from arrest or
prosecution.

Pol Pot, the mastermind of the Khmer Rouge revolution, died on the
Thai-Cambodian border in 1998.

Despite the growing evidence against them, the greatest obstacle to their arrest
and trial has been the reluctance of the current Cambodian government, under
Prime Minister Hun Sen, to agree with the United Nations on how to set up a
tribunal. China has proved a powerful ally for Mr. Hun Sen in his negotiations
with the United Nations.

These new documents add to the pressure from Cambodians as well as from the
United Nations and influential foreign nations to bring these men to justice.
"This report will be a template for any prosecutor, a starting point for an
investigation," said Ralph Zacklin, the assistant secretary general for legal
affairs at the United Nations, who has been part of the negotiations with
Cambodia to set up a tribunal. "It definitely will focus a lot of attention on
the Cambodian trials and presumably it will energize member states to keep
pushing this forward."

In an era when Slobodan Milosevic, the Yugoslav leader blamed for starting four
Balkan wars, has been handed over to The Hague to stand trial for war crimes,
when other countries that were once part of Yugoslavia as well as Rwanda and
Sierra Leone are cooperating with international tribunals, Cambodia has become
the odd country out.

For David J. Scheffer, the former American ambassador at large for war crimes
who negotiated with Cambodia for a tribunal, the report marks "a big leap
forward" in establishing the specific case against Khmer Rouge leaders.

"This is extremely important to reconstruct the paper trail all the way to the
top and establish the command authority of the leaders," Mr. Scheffer said.
"We're reaching a very important moment."

The Hun Sen government has resisted three years of attempts by the United
Nations to establish a tribunal. Last week Parliament approved legislation to
set up a tribunal, but it will take months to establish. And Mr. Hun Sen has yet
to sign an agreement with the United Nations to ensure that the tribunal would
adhere to minimum international standards.

The report, by Stephen Heder, a Cambodia scholar, and Brian D. Tittemore, a
legal expert, was written out of frustration -- concerned that without a
tribunal there would never be a legal document establishing responsibility for
the Cambodian killings, said Diane Orentlicher of American University, who led
the project. "We knew the efforts to create a legitimate tribunal were running
up against resistance," she said.

These latest documents were discovered in old government archives by Youk
Chhang, executive director of the Cambodian Documentation Center in Phnom Penh,
a nonprofit research organization that is the main repository of the evidence
against the Khmer Rouge. "I found many filed in the wrong dossiers at government
buildings," Mr. Youk Chhang said in an interview. "This is the first specific
indictment of the leaders and I know the people of Cambodia will be surprised by
all that we have found."

Mr. Hun Sen was recently quoted as telling the United Nations to "stay calm and
shut up," threatening to end negotiations for a tribunal. Mr. Hun Sen and nearly
every major figure in the current Government were aligned with the Khmer Rouge
earlier in their careers, and the current leaders' reluctance to reopen
questions about the regime has undermined the negotiations.

But major aid donors to Cambodia, who contribute half the national budget,
warned Mr. Hun Sen last month that they were frustrated by the slow progress
toward a tribunal.

The Khmer Rouge took power in April 1975, and attempted the most radical and
brutal revolution in modern history. They forced Cambodians to leave their homes
in cities and villages and sent them by foot to dirt-poor collective farms,
hunting out people they considered class enemies and ordering them executed.

To hide their role in these and subsequent crimes, the leaders had mid-level
officials write the voluminous records chronicling a bureaucracy of death, a
collection of documents that experts consider as detailed as those kept by the
Nazis during the Holocaust.

These new telegrams and other documents show that the senior Khmer Rouge
officials received copies of these chilling reports.

Indeed, prosecutors preparing the case against Mr. Milosevic at The Hague are
searching for documents, communications intercepts or memorandums to prove his
direct command role in the war crimes committed in the name of his dream of a
"Greater Serbia."

The Cambodian documents show that the leaders were kept abreast of the huge
purges as well as individual executions. In one example, several senior Khmer
Rouge leaders waited anxiously in Phnom Penh, the capital, for news from the
north, where they had ordered the purge of dozens of fellow revolutionaries.

Finally, on April 10, 1978, they were handed telegrams, transmitted over a
shortwave radio, confirming that officials from the northern zone had captured
and killed most of the dozens of Cambodians whom they had marked as turncoats.

Northern officials reported that after combing the forest, they were able to
"capture and smash all such bandits one after the other."

Unfortunately, one report continued, "a number of soldiers, police and civil
servants fled after we had swept approximately twenty of them cleanly away."

Many executions took place in the countryside, in the killing fields made famous
by the 1984 movie of that title. In desolate jungle clearings, low-ranking Khmer
Rouge officials killed Cambodians in the dead of night and hastily buried the
bodies in mass graves.

In the newly uncovered telegrams, often entitled "Respectfully Presented to
Beloved and Missed Brother," these provincial officials dutifully recounted to
their superiors in Phnom Penh that they, like the city prison guards, had
followed orders to "smash enemies" and "burn the homes of ordinary people."

In one April 1978 telegram sent by shortwave radio to Mr. Nuon Chea and Mr. Ieng
Sary, the former foreign minister, a provincial leader reported that he had
carried out orders to kill Khmer Rouge officials in eastern Cambodia because
they had failed to protect their livestock.

"They have been purged," wrote the official, named Vi, who said he had also
"silenced a number of elements, some of whom have been flushed out, isolated and
cleaned up."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodian legislators voting last week to approve the
establishment of a tribunal to try Khmer Rouge leaders. (Reuters) Map of
Cambodia highlighting Phnom Penh: Researchers in Phnom Penh have collected Khmer
Rouge records.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (68%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (64%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (62%); LAW
SCHOOLS (61%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
TORTURE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN UNIVERSITY

PERSON: BECKER, ELIZABETH; NUON CHEA; IENG SARY; KHIEU SAMPHAN

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1420 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 16, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ending the Slave Trade

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 158 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Criticizes Major Allies for Inaction in Slave Trade" (news article,
July 13):

The State Department's Trafficking in Persons Report says the root causes of
trafficking include "greed, moral turpitude, economics, political instability
and transition, and social factors."

What the report does not say is that no country can effectively address
trafficking in women without addressing the enormous demand for women and girls
in prostitution.

Around the world, in rich countries as well as poor countries, from Thailand and
the Philippines to Germany and Israel, commercial sex industries flourish on the
backs of girls and young women from poverty-stricken countries. Until
governments address the demand to buy sex from young women and girls, no
government, including the United States, will truly have met minimum standards
for the elimination of trafficking.

PAMELA SHIFMAN
Associate Director
Equality Now
New York, July 13, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); POOR POPULATION
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (68%) SLAVE LABOR;
WOMEN;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  PROSTITUTION

ORGANIZATION: EQUALITY NOW (83%) EQUALITY NOW (ORGN)

PERSON: SHIFMAN, PAMELA

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); GERMANY (68%);
THAILAND (53%)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1425 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 19, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Dutch Approve International Court

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 63 words


The Netherlands became the 37th country to ratify the treaty of the
International Criminal Court.

Another 23 ratifications are now needed to allow the court -- the first
permanent tribunal created to try individuals charged with genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity -- to begin operating. It will be based in The
Hague, the Dutch capital.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (83%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: NETHERLANDS

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1437 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 22, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slobo Was Here

BYLINE:  By Roger Cohen

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 599 words


Soon after the war began in Bosnia in April 1992, the landscape came to resemble
a scene of madness: roofless houses with baleful black eyes for windows,
staircases to nowhere, smashed minarets or chimneys pointing a stone vestige to
the sky, entire villages deserted but for stray dogs attacking the carcasses of
cows. War is hell, but this was not war in the conventional sense of a battle
between armies. The devastation resulted from the overwhelming Serbian onslaught
on Muslim civilians, which tried to purge most of Bosnia of any non-Serb in the
first months of the war.

Slobodan Milosevic is not on trial in The Hague for ordering this rampage, which
led, in a matter of weeks, to the flight of about three-quarters of a million
Muslims. He is not on trial for establishing the concentration camps, like
Omarska, through which many of these Muslims were processed. Nor is he facing an
indictment for the killing and torture that Serbs practiced in these camps. But
the evidence remains, in the form of the skeletal dwellings that line the Drina
River Valley. It is silent; it is also eloquent.

In Kosovo, seven years later, another bout of Serbian madness, directed this
time against ethnic Albanians, produced similar destruction. Indeed, there is no
more consistent symbol of the Balkan wars of the past decade than a burned,
battered, blasted home where some crazed Serbian killer has inscribed the four
C's (the Cyrillic letter S) that stand for "Samo Sloga Srbina Spasava" -- Only
Unity Saves the Serbs."

Perhaps every national debacle has its empty slogan. The renewed propagation of
this one coincided with Milosevic's rise to power in 1989. His nationalism boded
violence, and the slaughter duly came. It is for the killing in Kosovo that the
former Yugoslav president has been charged in The Hague with crimes against
humanity. Meanwhile, Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor, says that she is
preparing an indictment against him for genocide in Bosnia. It may be ready by
October.

That will be late in the day. Almost a decade after the onslaught, the corpses
of countless victims of the Serbs from towns along the Drina River Valley --
Foca, Visegrad, Zvornik, Vlasenica -- remain undiscovered. More than 20,000
houses still need to be rebuilt. A mere fraction of the Muslims who fled have
returned to a Bosnia united only in name. The uncovering of mass graves like the
one recently found near Visoko will no doubt continue for many years.

These graves will speak of the methods used by Serbs in a furious attempt to
eliminate any trace of their neighbors. Traveling through the Drina River Valley
late in the war, I saw Serbs burning the already destroyed homes of Muslims. By
then it was a sort of weekend pastime. And I thought that only a brother --
somebody related in blood, in language, in culture -- could inspire such an
obsessive thirst for destruction as the Muslims of Bosnia had awakened in their
Serbian neighbors.

A house with a roof may be used again; it may even provide a setting for
conciliation of sorts. But these houses -- damaged, dynamited, then burned;
mutilated in the same way as many of the war's corpses -- were reduced to ruins
to try to ensure that no return is possible.

"What is it the Serbs have against a roof?" a colleague once asked me in the
Drina River Valley. I do not believe that question has been answered -- or even
posed -- in Serbian society as a whole with respect to the first months of the
Bosnian war. In its way, it is a significant question, which Milosevic's trial
before an international tribunal may eventually raise.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Paul Lowe)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (89%); RELIGION (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); DOGS (72%); BURN INJURIES (72%); TORTURE (67%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: COHEN, ROGER; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (93%); ALBANIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (71%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1444 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 25, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing South: Kentucky: Baptist Group Wins Suit

BYLINE:  By Elizabeth Becker (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 153 words


In a case with implications for President Bush's proposal to provide federal
financing to charities run by religious organizations, a federal court in
Kentucky ruled against Alicia Pedreira in a lawsuit accusing the Kentucky
Baptist Homes for Children of discrimination. In a termination letter, Ms.

Pedreira, a lesbian, was told she was fired in 1998 because the "homosexual
lifestyle is contrary to Kentucky Baptist Homes for Children core values."
Officials at the American Civil Liberties Union, which joined her in the lawsuit
and announced the outcome, said they strongly disagreed with the finding. The
home receives financing from Kentucky, and the A.C.L.U. had argued that
religious organizations that receive taxpayer financing should not be allowed to
discriminate. Mr. Bush's proposal would expand a religion's right to hire within
its faith to include federally financed programs.   Elizabeth Becker (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); LITIGATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CHURCH & STATE (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
CHARITIES (88%); BUDGETS (88%); VERDICTS (88%); CHILD RESIDENTIAL HOMES (87%);
DISMISSALS (87%) ORPHANS AND ORPHANAGES;  DISCRIMINATION;  CHURCH-STATE
RELATIONS;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; KENTUCKY BAPTIST HOMES FOR CHILDREN

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (88%) BECKER, ELIZABETH; PEDREIRA, ALICIA

STATE: KENTUCKY, USA (96%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: KENTUCKY

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1462 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1242 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

White House Says the U.S. Is Not a Loner, Just Choosy
President Bush's advisers said his rejection of various international accords
and threat to skip a conference on racism did not indicate that he was
unilateralist or isolationist or that the administration had a blanket disdain
for group action in the conduct of world affairs. Rather, they said, the
administration was pursuing a policy of evaluating international agreements and
meetings on a case-by-case basis.   A1

Racism Conference Agenda
The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, said the organization's world
conference against racism next month was intended to prevent future problems,
not become mired in old ones. He seemed to be supporting the Bush
administration, which warned that it might not attend the conference, which will
be held in South Africa, because the agenda included discussion of viewing
Zionism as racism and demands for compensation for slavery.   A10


Gruesome Inquiry in Serbia
As many as 1,000 bodies have been found in mass graves and freezer trucks in
Serbia, believed to be those of Kosovo Albanians killed by Serbs during the 1999
war. The new Serbian government says it has solid evidence that former President
Slobodan Milosevic ordered security forces to cover up evidence of crimes that
would be of interest to The Hague war crimes tribunal, where he awaits trial.
A3

Daylong Violence in Mideast
Bombs, mortars, missiles and knives left casualties on both sides of the
conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.   A8

Protestants Kill a Protestant
A banned Protestant paramilitary group in Northern Ireland took responsibility
for the killing of an 18-year-old Protestant in a drive-by shooting aimed at a
group of teenagers who were walking outside a Catholic Gaelic football park.
A11

Scholar Back in Hong Kong
Li Shaomin, a Chinese-born American scholar convicted by Beijing of spying for
Taiwan and deported to the United States last week, returned to Hong Kong to
resume his teaching job at the City University there. His return was hailed as a
victory for Hong Kong's autonomy within China.   A6

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A12-17

Lawyers' Group Weighs Revision of Ethics Code
The American Bar Association is considering an update of ethics rules for
lawyers, which if approved would give attorneys more freedom to divulge clients'
secrets if such revelations would prevent fraud, injury or death. The proposed
rules also deal with topics like sex with clients and whether lawyers should be
obligated to tell the whole truth in court. The association's annual meeting
begins tomorrow in Chicago.   A1

Research Entanglements
The House is expected to consider two competing cloning bills, possibly today.
Both would ban making babies by cloning, but the more restrictive would also ban
cloning to make embryos for medical research, work that destroys the tiny balls
of cells.   A17

Pressing for Patients' Rights
Representative Charlie Norwood, a Georgia Republican who has led a six-year
effort to enact a patients' bill of rights, was moving toward compromise with
the White House on a bill that could be put to a vote in the House this week.
A17

F.B.I. Nominee Sees Challenge
Robert S. Mueller III, President Bush's choice to lead the F.B.I., acknowledged
at his Senate confirmation hearing that the agency had been tarnished by
problems and that employees who committed blunders must be held accountable.
A14

Electoral Overhaul Urged
A commission led by former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford is
recommending numerous changes to the election system, including the use of
provisional ballots, making Election Day a national holiday and putting limits
on news media projections of winners.   A14

New Bomb Prosecution Sought
Dozens of victims of the Oklahoma City bombing and relatives of the dead met
with a new prosecutor to discuss whether Terry L. Nichols, now serving a federal
sentence of life in prison, should be tried on state murder charges in the
killing of 160 people.   A12

Welfare-to-Work Studies
Early studies of families in three welfare-to-work programs have found
unexpected evidence that their adolescent children have lower academic
achievement and more behavioral problems than the children of other welfare
households.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Vallone Says His Strength Is Protecting City's Gains
Peter F. Vallone, the City Council speaker and a Democrat, said in an interview
that with the imminent departure of many elected leaders because of term limits,
himself included, his election as mayor would assure stability in City Hall and
protect advances made in the last decade.   A1

Harlem Welcomes Clinton
Bill Clinton received a hero's welcome from an adoring crowd as he formally
opened his office in a Harlem building. The former president was joined by
prominent New York Democratic officials and some former Cabinet secretaries.
Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton stayed in Washington because her mother was
having surgery, Mr. Clinton said.   A1

Although Mayor Giuliani was listed on the program as a speaker, he did not
attend, and later said he had no idea he had been expected, though he said Mr.
Clinton's locating in Harlem would be good for the area.   B4

Boy Killed in M.R.I. Accident
A 6-year-old patient at Westchester Medical Center was struck on Friday by a
metal oxygen tank -- which should not have been in the room -- that was pulled
through the air by the machine's powerful electromagnet, officials said. He died
on Sunday.   B1

Terror Case Costs Near Record
Defense costs in the embassy bombings case in Manhattan exceed $7 million,
possibly making it the second-most expensive criminal defense ever paid for by
the government. Four suspects were convicted, a fifth pleaded guilty and two
await trial.   B1

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Calling and Driving Don't Mix
Researchers said a study of brain activity showed that when people try to drive
in heavy traffic and talk, brain activity does not double; rather, the amount of
brain activity devoted to each task actually decreases.   F1

Health & Fitness   F5

ARTS   E1-8

The Endless Summer
Business is off for much of the entertainment industry. More people are staying
home and out of the theaters, and fewer are buying books. Experts cite the mushy
economy and high prices, a lack of quality and too many options, especially on
television.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Speechmaking Software
AT&T Labs will start selling software that it says can reproduce the sounds,
inflections and intonations of a human voice so well that it can recreate voices
and even bring the voices of dead celebrities back to life.   A1

Borrowing to Finance Rebates
The Treasury said it would borrow the money needed for the rebates -- up to $600
a couple or $300 for individuals -- now going to taxpayers as part of President
Bush's $1.35 billion tax cut. The decision reflects a cash flow squeeze, not a
sudden turn of the budget from surplus to deficit.   C1

Wariness of Dollar's Rise
A growing number of economists say it is time to consider whether the dollar,
which has shot up this year against the euro and the Japanese yen, has risen to
a level that could do more harm than good.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

SPORTS   D1-7

OBITUARIES   C17

FASHION   B8

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Death at the hands of science; Mr. Clinton's Harlem renaissance; new
political star in Japan.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); ETHICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); EVIDENCE (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (86%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(86%); CLONING (84%); BIOETHICS (84%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (77%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (75%); CRIME PREVENTION (74%); WAR CRIMES (72%); VEHICULAR OFFENSES
(72%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (71%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (70%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (69%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (69%); MEDICAL RESEARCH (68%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (67%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (67%); SHOOTINGS (66%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(66%); DEPORTATION (65%); REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (64%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (63%);
ASIAN AMERICANS (57%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (73%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); HONG KONG
(93%); CHINA (79%); TAIWAN (79%); ALBANIA (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); ISRAEL (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%); NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1467 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 1, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ISRAELI RAID KILLS 8 AT HAMAS OFFICE; 2 ARE YOUNG BOYS

BYLINE:  By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: NABLUS, West Bank, July 31


Eight Palestinians, including two small boys, were killed today when Israeli
Army helicopters fired missiles into the offices here of the militant Islamic
group Hamas, igniting fury on the street and demands for swift revenge.

It was the deadliest incident in the Middle East conflict since a supposed
cease-fire went into effect seven weeks ago. Combined with an explosion north of
Nablus that killed six Palestinians on Monday and shootings in the Gaza Strip
that took two more lives today, 16 people have died in the last two days, all of
them Palestinians.

The violence continued into the night with reports of two Palestinian drive-by
shootings that wounded five Israelis, one gravely, in the West Bank. There were
also heavy exchanges of gunfire on Jerusalem's southern rim, a frequent flash
point that had been quiet in recent days.

Taken together, the events suggested that the bloodshed, now in its 11th month,
is not about to end any time soon.

Once again, Israelis and Palestinians blamed each other for sabotaging hopes for
peace. Efforts led by the United States to put some kind of monitoring mechanism
in place have yet to yield results. As for the cease-fire, brokered by the
Americans in mid-June, there has been not a day when it could truly begin to
take root.

The dead today included the two boys, brothers who were hit by debris as they
happened to pass by when the attack occurred, and two local Hamas leaders who
were the Israelis' intended targets.

The army appeared to have been aiming in particular to kill Jamal Mansour, who
had been arrested many times by Israel and the Palestinian Authority and who was
said by the Israelis to have been behind major terrorist bombings.

The office of Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, issued a statement after
the attack saying Mr. Mansour and the other senior Hamas figure, Jamal Salim,
"were in the process of planning further terrorist acts." The army acted to
prevent them, the statement said, though adding its regret about the death of
the two boys, Bilal Abu Khader, 7, and his brother Ashraf, 5.

Hamas leaders warned that Israel would pay for what happened today, and their
threats intensified nervousness among Israelis, who were already on high alert
for terrorist bombs.

In the devastated Hamas offices here, three floors up from the street, young
women from the Union of Palestinian Medical Relief Committees picked carefully
through blood-soaked rubble, collecting body parts. They had to wade across a
thick carpet of paper, twisted furniture, upended chairs and shattered computer
terminals.

On the streets of Nablus there was unbridled rage.

"This is not seen as just an action against Hamas," said Muhammad Amudi, a
Nablus resident who was standing across the street from the newly charred and
pockmarked building on Assika Road where the Hamas offices had been. "It's an
act against the Palestinian people. When something like this happens, people
don't think Hamas or Fatah or Islamic Jihad. They think all our people are
targeted."

Qassem Shamoot, who runs a computer store on the ground level of the seven-story
building that was hit, saw at first hand the precision of the Israeli
helicopters. The damage was relatively light on all floors except the one where
Hamas used to be. Nevertheless, Mr. Shamoot said, everything shook, himself
included, when the missiles struck.

"I wanted to leave my store, but I didn't know what happened," he said. "There
was all this dust, and I couldn't see. So I felt my way along the wall to find
my way out."

"But when I got out," he said, "I saw the two kids lying on top of each other."
Mr. Shamoot placed his right hand on top of his left to illustrate how he had
found young Bilal and Ashraf.

"I lost control," he said. "I started screaming 'God is great, God is great,'
and called to people to bring us ambulances."

Next to him stood Ghassan Khadair, who broke in to say, "Sharon claims
Palestinians are terrorists, but this shows he is the terrorist. He should pay a
price for it."

Besides the eight people who were were killed, who included office workers and
two journalists, six people were said to have been seriously wounded.

A sign outside the front door, still intact, identified the place as the
Palestinian Center for Studies and Media. "These people were sitting safely in
their office," said Ahmed Saker, identifying himself as a Hamas member. "It was
an office for study."

"Jamal Mansour was arrested by the Israelis more than 13 times," Mr. Saker said.
"They deported him to Lebanon once. That should have been enough for the
Israelis to know who Jamal Mansour was. If he was Hamas military, they never
would have released him."

But Israel insists that Mr. Mansour did indeed have Israeli blood on his hands.
Television reporters who cover such matters said tonight that security officials
had told them that the Nablus office had played a role in several bombings,
including one at a Tel Aviv disco in early June that killed 22 Israelis.

The Israeli pattern in recent months of targeting specific people for death has
outraged Palestinians. Jibril Rajoub, the Palestinian Authority's security chief
in the West Bank, called the policy barbaric, and some international human
rights groups have added their condemnation.

But the Israeli government defends the tactic as a life-saving one for Israelis,
made necessary by the conflict.

Several times now, Israel has readily acknowledged killing Hamas figures. It has
been noticeably more circumspect in the deaths of people belonging to the Fatah
faction of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian Authority chairman, including the six
who died in the explosion on Monday.

In those incidents -- and there have been several -- the Israelis tend to deny
any involvement, despite Palestinian charges of assassination. Typically, as was
the case on Monday, Israel attributes Fatah deaths to "work accidents," a
euphemism for people blowing themselves up by mistake while piecing bombs
together.

The Israeli killing policy was vigorously defended today by Ephraim Sneh, the
transportation minister and a former army commander in the West Bank.

"Anyone who thinks that the war against terrorism is a Ping-Pong war simply
doesn't understand it," Mr. Sneh told the army radio station. "You must also
make pre-emptive strikes. As soon as you know about terrorists preparing an
attack, it is your duty to strike them first."

In Amman, Jordan, Reuters reported that Mr. Arafat had called the killings today
"a very dangerous conspiracy to liquidate our cadets." Once again, he urged
world leaders to send international observers to the Palestinian territories.

But some high-ranking Israelis have begun to say in increasingly blunt terms
that Mr. Arafat is the problem. The army chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz,
said at a news conference today that Mr. Arafat's Palestinian Authority had
given "a green light" to terrorist attacks, and "these have accelerated of
late."

"I think that anyone who sees the data realizes that the Palestinian Authority
has become a terrorist entity," the general said. "I don't think there is anyone
who would dispute that today in light of the data, and this should be said
loudly."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two of the top leaders in the West Bank of the militant Islamic
group Hamas, Jamal Mansour, above left, and Jamal Salim, were among eight
Palestinians, including two small boys, who were killed yesterday when Israeli
Army helicopters fired missiles into the organization's offices, at left.
(Associated Press); (Agence France-Press)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
ARMIES (90%); RELIGION (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); HELICOPTERS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (64%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (64%); ARRESTS (50%) PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST MOVEMENT)

PERSON: HABERMAN, CLYDE; MANSOUR, JAMAL; SALIM, JAMAL

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  NABLUS (WEST BANK);  JERUSALEM

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1469 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1141 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

Mexicans Dispute Claims Their Trucks Are Unsafe
Experts in Mexico and the United States said that American opponents of allowing
Mexican trucks to venture much beyond the border had marshaled safety statistics
that on close examination were misleading or incomplete. They also said there
appeared to be little or no data supporting the contention of the Teamsters and
others that Mexican long-haul trucks and truckers were considerably more
dangerous.   A1

The Senate approved a $60 billion transportation bill that President Bush
threatened to veto because it would limit Mexican trucks' access to American
roads. The White House says restrictions in the bill violate Nafta provisions
and hinder improvements in diplomatic and commercial relations with Mexico.   A8


Senate Action on Warming
The Foreign Relations Committee unanimously urged the Bush administration to
develop a plan to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and to take part in
international talks on global warming.   A9

Israel Affirms Target Strategy
Israel, rejecting protests from the United States and elsewhere, defended its
missile strike on Tuesday that killed eight West Bank Palestinians and said it
would carry out more if it felt Israeli lives were at risk.   A8

Bosnia War Crimes Trial
A former Serb general, Radislav Krstic, the highest-ranking Serb to face
judgment in The Hague so far, is expected to hear the verdict today of three
judges on the United Nations war crimes tribunal. In 1995, General Krstic
commanded troops that overran Srebrenica, where 7,000 Muslims were reported to
have been massacred. The verdict will be the tribunal's first on whether
genocide was committed in Bosnia from 1992 to 1995.   A7

Progress in Macedonia Talks
Leaders of the Macedonian Slavs and minority Albanians said they had determined
that Albanian, spoken by about a third of the population, would become an
official language with Macedonian.   A5

Last-Ditch Plan for Ulster
Britain and Ireland proposed measures to start I.R.A. disarmament and avert a
breakdown of the power-sharing Northern Ireland Assembly.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A12-18

House Backs Arctic Drilling In Victory for Bush's Plan
The House passed a sweeping energy plan, voting to allow drilling in the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge and rejecting an effort to further raise fuel
efficiency standards for vehicles. Republican leaders managed to preserve major
portions of President Bush's energy plan while defeating environmentalists on
the Alaska and fuel issues.   A1

Deal on Patients' Rights
President Bush and Representative Charlie Norwood, a Georgia Republican, a
dentist and the leader of a six-year effort for patients' rights, agreed on
compromise legislation.   A1

Move to Keep Vieques Open
The House Armed Services Committee approved a measure that would bar the Navy
from closing its Vieques firing range until a suitable replacement was found.
Democrats said that could keep it open for years.   A18

Arrest in Killing Spree
Gary Sampson, 41, was arraigned in Vermont after confessing to three killings
and a series of carjackings in New England, records showed.   A16

Study Faults Death Penalty Use
A study of capital punishment in Nebraska suggests that the death penalty is
applied unequally in rural and urban areas and that defendants whose victims are
affluent are more likely to receive a death sentence.   A15

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Surgery for Epilepsy
Brain surgery is better than prolonged drug therapy for treating the most common
form of epilepsy, according to the first study that directly compared the two
treatments.   A12

Heart Patient Recovering
The first recipient of a self-contained artificial heart is walking, eating some
solid food, exercising lightly and talking a blue streak as he gains strength in
a surprising recovery.   A17

Misgivings Over Cloning
The Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, said he was "very uncomfortable" with
human cloning even for research purposes as he sought to turn the debate back to
embryonic stem cell research, which he and many other Democrats support.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Green Promises No Sequel To Giuliani Administration
Mark Green said in an interview that if he were elected mayor, his
administration would be profoundly different from Mayor Giuliani's. For example,
Mr. Green, a Democrat, would seek to shift some of the Police Department's
overtime budget for fighting crime to social programs for the police and for
crime prevention.   A1

A.A. Statements Protected
A federal judge in White Plains ruled that conversations between members of
Alcoholics Anonymous have the same sort of privilege as contacts between clerics
and parishioners, and he overturned the conviction of a man who killed two
people 13 years ago in Larchmont, N.Y..   B1

CIRCUITS   G1-10

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

EDUCATION

Bush Presses for Schools Bill
President Bush, addressing the National Urban League, urged the House and Senate
to settle their differences and pass final legislation, saying the state of many
urban schools was a "great and continuing scandal" that needed rapid action.
A14

ARTS   E1-10

OBITUARIES   A19

SPORTS   D1-8

Pro Football All-Star Dies
Korey Stringer, 27, an offensive tackle for the Minnesota Vikings, died a day
after collapsing during preseason practice in 90-degree heat.   A1

Heat-related illnesses typically strike young athletes overexerting themselves
in hot, humid weather and elderly people living in houses without
air-conditioning. An athlete exercising in extreme heat can lose a quart or more
of sweat in an hour.   D4

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

New Internet Technology
I.B.M. is announcing a new initiative today to support and exploit grid
computing, which the company and many computer researchers say is the next
evolutionary step in the development of the Internet. In the grid vision,
individual computer users can amass the power of a supercomputer through
networks.   C1

Generic Prozac Set for Market
Barr Laboratories, a generic-drug maker in Pomona, N.Y., that battled Eli Lilly
over patent rights to Prozac, said it expected to gain final F.D.A. approval to
begin shipping a generic version of the antidepressant to pharmacies today.
Lilly said it would appeal to the Supreme Court.   C1

Seeking a Repeat Performance
Theodore J. Forstmann, the financier who revived Gulfstream Aerospace, will try
to do the same for the ailing phone company McLeodUSA by investing an additional
$275 million and calling in some of the Gulfstream makeover team.   C1

Mixed Day for Stocks
The Nasdaq rose 2.03 percent while the S.& P. 500 edged up 0.12 percent and the
Dow slid 0.4 percent.   C7

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: Mrs. Whitman stays the course; the fate of patients' rights; Bill
Berkeley on "Lumumba."

Column: Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E10
Crossword   E9
Weather   D8
Public Lives   B2

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); LEGISLATION (89%);
APPROVALS (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (87%);
WAR CRIMES (87%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (79%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(78%); AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (78%); TRUCK DRIVERS (78%);
TRANSPORTATION REGULATION (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); VETO (76%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (75%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%);
GLOBAL WARMING (74%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (74%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (74%);
EMISSIONS (73%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); FOREIGN POLICY (69%); ARMED
FORCES (69%); GREENHOUSE GASES (68%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (68%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); RANKINGS (65%); WILDLIFE (60%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
(60%); RELIGION (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (56%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: ALASKA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); MEXICO (96%); ISRAEL (93%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER
YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (93%); ALBANIA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); NORTH
AMERICA (92%); ARCTIC (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); IRELAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1470 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2001 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain and Ireland Present 'Final' Ulster Rescue Plan

BYLINE:   By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 1


Britain and Ireland proposed last-ditch measures today aimed at obtaining a
start to disarmament by the Irish Republican Army and thereby preventing a
breakdown of the power-sharing Northern Ireland Assembly later this month.

The two governments called the document "fair, balanced and justified" and asked
leaders from rival Catholic and Protestant parties to decide by Monday whether
it was an acceptable basis for resolving an impasse that is threatening the
home-rule legislature. The assembly was set up by the Good Friday peace
agreement in April 1998 and was intended to end decades of violence between the
two communities by apportioning authority.

The document was released outside Belfast this morning by Ireland's Foreign
Minister, Brian Cowen, and Britain's Northern Ireland Secretary, John Reid, as
funeral services for Gavin Brett, the latest victim of the sectarian violence,
took place just miles away.

Mr. Brett, an 18-year-old Protestant, was killed by Protestant paramilitary
gunmen on Sunday night as he stood talking with Catholic friends outside a
sports stadium near his North Belfast home. More than 3,600 lives have been lost
in the violence of the past three decades.

"Gavin Brett was a young Protestant whose best friend was a young Catholic," Mr.
Reid said. "That, more than any action of politicians, is a sign of hope for the
future of this society in Northern Ireland. All of us politicians and
governments owe it to them and to the hundreds of young people like them that we
have the courage and maturity to work together."

Five days of inconclusive talks last month led by Prime Minister Tony Blair and
his Irish counterpart, Bertie Hearn, yielded today's document, which the two men
described as nonnegotiable.

While the purpose of the document is to break the stalemate in the peace talks
caused by the I.R.A.'s refusal to disarm, the two governments mentioned
disarmament only as an "indispensable part" of any solution and set no timetable
or procedures. That responsibility, the governments said, lay with an
international commission, led by Gen. John de Chastelain of Canada, that was set
up for the purpose.

Instead, the package focused on promised new steps that respond to demands from
Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A., to establish the "context" of
guarantees that the guerrilla group says it needs as a condition for disarming.
It is the hope of London and Dublin that the new commitments will produce an
imminent move from the I.R.A., without which the Catholic-Protestant government
appears doomed.

Protestant party leaders have said they will no longer take part in government
with Sinn Fein if the I.R.A. insists on remaining fully armed. Under the
power-sharing terms of the enacting law, the assembly will come to an end if one
side backs out.

A further hurdle is the expected objections from Protestants, who are likely to
see the new proposals as concessions to Catholics who, in their view, have
already benefited disproportionately from the agreement.

Rising violence across Northern Ireland in recent weeks, with two sectarian
killings, hundreds of firebomb attacks on homes and churches, and sporadic
gunfire across the so-called Peace Line of walls and fences separating Catholics
and Protestants in Belfast, has served as a menacing reminder of what fills
political vacuums in the province.

The current sense of urgency was brought on by the Ulster Unionist leader, David
Trimble; on July 1 he resigned his post as the assembly's first minister to
protest the I.R.A.'s failure to meet its own June deadline for disarming. Mr.
Trimble's move left Britain and Ireland with a legal deadline of Aug. 12 and
three options for action by then: achieve disarmament of the paramilitaries,
suspend the legislature and restore direct rule from London, or hold new
elections, which are liable to put in power Protestant hard-liners opposed to
political cooperation with Catholics.

"No one should underestimate the serious consequences for the stability of the
agreement and for the future of Northern Ireland if we can't find an agreed way
forward before that date," Mr. Reid said.

Among the proposals in today's document aimed at satisfying Catholic demands
were these:

*Making a proposed police force more accountable to Catholic politicians and
more inviting for Catholic recruits. The force would replace the Royal Ulster
Constabulary, which is 92 percent Protestant.

*Establishing a shorter timetable for the reduction of British troops and the
demolishing of army bases and watchtowers overlooking Catholic areas.

*Declaring an amnesty for suspects on the run, in accordance with the
early-release provisions that led to freedom for more than 400 paramilitary
prisoners in the past three years.

*Appointing an international judge to look into killings -- like those of two
human rights lawyers, Pat Finucane and Rosemary Nelson -- where the Royal Ulster
Constabulary has been accused of colluding with their Protestant killers.

In an effort to balance the document with measures that address Protestant
complaints, the package directs the international judge also to look into cases
where the Irish police were accused of aiding I.R.A. murderers. It would also
set up a fund for surviving family members of slain Constabulary officers, more
than 300 of whom have been killed in past three decades, and it promised a
review of the Parades Commission, which has angered Protestants by barring
Orange Order marches through Catholic neighborhoods.

Mr. Cowen, the Irish Foreign Minister, called on politicians to consider the
proposals carefully.

"I accept that each will have difficulties with aspects of what we proposed," he
said. "But taken as a whole, I hope they accept that it will have potential to
deliver what each of them needs."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: August 3, 2001



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a plan
presented by the British and Irish governments to rescue the home rule
government in Ulster misstated the surname of the Irish prime minister. He is
Bertie Ahern, not Hearn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%);
PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); DISARMAMENT (89%); POLITICS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS
(74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); EASTER SEASON (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(70%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (52%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (91%) IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (59%); BRIAN COWEN (53%) HOGE, WARREN

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); DUBLIN, IRELAND
(78%)

COUNTRY: IRELAND (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); NORTHERN IRELAND (94%)

REGION: NORTHERN IRELAND;  IRELAND

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1471 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Verdict Is Due Today in Major Trial on War Crimes in Bosnia

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Aug. 1


Mark Harmon, an American prosecutor, ended his final plea in a quiet voice that
contrasted oddly with the scale of killing that he had just described, the
reported massacre of 7,000 Muslims by Bosnian Serbs who overran Srebrenica in
eastern Bosnia in July 1995.

"Is there any sentence," Mr. Harmon asked the three judges at the United Nations
war crimes tribunal here, "that can be appropriate?"

On Thursday, the judges will deliver what experts consider a significant verdict
on a general at Srebrenica, Radislav Krstic, the highest-ranking Serb to face
judgment so far. The verdict -- the prosecutor is seeking a life sentence --
will represent the tribunal's first ruling on whether genocide was committed in
Bosnia in the war from 1992 to 1995.

General Krstic was a commander of the 15,000-member Drina Corps, which overran
Srebrenica, a town with tens of thousands of Muslims who supposedly enjoyed
United Nations protection.

In the 16-month trial, the prosecution offered evidence that the Drina Corps and
the Bosnian Serb special police took more than 7,500 prisoners, almost all
unarmed men from 13 to 70, during and after the capture of the enclave. Almost
all those men were reportedly executed. Tribunal investigators have exhumed
2,028 bodies from mass graves in the region. An additional 2,500 have been
located.

"In five days, a community was destroyed in eastern Bosnia," Mr. Harmon said in
his closing argument in June. "What was once a vibrant community is no more.
What remains are only the memories."

The allegation that the "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia amounted to genocide and
the execution of civilian prisoners are just two of the charges against General
Krstic. Another concerns the mass deportation of civilians. In front of 300
Dutch peacekeepers, the Bosnian Serbs forced 25,000 to 35,000 people, mostly
women and children, to board buses and leave the territory where their families
had lived for generations.

In his defense, General Krstic has pleaded not guilty and faulted others. He
pointed to Gen. Ratko Mladic, the overall Bosnian Serb military commander in the
war who has been indicted on similar charges and is a fugitive. General Mladic
took over command in the capture of Srebrenica and its aftermath.

General Krstic's lawyers have argued that although numerous killings occurred,
it was impossible to speak of genocide, because thousands of women and children
were spared and transported to safety. The lawyers said the prosecution had
failed to prove that there was a plan or even intent to commit genocide.
According to the tribunal rules, proving intent is the core of proving genocide.

The defense team also insisted that many of those in mass graves were battle
casualties. Prosecutors responded with gruesome images on a large screen in the
courtroom with photographs taken at grave sites that showed skulls with
blindfolds attached to the bones and decayed hands with their bony thumbs and
wrists tied together with wires or strings. Mr. Harmon said 448 blindfolds were
found.

The trial was preceded by five years of investigations and produced the largest
catalogue of extermination presented at the tribunal. More than 100 witnesses,
including survivors and peacekeepers, testified. Prosecutors showed more than
900 exhibits, including intercepts of Bosnian Serb radio messages provided by
Bosnian Muslim forces and forensic reports on human tissue from sites where
prisoners were killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); GENOCIDE (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CHILDREN (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(77%); RELIGION (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); JUDGES (77%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%);
FAMILY (74%); SENTENCING (73%); DEPORTATION (71%); CEMETERIES (65%) WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; HARMON, MARK; KRSTIC, RADISLAV; MLADIC, RATKO

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(87%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1473 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1145 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Bosnian Serb Sentenced To 46 Years for Genocide
Radislav Krstic, a former Bosnian Serb general, was found guilty of genocide for
his role in the systematic execution of more than 7,000 unarmed Muslim men and
boys near the Bosnian town of Srebrenica in July 1995. The verdict by the
international war crimes tribunal at The Hague was its first conviction on a
charge of genocide in the wars that broke up Yugoslavia.   A1

Explosion in West London
A blast, apparently from a car bomb, went off near a subway station, injuring at
least six people.   A4


Gephardt Attacks Bush Policies
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, accused the Bush
administration of being obsessed with missile defense and of pursuing a
unilateralist approach to world affairs. Mr. Gephardt vowed to forge a
bipartisan majority in Congress to block any missile defense system that would
violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty.   A10

Mexico to Retaliate on Trucks
President Vicente Fox said Mexico would bar American trucks from its roads until
Mexican truckers were allowed on American highways. Mr. Fox was reacting to a
United States Senate vote to impose restrictions on Mexican trucks, which
followed a House vote to bar Mexican trucking companies from seeking operating
licenses in the United States.   A5

Findings in Downing of Plane
An inquiry by Peru and the United States concluded that mistakes arising from
poor communications and procedural shortcuts led to the downing of a civilian
plane carrying a missionary family by a Peruvian fighter working with an
American surveillance plane in an antidrug operation. An American woman and her
baby were killed in the April incident.   A4

Russia May Free American
Judicial authorities indicated that John E. Tobin, 24, a Fulbright scholar
imprisoned on marijuana-related charges since February, could be set free today.
At one point, Russian security officials sought to implicate him in espionage.
A10

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-20

New Patients' Rights Rules Win Approval in the House
The House, in a 226-to-203 vote, passed a bill that would create new federal
rights for Americans in managed health care plans, after revising the
legislation to limit lawsuits against insurance companies. The passage was an
important political victory for President Bush, who had complained that earlier
versions of the bill would encourage frivolous lawsuits. Shortly after the vote
the House recessed until Sept. 6.   A1

A Bush Nominee Is Rejected
The Senate Commerce Committee voted on party lines to reject Mary Sheila Gall as
head of the Consumer Product Safety Commission. Democrats said her record on the
board showed a disregard for child safety.   A1

Democrats' Immigration Plan
House and Senate Democrats proposed a policy overhaul that would raise visa
ceilings to reunite immigrant families, let illegal immigrants earn permanent
legal status, and enhance temporary worker programs with greater legal
protections.   A19

Military Base Closings List
The Pentagon announced plans for closing many of the 398 domestic military
bases. The plan, intended to save the military billions of dollars, is likely to
face stiff opposition in Congress.   A16

Gore Getting Back in the Game
Former Vice President Al Gore is easing back into politics, training Democratic
operatives for elections this fall in New Jersey, New York and Virginia and
founding a political action committee to help Congressional candidates in 2002.
A14

Clinton's Next Agenda
Bill Clinton said he would use his presidential library and policy center to
advance themes that were central to his presidency.   A16

Plea in Strip Club Trial
Steven E. Kaplan, owner of the Gold Club in Atlanta, pleaded guilty to one count
of racketeering and agreed to spend three to five years in prison, pay $5
million to the government and give it title to his club, which will be closed
and the property sold.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Ideas for Decency Panel Include Museum Money Cut
A member of Mayor Giuliani's commission on art and decency is suggesting changes
in museum financing. They include giving 10 percent of the budget for major art
institutions to other groups and requiring institutions to adopt an ethics code
similar to the American Association of Museums'. The proposal also accuses the
Department of Cultural Affairs of not properly auditing museums.   A1

Albany Budget Clash
Governor Pataki asserted that the Legislature's stripped-down $79.6 billion
budget -- $4 billion less than what Mr. Pataki had sought -- was
unconstitutional, saying it did not "meet the needs of the people." As
legislators stayed late to cast final votes on the plan, it was unclear whether
the governor would challenge the budget plan in court today.   A1

Police Say Abduction Was Hoax
Karan Kumar, a prominent Nassau County Republican and businessman, was charged
with two misdemeanor counts of making false written statements, arising from his
claims of being kidnapped last month. Officials said he admitted concocting the
tale to prompt an investigation into anonymous criticism of him in fliers and
newspapers.   B1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Dinosaurs Get a Makeover
An Ohio University scientist has concluded that dinosaur nostrils were at the
front of the snout, not higher on the head, a theory that may alter the
understanding of how dinosaurs functioned and appeared.   A1

WEEKEND   E1-28; E29-36

SPORTS   D1-8

EDUCATION

Mixed Report Card on Math
Fourth and eighth graders made modest gains on a math test given periodically,
the National Assessment of Educational Progress; 12th graders' scores declined
slightly.   A14

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

G.M. Goes for a New Look
General Motors hired Robert A. Lutz, the former president of Chrysler, as vice
chairman for product development. G.M. hopes Mr. Lutz, known for championing
distinctive vehicles like the Dodge Viper and PT Cruiser, will add flair to G.M.
designs.   C1

Wachovia Takeover Battle
Shareholders are to determine the winner today in the battle for control of
Wachovia. Analysts and major investors predict that First Union will prevail
over SunTrust Banks.   C1

Microsoft Loses a Round
A federal appeals court refused to reconsider its ruling that Microsoft had
illegally blended its Internet browser with its Windows operating system. The
case next goes to a district judge to decide what sanctions should be imposed --
unless Microsoft moves to appeal to the Supreme Court.   C4

Stocks Post Modest Gains
The Nasdaq rose 19 points, to 2,087.38; the Dow gained 41.17 points, to
10,551.18; and the S.& P. 500 rose 4.82 points, to 1,220.75.   C5

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   A21

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: A new Irish peace bid; signing on to Shays-Meehan; heatstroke deaths
in football; the mayoral race and the poor.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E25
TV Listings   E27
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); LITIGATION (89%); VERDICTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); ESPIONAGE (78%); DRUG POLICY
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); BOMBINGS (76%); PRODUCT SAFETY (75%);
DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (74%); HEALTH CARE (74%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (74%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); LEGISLATION (74%); MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (74%); HEALTH
CARE POLICY (74%); CANNABIS (73%); TRUCK DRIVERS (72%); CLOSINGS (70%);
SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (70%); CHILDREN (69%); FAMILY (69%);
APPROVALS (68%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (68%); TRUCKING (67%); CONSUMER LAW (66%);
HEALTH INSURANCE (66%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (64%); CONSUMER WATCHDOGS (61%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%); INSURANCE (50%); MILITARY
BASES (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (66%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); LONDON, ENGLAND (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); MEXICO (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1474 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge's Words: 'Cleansing Became Genocide'

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 768 words


Following are excerpts from the sentencing judgment read yesterday by Presiding
Judge Almiro Rodrigues, as provided by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia:

It is clear that the principal question which arose was whether genocide was
committed against, in the prosecutor's words, "a part of the Bosnian Muslim
people as a national, ethnical, or religious group." . . .

The fact that serious bodily or mental harm was inflicted on the Bosnian Muslims
or that they were murdered has not been disputed. The Trial Chamber considers
that one also cannot dispute the fact that the victims were chosen because of
their membership in a national group, that is, precisely because they were
Bosnian Muslims. . . .

The Trial Chamber is not stating, nor does it wish to suggest, that a plan to
commit genocide existed prior to the attack on Srebrenica or even right before
the city fell. However, according to the Appeals Chamber decision in the Jelisic
case, a plan of genocide need not have been formed. Nor is it indispensable
that, should such a plan exist, some time must pass between its conception and
its implementation.

What we are asserting here, on the basis of all the evidence presented to us, is
that a decision was first taken to carry out "ethnic cleansing" of the
Srebrenica enclave. . . . However, for reasons the Trial Chamber has been unable
to clarify, the decision was then taken to kill all the men of fighting age. The
result was inevitable: the destruction of the Bosnian Muslim population in
Srebrenica. At issue is not only the commission of murders for political, racial
or religious reasons, which already constitutes a crime of persecution. At issue
is not only extermination of the Bosnian Muslim men of fighting age alone. At
issue is the deliberate decision to kill the men, a decision taken with complete
awareness of the impact the murders would inevitably have on the entire group.
By deciding to kill all the men of Srebrenica of fighting age, a decision was
taken to make it impossible for the Bosnian Muslim people of Srebrenica to
survive.

Stated otherwise, what was ethnic cleansing became genocide. . . .

In order to establish the possible responsibility of General Krstic for these
crimes, the Trial Chamber took account of his position as deputy commander and
then commander of the Drina Corps at the time these crimes were committed. The
Drina Corps, as I have already said, had authority over the entire area in which
the crimes took place. . . .

On the evening of 13 July, I repeat -- 13 July -- you took command of the Drina
Corps and signed your first order as the corps commander around 20.30 hours. On
14 July, you launched the attack on Zepa. Nonetheless, you remained perfectly
well informed of what was going on in the area to the north of the town of
Srebrenica. In the night of 14-15 July, troops from the Zvornik Brigade part of
the Drina Corps moved up from Zepa toward Srebrenica, and you knew why they were
doing that. On 15 July in the morning, the security chief of the Main Staff
called you and asked for your help in dealing with "3,500 packages."

You knew exactly what was meant by "packages," General Krstic -- Bosnian Muslims
who were to be executed. You expressed your displeasure. That same officer told
you that the MUP forces, the Interior Ministry police, did not want to do it.
You said you would see what you could do. On 16 July, some of your subordinates,
men from the Bratunac Brigade, participated in the mass executions at the
Branjevo military farm. On 16 July, the security chief of the Drina Corps whose
commander you were, continued to keep you informed about the situation. You
asserted to the Trial Chamber that, subsequently, you wanted to take measures
against that officer, but out of fear of reprisals against yourself or, more
specifically against your family, you decided not to. The Trial Chamber,
however, found nothing to confirm your assertions. Not a single soldier of the
Drina Corps was punished for the murder of one or several Bosnian Muslims. On
the contrary. . . . General Krstic, you were seen being congratulated for the
action you took in Srebrenica. You were seen right next to General Mladic, when
in December 1995 a ceremony was organized for the Drina Corps. . . .

You are guilty of the persecution suffered by the Bosnian Muslims of Srebrenica.
Knowing that the women, children and old people of Srebrenica had been
transferred, you are guilty of having agreed to the plan to conduct mass
executions of all the men of fighting age. You are therefore guilty of genocide,
General Krstic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); SENTENCING (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); EVIDENCE (77%); ARMED FORCES (64%);
MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%)

PERSON: KRSTIC, RADISLAV

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1479 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 7, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEW I.R.A. STANCE ON ARMS IS HAILED AS BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE:  By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1386 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 6


The Irish Republican Army has agreed to a method of destroying its arsenal that
Britain and Ireland hailed today as the long-sought breakthrough needed to push
forward the stalled Northern Ireland peace accord.

Words like "significant" and "historic" were used to describe the development by
Prime Minister Tony Blair and his Irish counterpart, Bertie Ahern, who are
struggling to save the three-year-old agreement from collapse.

But Protestant leaders in the embattled province expressed skepticism, welcoming
the move but questioning whether an announcement of intent rather than actual
weapons destruction would break the deadlock.

The I.R.A. plan was announced today by the international commission responsible
for the disarming of paramilitary forces in Northern Ireland. Details of what
the I.R.A. had agreed to were not disclosed, and the crucial matter of when
actual disarmament might begin was left unaddressed.

However, the commission chairman, Gen. John de Chastelain of Canada, said the
proposals had been accepted by the panel as ones that would "put I.R.A. arms
completely and verifiably beyond use."

The announcement of the I.R.A. plan came just hours before Northern Ireland's
political parties were to decide whether to accept a British-Irish package of
measures given them last Wednesday in an effort to avoid the shutdown of the
Northern Ireland Assembly. The legislature is the centerpiece of a government
set up in Belfast by the April 1998 peace agreement that seeks to end decades of
violent conflict between Protestants and Catholics by apportioning political
power between them.

The Ulster Unionists, the province's largest party, had said they would no
longer take part in the assembly if the I.R.A. did not begin disarming. It was
the protest resignation last month of the party's leader, David Trimble, as the
assembly's first minister that set off the current scramble to break the arms
impasse.

Protestant distrust of the commitment of the I.R.A. to the peace effort, and
that of its political wing, Sinn Fein, has grown, fueled largely by the
guerrilla group's refusal to disarm and by a perception among Protestants that
Catholics have gained more from the negotiations than they have.

Tonight, Mr. Trimble emerged from a two-hour meeting of officers of his party in
Belfast to say that they would need more time to decide whether the new I.R.A.
stance on decommissioning, as disarmament is called in Northern Ireland, would
change their attitude.

"In the absence of actual decommissioning, then there is nothing at present for
Ulster Unionists to respond to," he said.

Other parties said they too would ignore today's deadline, and neither the
British nor Irish governments objected, effectively postponing action on their
package of measures until later this week.

A spokeswoman for Prime Minister Blair said, "We hoped that people would respond
today, but people have said they want more time, so we will wait."

Prime Minister Ahern urged the Ulster Unionists to accept the development as the
elusive breakthrough they had been seeking. "People should see the historic
significance rather than trying to see difficulties in it," he said.

He held out the possibility that actual disarmament might follow soon.
"Hopefully over the next number of days, perhaps the outstanding issue of the
commencement of that process, hopefully, will also move on," he told RTE Radio
in Dublin.

From Mexico, where he and his family are on holiday, Mr. Blair sent word that in
his view "this is an important step forward which I warmly welcome and on which
I hope we can build rapidly."

His Northern Ireland secretary, John Reid, said, "I believe it provides the
basis and potential for rapidly resolving the arms issue."

The arms issue has been a continual stumbling block in the Northern Ireland
peace negotiations, and in the three years since the accord was reached there
has been a series of crisis talks to try to solve it. Since the de Chastelain
commission was created in 1997, it has waited in vain for the I.R.A. and
Protestant guerrilla groups to begin scrapping weapons under its supervision.

The announcement today came after meetings between the commission and a
representative of the I.R.A. A commission spokesman would not elaborate on the
I.R.A. plan other than to say that it satisfied demands that the method pose "no
risk to the public and avoid the possibility of misappropriation by others."

The I.R.A. has maintained a cease-fire for four years, but disaffected members
of the organization have formed new dissident groups like the Real I.R.A. that
have planted bombs and launched mortar attacks to try to disrupt the peace
effort. The "misappropriation" concern aims at keeping the renegades from
gaining access to I.R.A. bunkers whose locations they know.

Early Friday, in what was the seventh such incident in London in the last 18
months, the Real I.R.A. set off a car bomb, injuring 11 people and destroying
shops and buildings in Ealing Broadway, a busy West London neighborhood. Among
those condemning it was Sinn Fein, which has an active interest in keeping the
powers-sharing government alive.

The current package of proposals, described as a take-it-or-leave-it document,
was produced by Britain and Ireland after five days of talks last month led by
Mr. Ahern and Mr. Blair failed to produce any progress on disarmament. Its main
provisions included promises to Sinn Fein of a stepped-up reduction of the
British military presence in the North; independent investigations of the
killings of human rights lawyers where Catholics suspect collusion with security
forces; amnesty for suspects still on the run; and a more thoroughgoing reform
of the predominantly Protestant police service to make it more acceptable to
Catholics.

The original peace pact set a goal of total paramilitary disarmament by
mid-2000. When that deadline lapsed, a new one of June 2001 was set. It was when
that date passed that Mr. Trimble stepped down as the assembly's first minister
in protest against the I.R.A.'s unwillingness to act on guns.

That resignation set in place a timetable that expires at midnight Saturday. By
then, Britain and Ireland, the two sponsors of the peace talks, must either
obtain a start to disarmament accepted by all parties, suspend the assembly and
restore direct rule from London, or hold new legislative elections that they
fear will put into power people who oppose dividing power among Protestants and
Catholics.

In the weapons dispute, the most attention has been paid to the I.R.A., because
it is by far the most heavily armed force and is the only one with political
allies -- Sinn Fein -- participating in government. How, the objectors say, can
you let a party remain active in a political forum while it has a fully armed
guerrilla force standing behind it?

Meanwhile, Protestant guerrilla groups have said they will not disarm until the
I.R.A. does.

In recent months, pressure had been growing on the I.R.A. and Sinn Fein for a
move on disarmament, with Catholic leaders in the North, Irish politicians and
the Irish press all joining in the calls.

Gerry Adams, the party's president, tried today to shift that pressure to his
Protestant rivals. "Once again, the I.R.A. has demonstrated its commitment to
the search for a lasting peace," he said. "The other parties need to match that
commitment and should respond positively and constructively."

British security officials estimate that the I.R.A. possesses three tons of
Semtex explosive, 1,000 rifles and 600 handguns in addition to mortars,
launchers and other military materiel. Secret dumps have been checked twice by
two international weapons monitors -- Martti Ahtisaari of Finland and Cyril
Ramaphosa of South Africa -- who have reported back to the commission that the
weapons are securely stored and cannot be removed undetected.

The manner of their destruction has been a crucial issue in the Northern Ireland
political struggle. The I.R.A. is unwilling to surrender its weapons because it
associates that with defeat.

One proposal reportedly under consideration -- sealing bunkers with concrete --
was unacceptable to Protestant politicians, who argued that it would not put
weapons permanently out of use. Their counterproposal -- that the arms be
destroyed by chemicals -- was rejected by the I.R.A.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: On a day of movement in the Ulster standoff, graffiti in Belfast
yesterday reflected a republican viewpoint. (Associated Press)(pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (89%); POLITICS (89%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (89%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
RELIGION (76%); BONE FRACTURES (75%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (70%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (64%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (93%); SINN FEIN (59%) IRISH REPUBLICAN
ARMY; SINN FEIN

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%); BERTIE AHERN (58%) HOGE, WARREN; DE CHASTELAIN, JOHN
(GEN)

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); IRELAND (94%); CANADA
(79%)

REGION: NORTHERN IRELAND;  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1491 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 11, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serb Officer Arrested on War Crimes Charges

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: BANJA LUKA, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Aug. 10


NATO-led peacekeepers arrested a Bosnian Serb army colonel today who commanded a
brigade in eastern Bosnia during the 1992-95 war, the Bosnian Serb Interior
Ministry said.

The officer, Col.

Vidoje Blagojevic, 51, was immediately transferred to the United Nations
tribunal in The Hague, which has indicted him on two counts of genocide, five
counts of crimes against humanity and one count of violating the laws and
customs of war.

Colonel Blagojevic led an infantry and engineering brigade of the Bosnian Serb
Drina Corps, which operated in Bratunac and Srebrenica, an area in eastern
Bosnia that was stripped of its non-Serbian population. More than 7,000 Muslim
men disappeared after Srebrenica fell to Serbian forces in July 1995.

An association of Srebrenica survivors said today that Colonel Blagojevic was
responsible for "genocide in Bratunac in 1992 and in Srebrenica in 1995." The
group accused him of killing 1,800 Muslim men in Bratunac in 1992 and blamed him
for the Srebrenica massacre.

Since the transfer of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader, to The
Hague in June, the Serbian republic in Bosnia has been under international
pressure to arrest and hand over war crimes suspects in its territory. But
Bosnian Serb officials said the colonel's arrest could hinder efforts to
persuade politicians to approve a law establishing formal cooperation with the
tribunal.

The Bosnian Serb Parliament is to vote on the law in September.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARMIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); INDICTMENTS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); ARMED FORCES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); APPROVALS
(72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

PERSON: BLAGOJEVIC, VIDOJE (COL)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); SERBIA (93%);
NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1503 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 16, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: War-Crimes Suspect Surrenders

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 84 words


A Bosnian Serb army officer surrendered to the United Nations war-crimes
tribunal to face charges of murder and persecution of Muslims while serving near
the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica in 1995, where more than 7,000 Muslims
were massacred. Lt. Col. Dragan Jokic turned himself in at the court's Banja
Luka office in Bosnia and was flown to the Netherlands, site of the tribunal,
where he has been accused of four counts of crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); LAW OF WAR (88%); ARMIES (88%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); RELIGION (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JOKIC, DRAGAN (LT COL)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (67%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1506 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 17, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Mean-Spirited U.N. Conference

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 462 words


The United Nations World Conference Against Racism, which will take place later
this month in South Africa, is one of those meetings that make people wonder
about the usefulness of the U.N. Originally conceived as a forum to examine how
to combat contemporary forms of racism, the meeting now threatens to dissolve
into an unproductive debate about reparations payments for slavery, condemnation
of Israel and such topics as whether the word "Holocaust" should be capitalized.

The Bush administration, impatient with the unruly preparations, has thought
about boycotting the gathering. It would be better to send a delegation and to
press for a responsible outcome. If the American representatives cannot rally
the meeting to endorse a sensible and humane set of principles, they can
withhold American support for the final conference declaration.

While some of the side issues have drawn the most publicity, the meeting's
primary problem is that all participants are trying to eliminate any mention of
their own acts of intolerance, especially cases that could eventually force them
to make payments to those wronged. Washington has worried about talk of
reparations for slavery, India is trying to keep issues of caste off the agenda,
and most European nations want no mention of Gypsies. The draft's discussion of
refugees, who face discrimination worldwide, is sadly inadequate.

Even if the conference ends up producing an anodyne declaration, some good could
still come out of it. The process has already helped to create a global civil
rights movement, as activists for the dispossessed everywhere meet each other
and work together. It is helpful, for example, for untouchables in India or
Gypsies to hear people around the world endorse their struggle and see
themselves as part of a global movement. Conference participants will have to
appoint officials whose job is to monitor and enforce national progress on
combating racism.

Preparations for the conference have also been warped by an argument about
Israel. Arab countries are irresponsibly proposing that the conference single
out Israel for criticism and endorse a statement condemning "the Zionist
movement which is based on racial superiority." The Bush administration is
rightly incensed by these efforts and must use its influence to block them. If
that fails, Washington should not sign the final declaration.

Were the conference more promising, Secretary of State Colin Powell might
consider leading the American delegation. At this point, however, his presence
would lend the gathering a distinction it has not earned. But America should be
represented. Despite the meeting's many defects, the conference can help
identify and stigmatize racist practices and boost those who fight for
tolerance.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (92%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HOLOCAUST (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); REFUGEES (73%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST
RACISM;  EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (93%); INDIA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (91%);
EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1507 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 17, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mideast Misconception

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 167 words


To the Editor:

The attempt by Mary Robinson, the United Nations commissioner for human rights,
to equate the "historical wounds of anti-Semitism and of the Holocaust" with the
Palestinians' "accumulated wounds of displacement and military occupation"
distorts reality (news article, Aug. 12).

The attempted symmetry is totally misplaced.

The systematic effort to exterminate the Jewish people stands on its own. The
Palestinian situation is not comparable. A Palestinian state was offered by the
United Nations in 1947, but was rejected in favor of war against the fledgling
Jewish state. Last year, Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, rejected a
historic offer that could have settled the conflict and instead chose violence.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is fundamentally a political conflict, and
thus, contrary to what Ms. Robinson said, has no place on the agenda of the
United Nations conference on racism.

DAVID A. HARRIS
Executive Director
American Jewish Committee
New York, Aug. 12, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (88%); DISPLACED PERSONS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (67%) PALESTINIANS;  NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND
MINORITIES;  JEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE (83%) UNITED
NATIONS; AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE

PERSON: ROBINSON, MARY; HARRIS, DAVID A

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); UNITED STATES
(92%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: MIDDLE EAST

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1508 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 18, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sex Bias Alleged in City's Vocational Schools

BYLINE:  By ABBY GOODNOUGH

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 700 words


New York City's vocational high schools are deeply segregated by sex, with most
girls enrolled in programs leading to "traditionally female" careers like
cosmetology and boys predominating in schools geared toward high-tech,
higher-paying jobs, a women's rights group has charged.

In a letter to Schools Chancellor Harold O. Levy this week, the National Women's
Law Center in Washington complained that the Board of Education operates
"virtually a dual system of vocational high schools for male and female
students."

According to the law center, 9 of the city's 18 vocational-technical high
schools had student bodies that were more than 70 percent male in the 1999-2000
school year, while 4 had student bodies that were more than 70 percent female.

The schools with predominantly female enrollments offer vocational programs
leading to jobs like cosmetology, nursing assistance and clerical support, said
Marcia D. Greenberger, co-president of the law center. In contrast, she said,
the schools that enroll mostly male students offer "many high-tech programs that
lead to high-wage work," like mechanical engineering and computer repair.

Ms. Greenberger said that in allowing vocational schools to remain segregated,
the Board of Education was violating Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972, which prohibits sex discrimination in programs that receive federal money.

Karen Finney, a spokeswoman for Mr. Levy, said yesterday that the chancellor was
taking the complaint seriously. She said that Mr. Levy was trying to improve the
infamously confusing process of choosing a high school in New York City, and
that one of the goals is for all students to have "the full range of
information" about every option.

Among the troubling aspects of the vocational programs with overwhelmingly
female student bodies is that none provide advanced placement courses in math or
science, Ms. Greenberger said. In their letter to Mr. Levy, the law center
leaders also charged that many vocational schools send signals that they want
only male students. For example, they wrote, at a high school fair last fall,
Samuel Gompers High School in the Bronx, whose student body is 83 percent male,
had a banner over its recruiting table that read, "Gompers Builds Mechanical
Men."

To stop the inequities, Ms. Greenberger said, the board should offer not only
more advanced placement courses but more courses geared toward high-tech careers
in the four vocational schools with predominantly female enrollments. Those
schools are Fashion Industries High School in Manhattan, William H. Maxwell High
School in Brooklyn, and Jane Addams High School and Grace H. Dodge High School,
both in the Bronx. She said the predominantly male schools should also work
harder to recruit female students and make them feel welcome.

This is not the first time the Board of Education has been accused of allowing
sex discrimination in its vocational education system. In 1982, the State
Education Department charged that the city's vocational schools were
discriminating against female students in counseling, recruiting, admissions and
overall treatment. The board agreed to make changes to comply with the law and
for a few years, the number of female students at traditionally male vocational
schools increased.

But of the nine vocational schools whose student bodies were more than 70
percent male in 1999-2000, only one, Thomas A. Edison High School in Queens, has
increased its female enrollment significantly since 1993, Ms. Greenberger said.
Three of the schools -- Samuel Gompers, Aviation High School in Queens and
Transit Tech High School in Brooklyn -- actually saw a decline in female
enrollment, she said. The center used 1999-2000 enrollment figures because the
board has not yet published figures from last year.

Overall enrollment in the city's vocational high schools has dwindled, partly
because of the increasing pressure to raise academic standards and prepare all
students for college. Instead of focusing almost exclusively on preparation for
specific trades, the schools must prepare students for the rigorous Regents
examinations that the state now requires every student to pass before high
school graduation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VOCATIONAL & TECHNICAL TRAINING (95%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (91%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); HIGH SCHOOLS (90%);
PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%);
GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); EDUCATION
LAW (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); WOMEN (78%); ADVANCED
PLACEMENT PROGRAMS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ENGINEERING (74%);
EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES
(72%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (66%) EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;  WOMEN;
DISCRIMINATION;  EQUAL EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES;  VOCATIONAL TRAINING

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER (83%) NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER

PERSON: GOODNOUGH, ABBY

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (97%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1517 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 22, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: Not Guilty, Bosnian Serb Says

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 93 words


A Bosnian Serb army officer pleaded not guilty at the war crimes tribunal in The
Hague to charges of killing Muslims in the United Nations "safe area" of Bosnia
in 1995. Lt. Col. Dragan Jokic was charged with four counts of crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws and customs of war in the killing of more
than 7,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica.  Prosecutors say Colonel Jokic,
chief engineer of the Zvornik Brigade, assisted the massacre and the burial of
victims by providing the army with excavators, spotlights and communication
devices.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW OF WAR (88%); RELIGION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS
EQUIPMENT (50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JOKIC, DRAGAN (LT COL)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1520 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 22, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Murder or Self-Defense?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 153 words


To the Editor:

Re "Making Rules in the World Between War and Peace" (Week in Review, Aug. 19):

Legal experts disagree on whether assassination of political adversaries is
illegal murder or permissible self-defense.

While international violence remains unchecked by clearer laws and effective
legal institutions designed to discourage such violence, innocent victims will
continue to be killed.

The international criminal court now being formed at the United Nations, despite
opposition by the United States, aims to deter such crimes against humanity. The
new court will build on the hopes espoused by the United States at the Nuremberg
war crimes trials that looked to international law to maintain peace and
security for all. To stop unrestrained violence, let us never forget that law is
always better than war.

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
New Rochelle, N.Y., Aug. 19, 2001

The writer was a Nuremberg war crimes prosecutor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ASSASSINATION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); NEWS BRIEFS (72%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); MURDER (56%)
PALESTINIANS;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ISRAEL
(79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1531 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 26, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Black Canada Lifts Its Voice and Seeks the World Stage

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: HALIFAX, Nova Scotia


On the edge of Atlantic Canada, far from the American South and the
slave-trading ports of Africa, a long-established community of black Canadians
is beginning to join calls for reparations for slavery and for greater
recognition of their history.

Like civil rights campaigners in the United States, black Canadians want their
voices to be heard in Durban, South Africa, at the end of August at the United
Nations international conference on racism and discrimination. That is
especially true in this port city, where a once strong black community is in the
midst of a cultural revival.

The black residents of greater Halifax -- in the old city itself, across the
harbor in Dartmouth and in the semirural township of Preston -- form one of the
oldest and largest black populations in Canada, their leaders say. Black
immigrants arrived along with the French, British and Scottish settlers of the
British colonial era.

"Well, you won't hear much about us on the regular tours," said Carolyn Thomas,
as she guided a visitor around the Citadel, the fort that looms over the town of
Halifax. Black residents say it may have been built in large part with forced
labor by the Jamaican Maroons, sent here in the late 18th century because they
were troublesome to the British in the Caribbean.

Although most of the Maroons were again forcibly moved, to help colonize Sierra
Leone a few years later, hundreds managed to stay.

That is part of what Ms. Thomas calls "the other half of the story" of Halifax.
In the mid-1990's, she and her husband, Matthew, distressed because black Nova
Scotia seemed invisible, took early retirement from their government jobs to
start Black Heritage Tours. It is still a two-person operation.

A former teacher and government affirmative action director, Ms. Thomas, 58,
said she had not been able to increase significantly the participation of black
residents or the inclusion of their history in the mainline tourism industry,
which is important to the local economy. The struggle continues, she added.

"All traces of segregation were not removed from our statutes until 1954," she
said, about the same time as the Supreme Court decision in the United States
outlawing school segregation. Before that, most black students here had no
opportunity to go beyond eighth grade, she said, and, "that denial included the
denial of our history."

A conference on racism and discrimination -- a kind of warm-up for Durban -- was
held here in early August. Among the organizers of the Halifax conference was
Esmeralda Thornhill, who holds a chair in black Canadian studies at Dalhousie
University in Halifax. She told a local newspaper that if governments could
address the Holocaust, the incarceration of Japanese during World War II and the
forced movements of indigenous people, then "reparation talks for slavery are
needed to address the legacy of colonialism."

Black Canadians, whose ancestors were enslaved under both British and American
rule, fear that their government will join the United States in trying to keep
the issue off the agenda.

Greater Halifax has 12,000 to 15,000 black residents out of a population of
close to 400,000. Their ancestors include slaves freed by the British in
colonial America in return for their labor or willingness to fight for England
in the Revolutionary War or in the War of 1812. Others escaped slavery along the
Underground Railroad, often with help from Quakers.

"In my grandmother's house there was always a picture of the Quakers," Ms.
Thomas said. "It was in my mother's house, too. Like by osmosis, it became part
of my life. The picture now hangs over my computer."

Some people owned slaves in Nova Scotia, but slavery was not much in evidence by
the time it was abolished throughout the British Empire in the 1830's. Black
residents here say that there are enduring wounds, though.

When their ancestors arrived, they were given far smaller plots of land than
white Loyalists, and rural townships where they were settled lacked basic
services.

Ms. Thomas said that when she taught school three decades ago in Preston, there
was no bus service or snow plow. Community leaders shoveled their way to the end
of the bus line to take her to school.

The story of Africville is not a happy one. Black historians say it was settled
by blacks in 1796 on a lush meadow beside Bedford Bay, outside Halifax. It was
bulldozed away in the 1960's to make room for an approach to a bridge and other
development. Many families who had built homes over several generations,
scraping together savings from their wages as servants and porters, were moved.
A park called Seaview was built where their community once stood. The name
Africville disappeared from the map.

"The destruction of our community meant the loss of the physical -- the land;
the spiritual -- our church, and the community -- the people," said Irvine
Carvery, president of the Africville Genealogy Society, founded to keep its
history alive. "These three things had worked in harmony, cultivating the
heritage and culture that allowed us to survive over two hundred years of
exclusion and marginalization with a sense of worth and dignity."

Pictures and objects from old Africville are on display at the Black Cultural
Center for Nova Scotia in Dartmouth, where black history has been reconstructed
from the limited documents available, along with the stories of a rich oral
tradition handed down through families and churches.

The center, which has grown steadily since its opening in 1983, promotes the
achievements of local black heroes. They include church leaders like the
19th-century pastor Richard Preston, founder of the African United Baptist
Association, a strong force for development in the region. It has a library and
works by black artisans on display and offers musical performances to schools.

Linda Carvery, a Nova Scotian singer and actress, called the impact of the
center phenomenal. On a recent morning, she brought her grandson, Dwayne
Carvery, 8, to look at the exhibits. "To see these things is wonderful for our
self-esteem, our being," Ms. Carvery said.

Like some other black Canadians, Ms. Carvery said she regretted that black
Americans did not seem aware of these communities.

Matthew Thomas recalled that some years ago, when he and his wife were invited
to speak at the Canadian Embassy in Washington, a black American asked
afterward, "Where did you say you were from?" When he answered, "Nova Scotia,"
the response was, "We didn't know we went up that far."

Mr. Thomas said he told them, "Well, we've got news for you."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Caroline and Matthew Thomas, distressed because black Nova
Scotia seemed invisible, started Black Heritage Tours to tell the region's
story. (Photographs by Barbara Crossette/The New York Times) Map of Nova Scotia
highlighting Halifax: The black community in Halifax is in the midst of a
cultural revival.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); SLAVERY (90%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION
(89%); FORCED LABOR (78%); SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%);
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); HISTORIC SITES (77%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
(76%); GENOCIDE (76%); HOLOCAUST (71%); IMMIGRATION (71%); RETIREMENT & RETIREES
(71%); CIVIL SERVICES (68%); EARLY RETIREMENT (63%); ACTION & ADVENTURE FILMS
(62%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (62%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (61%); WORLD WAR II (60%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (50%); SUPREME COURTS (50%); APPEALS (50%); TOURISM (50%)
HISTORY;  BLACKS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); CITADEL (55%)

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; THOMAS, CAROLINE; THOMAS, MATTHEW

STATE: NOVA SCOTIA, CANADA (94%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); AFRICA (92%);
SOUTH AFRICA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: CANADA;  CANADA;  HALIFAX (NOVA SCOTIA)

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1534 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 28, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Schools Official to Investigate Treatment of Asian Students

BYLINE:  By YILU ZHAO

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 438 words


Schools Chancellor Harold O. Levy has assigned a superintendent to look into
possible discrimination against Asian immigrant students at Lafayette High
School in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, school officials said yesterday.

Last September, five Chinese students beginning their senior year were forced to
leave Lafayette without prior notice on the ground that they had completed their
graduation requirements. The students, however, did not want to leave because
they felt they needed more preparation for college.

After a petition drive by scores of Chinese students angry at the dismissals,
the Board of Education let the dismissed students return to Lafayette to
complete their senior year. The students have complained that the treatment of
the dismissed students reflects wider hostility toward Asian-Americans at the
school.

To examine conditions at the school, Chancellor Levy assigned Ronald Woo, the
superintendent of monitoring for the school system, to produce a report and some
recommendations by Oct. 1 about improving race relations at the school, said
Margie Feinberg, a spokeswoman for Mr. Levy.

The school system has taken other steps to address the concerns. Reyes Irizarry,
the superintendent of Brooklyn and Staten Island high schools, issued a plan
recommending that the first fall-semester letter to parents be translated into
various languages. He also recommended that the school's new acting principal --
the fifth in five years -- hold monthly parent forums. And he called for
improvement in the school's multicultural education programs. The plan was
posted on the Internet last week.

Mr. Irizarry said that any future decision to dismiss a student before the end
of his or her senior year at Lafayette has to be cleared with him before being
carried out. But he would not guarantee that dismissals like the ones that
happened last September would not occur again.

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund, a civil rights group in
Manhattan, is conducting its own investigation of racial discrimination at the
school, and is considering filing a civil rights lawsuit in Federal District
Court or with the federal Department of Education, said Sinyen Ling, a legal
fellow with the organization.

"Does the education system in the New York City school system know how to deal
with a growing number of non-English-speaking students?" Ms. Ling said. "I think
the answer is 'no' at this point."

Ms. Ling and one of the five dismissed students, Wen Jie Li, said that the
Department of Justice had called them to inquire about the incidents at
Lafayette. A call to the Justice Department was not returned.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); HIGH
SCHOOLS (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); ASIAN AMERICANS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%);
EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (79%); SCHOOL
SUPERINTENDENTS (79%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (77%);
PETITIONS (76%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (61%) EDUCATION AND
SCHOOLS;  ASIAN-AMERICANS;  DISCRIMINATION

PERSON: ZHAO, YILU; LEVY, HAROLD O (CHANCELLOR); WOO, RONALD

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (96%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1537 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 29, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Teaching the Taliban About Human Rights

BYLINE:  By Karl F. Inderfurth; Karl F. Inderfurth, a senior associate at the
Institute for Global Engagement, was assistant secretary of state for South
Asian affairs from 1997 to 2001.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: MC LEAN, Va.


The Taliban of Afghanistan, whose name comes from talib, "religious student,"
seem to have declared war on religion.

Twenty-four aid workers -- 16 Afghans and eight foreigners, including two
Americans -- have been arrested by the Taliban on charges of spreading
Christianity. All were working to provide food and medical assistance to people
facing famine and dislocation. Periodic massacres of Shiite Muslims have been
reported. The Shiites, who number several million in Afghanistan, are considered
little better than infidels by the Taliban, who are Sunni Muslims. In May,
Hindus in Afghanistan were ordered to wear yellow identification badges to
distinguish them from Muslims (under intense international criticism, the
Taliban later backed down to the extent of deciding only identification cards
would be required). Earlier, the Taliban embarked on a campaign to destroy all
"un-Islamic idols," including two giant Buddha statues in Bamiyan.

Is there a way to persuade the Taliban to pursue a path of greater tolerance?
Given the Taliban's suspicion of the West, the more logical persuaders may be
fellow Muslims and Islamic governments. They are in the best position to speak
with the Taliban about the interpretation of their faith and of the Koran.
Indeed, it would not be appropriate for non-Muslims to presume to give
instruction on these matters.

Nearly one of every five people in the world is Muslim. Fifty-five nations make
up the Organization of the Islamic Conference. For some time the Islamic world
has declined to condemn Taliban extremism, with Iran, which is predominantly
Shiite, being the notable exception. But that silence was broken with the
Taliban's assault on the Buddhist statues. Muslim leaders from Turkey to
Malaysia and across the Middle East criticized the Taliban's actions. Although
they were unsuccessful in blocking the destruction of those treasures, Muslim
political and religious leaders remain in a position to urge the Taliban to show
respect for the diversity of Islam and the Koran in building a civil society
that is religiously tolerant. If the Taliban move in this direction, Muslim
states could take steps to increase educational, medical and other humanitarian
efforts in Afghanistan.

Of particular importance among Muslim nations are the three that have recognized
the Taliban as legitimate rulers, the only countries in the world to do so.
These countries -- Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates -- have
leverage with the Taliban and could help improve conditions by making it clear
that they would consider withdrawing their formal recognition if the Taliban
continue in their war on other religions -- which is a distortion of Islam.

The United States and the broader international community, of course, have an
important role in alleviating the desperate situation of Afghanistan's people.
The United States has committed $124 million in aid this year, making it the
largest humanitarian donor to Afghanistan. As Secretary of State Colin Powell
has said, America must "help the neediest wherever they may be."

Muslims, however, have a central opportunity to address the tragedy that is
Afghanistan today. Although convincing the Taliban to become more tolerant and
respectful of their own people, including women and girls, would not answer all
the concerns of the international community about this movement, it would be a
welcome beginning.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); FOOD CHARITIES (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MEDICAID (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
HINDUS & HINDUISM (78%); FAMINE (78%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (78%); QURAN &
ISLAMIC TEXTS (76%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%);
ARRESTS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE (54%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); MALAYSIA (79%); TURKEY (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1541 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Algeria: Suit Against France

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 91 words


A group of Algerians who fought for the French in their country's war of
independence filed a suit for crimes against humanity, charging that France had
abandoned them to violent reprisals. Their complaint to the Paris High Court
contends that France betrayed them when it pulled out of Algeria following the
1954-62 battle against colonial rule, leaving them to face torture and massacre
by victorious revolutionary forces. An estimated 150,000 of the so-called
harkis, who faced accusations of treason for siding with the French, were
killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (92%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
TREASON (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); TORTURE (85%) SUITS AND LITIGATION

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (73%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (93%); AFRICA (91%)

REGION: ALGERIA;  FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1547 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 2, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
The Slave Reparations Movement Adopts the Rhetoric of Victimhood

BYLINE:  By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 867 words


My great-grandfather John Wesley Staples was born in Bedford County, Va., on
July 4, 1865. Independence Day of that year was laden with symbolism because it
heralded the end of slavery through the 13th Amendment. Family legend has it
that John Wesley was one of the first free Negroes born in his county. But three
of his siblings were born into slavery, as was his mother, Somerville, who was
known in the family as an Ethiopian.

Slavery is nearer to us in time than most Americans understand. My eldest uncle,
who turns 84 this year, has often recalled meeting former slaves when he was a
boy at John Wesley's farm in Troutville, Va. Had John Wesley lived to my uncle's
age, he would had seen the beginning of the civil rights movement and met the
great-grandson who would later become an editorial writer for The New York
Times.

The post-slavery South was especially brutal for elderly black people who had
given their working lives to their masters and could no longer care for
themselves. Freedom, such as it was, was further circumscribed during the late
19th century, when Southern states were writing Negroes out of the state
constitutions, denying them the right to vote, hold office or attend school. The
trend was deepened by sharecropping and other forms of bondage.

Black Americans often suppressed slave memories out of horror and shame. But the
Staples family embraced its story out of pride in how well John Wesley and his
wife, Eliza, managed to fare in the aggressively racist environment of the South
in the late 19th century and early 20th century. My great-grandparents had the
benefit of a strong extended family, allowing them to pool resources, including
manpower. The Staples family protected the farm and John Wesley's wholesaling
business with shotguns and pistols that were evident even at the dinner table.
With no school available for black children, John Wesley and Eliza joined with
their neighbors and built one in a field at the intersection of their three
properties.

The teacher is listed in my great-aunt Sophronia's grade school composition book
as a "Miss Marion B. Brown." She worked at the one-room school in return for
room and board from the families. When John Wesley died in 1940, he left behind
a literate family, a thriving farm and $40,000 in cash -- a small fortune by
standards of the time. This achievement paved the way for my father's generation
and mine, which included the first college-bound members of the Staples family
line.

Black Americans made spectacular progress beginning in the decades after
slavery, moving from cotton fields to the boardroom in just over a century. But
the recent debate about reparations for slavery has introduced a different
narrative in which black people are cast as a victim class seeking compensation
for the suffering of ancestors. The most popular version of the reparations
proposal is found in "The Debt: What America Owes to Blacks," by the Africa
analyst Randall Robinson. The book has gained surprising credibility on the
political left while generating a considerable backlash among moderate and
conservative black intellectuals.

Targeted compensation is legal and morally just. The state of Florida made the
right gesture in 1994 when it gave college scholarships to descendants from the
black community of Rosewood, which was destroyed by whites in 1923 while the
state did nothing. The federal government has rightly compensated modern-day
Native Americans for lands taken from them in the last century. Supporters of
reparations have at least a moral case when they argue that companies that
enriched themselves in slavery should attempt restitution when documents are
specific enough to permit it.

But the sweeping notion that individual black Americans are owed a "debt" for
slavery is a bridge too far. Black families have made and lost fortunes just as
white families have. There is in addition no provable connection between
19th-century bondage and specific cases of 21st-century destitution. For these
reasons, a publicly financed reparations program based on ancestry is not
sustainable politically.

Such a program would logically be open to millions of people who have lived as
"white" for generations but are descended from enslaved black people. The
program would also be available to the descendants of black slave owners, who
were far more common than many people like to admit. Black masters in South
Carolina, for example, were confined to the margins of society but held many of
the same attitudes about race as whites. Black masters continued to hold slaves
even as the Union Army prepared for its terrible march through South Carolina.

The reparations debate is part of a burgeoning discussion about the role of
slavery in American history. But by blaming history alone for modern-day social
ills like poverty, illiteracy and unemployment, reparations advocates are
unwittingly saying that these problems are so deeply rooted as to be unsolvable.
They are also subverting the true story of black people in the United States.
This story is one of extraordinary achievement in the face of gargantuan
obstacles. It begins in the waning hours of slavery and continues to this very
day.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); GRANDPARENTS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); FAMILY (89%); GRANDCHILDREN (78%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY
(78%); SENIOR CITIZENS (73%); WRITERS (73%); CHILDREN (70%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS
(70%); FARM LABOR (70%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (68%) SLAVERY;  REPARATIONS

PERSON: STAPLES, BRENT

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1552 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1560 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

U.S. and Israel Walk Out Of U.N. Racism Conference
The United States and Israel left the United Nations conference on racism in
Durban, South Africa. Their action was prompted by proposed conference language
condemning "the racist practices of Zionism" and describing Israel's treatment
of Palestinians as a "new kind of apartheid." Emergency meetings were convened
to redraft the charged language in the hope of averting other walkouts. A
spokesman for the European Union, which raised concerns about the language, said
its diplomats would help in its redrafting.   A1


From the moment the United States delegation arrived at the meeting, their
marching orders were clear: engage actively in behind-the-scenes talks to
moderate the conference's tone toward Israel, and do little else unless that
effort succeeds.   A8

The walkout by Israel, which had been attacked by a coalition of rights groups
as "an apartheid regime" guilty of "ethnic cleansing and acts of genocide"
against the Palestinians, thickened the pall over already troubled efforts to
cobble together an Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire. Four bombs went off in
various areas of Jerusalem. No one was seriously injured, but the blasts led to
new clashes, leaving 2 Palestinian men dead and about 30 wounded.   A8

U.S. Research on Germ Warfare
The United States has been engaged for several years in secret research on
biological weapons that some officials believe tests the limits of the global
treaty banning such weapons. Government officials said the research mimicked
major steps a state or terrorist might take to create a biological arsenal and
was intended to understand the threat better.   A1

Mexico Leader Faces the Reality
President Vicente Fox of Mexico arrives in the United States today for a state
visit. In an interview, he discussed his realization that he could not deliver
on his promises as quickly as he wanted.   A1

Mexico took over nearly half of the country's sugar mills in an effort to save a
dying industry that had been subsidized for decades. Officials said they would
expropriate 27 of Mexico's 60 privately operated and deeply indebted sugar
mills, and then either shutter or sell them.   A3

A Shakeup in South Korea
South Korea plunged into a political crisis today after all cabinet members and
senior presidential aides resigned in the wake of a National Assembly vote for
the dismissal of Lim Dong Won, South Korea's unification minister, who has been
in charge of the government's "sunshine policy" with North Korea. South Korean
opposition leaders have complained that the government is getting little in
response for its aid and overtures to the North.   (A3)

Macedonia Peace Moves Ahead
Parliament resumed debate about constitutional and political reforms that are
crucial to the country's peace plan for ending an insurgency by ethnic Albanian
rebels. A preliminary vote is expected today.   A4

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A12-17

The Right Plans Effort On Supreme Court Choice
A coalition of socially conservative groups begins a $2 million campaign this
week to press President Bush and the Democratic-controlled Senate to fill the
next Supreme Court vacancy with an opponent of abortion rights. The campaign
comes amid the first signs of stress in the relationship between Mr. Bush and
the social conservative movement over his decision to allow federal financing
for some stem cell research.   A1

Bush's Labor Gap
Interviews with dozens of union members at Detroit's Labor Day parade and at a
Teamsters' picnic indicated that President Bush faced an uphill battle in his
new campaign to win the hearts and minds of union members. They pointed to a
long list of Bush positions that they oppose, including any privatizing of
Social Security, the revocation of ergonomics rules, and his push for fast-track
trade legislation and increased access for Mexican trucks to American roads.
A16

President Bush, speaking to gatherings of union carpenters in Green Bay, Wis.,
and Teamsters in Detroit, expressed concern about the economy, which he
described as "anemic at best" over the last year, and warned that there were
still "some problems on the horizon."   A16

Gore Noncommittal on 2004
Al Gore brushed aside questions on his political future at a campaign rally for
the Democratic mayor of Minneapolis. But he repeatedly mentioned his narrow
defeat to George W. Bush and asked the crowd what they thought of the country's
direction under Mr. Bush's leadership.   A15

Reno Hopes to Unseat a Bush
Janet Reno will announce today that she is entering the Florida governor's race,
a longtime associate said with her permission. Ms. Reno is expected to be the
favorite as she enters the Democratic primary campaign in a bid to challenge the
Republican incumbent, Jeb Bush, next year.   A15

2nd Fatal U.S. Shark Attack
A shark attacked a couple wading off North Carolina's Outer Banks, killing the
man and leaving the woman in critical condition. The death came two days after a
shark killed a 10-year-old boy in Virginia.   A12

Older Drivers and Safety
A study by an insurance industry group found that drivers 70 to 74 years old
were twice as likely to die in accidents as drivers 30 to 59. To help older
drivers avoid and survive accidents, the report recommended bigger letters on
road signs and seat belts designed to be easier on fragile shoulders and ribs.
A17

The Navy Corrects the Record
New evidence has persuaded the Navy to rewrite the record of the sinking of the
submarine chaser Eagle in 1945, within sight of the Maine coast, killing 49
sailors. Instead of a boiler explosion, the official cause will now be listed as
a torpedo from a German submarine. The change means that those who died or were
wounded will receive Purple Hearts.   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Softening Economy Eases Hunt for Tables and Rooms
Restaurateurs in New York City, especially those whose restaurants are just
below the top tier, are starting to worry about filling tables in an
oversaturated market and a weakening economy. Diners who were willing to endure
a three-month wait for a reservation a few months ago are now being courted with
free meals, discounts and solicitous service.   A1

The occupancy rate in Manhattan hotels fell nearly 12 percent from April through
June, compared with the same three months last year.   B7

An Endorsement Turned Around
Fernando Ferrer sought to turn former Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's
endorsement of Mark Green against him, demanding that Mr. Green explain why the
police commissioner had supported policies that many black leaders have
criticized as harmful to minority neighborhoods.   B1

EDUCATION

A Return to Uncertainty
New York City public schools welcome back 1.1 million students this week in an
opening marked by financial uncertainty, political dissent and what is expected
to be a good deal more confusion about staffing and spending than in any recent
year.   B1

ARTS   E1-8

SPORTS   D1-7

Sampras and Agassi to Meet
Pete Sampras beat Patrick Rafter, 6-3, 6-2, 6-7 (5), 6-4, in the round of 16 at
the United States Open. He will face Andre Agassi, who beat Roger Federer, 6-1,
6-3, 6-4.   D1

Pitcher Was in School at Home
Danny Almonte, the overage pitcher for a Bronx Little League team, attended
school in the Dominican Republic through June before flying to New York to play
in the summer tournaments against younger boys.   D1

No-Hitter For Rookie
Bud Smith of St. Louis pitched a 4-0 no-hitter against San Diego.   D3

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

New Use for Stem Cells
University of Wisconsin biologists said they had transformed human embryonic
stem cells into blood-making cells, laying the basis for new therapies based on
fabricating laboratory-made tissues and organs from embryonic cells.   A14

Health & Fitness   F7

OBITUARIES   C11-12

Pauline Kael
The writer who expressed her passion for movies in jaunty, jazzy prose as the
longtime film critic for The New Yorker was 82.   C12

BUSINESS DAY   C1-11

HP Acquiring Compaq
Hewlett-Packard plans to acquire Compaq Computer for $25 billion in stock,
creating a company with total revenue slightly less than IBM's.   A1

Chip Breakthrough
Motorola plans to announce a breakthrough today in the manufacture of
semiconductors that it says makes possible the manufacture of specialty chips
like power amplifiers in cell phones more cheaply.   C2

Mortgage Rates Near a Low
Fixed and adjustable rate mortgages are buttressing the housing market and
encouraging homeowners to refinance. The national average of 6.92 percent for a
30-year loan is near a two-and-a-half-year low.   C1

Oil and Gas Industry Mergers
Global Marine and Santa Fe International plan to merge in a $3 billion stock
swap that will make the new company, GlobalSanteFe, the second-largest offshore
drilling contractor in the world. Santa Fe will also assume about $900 million
in debt. Devon Energy of Oklahoma City, agreed to buy Anderson Exploration, a
Canadian company, for $3.4 billion and the assumption of $1.2 billion in debt.
C1

Overseas, Stocks Falter
Tokyo stocks plunged to a 17-year-low following a slew of profit warnings from
high-technology companies.   C4

Business Digest   C1

FASHION   B8

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Curing the patients' bill of rights; women at the top of academe;
for public advocate, Betsy Gotbaum.
Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E2
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   A18

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); RACE & RACISM
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); STRIKES (76%); PEACE PROCESS
(75%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (70%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (69%); TERRORISM (68%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (68%);
INTERVIEWS (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (66%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (66%); POLITICAL
DEBATES (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%)

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (50%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); EUROPE (79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
REPUBLIC OF (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (77%)

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1559 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1084 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

Taliban Official Displays Evidence of Evangelism
Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmad Muttawakil showed reporters in Afghanistan
translated Bibles and videos that he said were evidence of Christian evangelism
by international aid workers. Eight such workers were in their third day of
trial on charges of preaching Christianity, a crime that the Taliban have
suggested may bring them the death penalty.   A1

Violence, and Talk of a Meeting
Israelis and Palestinians traded lethal blows and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
said he was considering creating a buffer zone. Foreign Minister Shimon Peres
said he would meet next week with Yasir Arafat in an effort to halt the yearlong
fighting.   A3


Plea for Mexican Workers
President Vicente Fox, in Washington on a state visit, asked Congress to give
legal status to millions of undocumented Mexican workers.   A6

Optimism in Colombia
President Andres Pastrana said peace talks with leftist rebels could proceed in
this last year of his presidency, despite a lack of results after two years of
negotiation.   A6

Racism Conference Stalled
Delegates to the United Nations conference on racism remained at impasse over
language describing the Middle East situation and on addressing European
responsibility for colonialism and slavery in Africa.   A5

Macedonia Peace Plan
Parliament voted for constitutional changes to grant the ethnic Albanian
minority more rights, an action that let NATO resume collecting weapons from
ethnic Albanian rebels.   A3

Russian Stance on Defense
Moscow is willing to consider amendments to the "present-day system of
agreements on strategic stability" with the United States, a Russian official
said, but the ABM treaty of 1972 must be preserved.   A8

Vietnam Trade Pact Backed
The House voted to accept a wide-ranging trade agreement with Vietnam that would
end decades of economic sanctions.   A8

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A10-17

Bush Aides Seek Shift In Nursing Home Regulation
Bush administration officials want to ease regulatory requirements on nursing
homes, reducing the frequency of inspections and lessening or eliminating some
of the penalties, according to government documents that describe the proposals.
The officials want to move away from what they view as an adversarial, punitive
approach to enforcement and toward a more collaborative system for improving the
quality of care.   A1

Assurances on Two-War Plan
A computer-generated war game has determined that with current levels of troops
and weapons, the American military can topple one adversary while halting an
offensive by a second, officials said. The finding has calmed the debate between
the defense secretary and some officers over strategy and budgets.   A12

Court Battle Looms Over Files
The White House did not respond to a General Accounting Office demand to
identify lobbyists and executives with whom the Bush administration met in
formulating its energy plan.   A12

Curtailing Memorials on the Mall
The National Capital Planning Commission adopted a master plan banning all
future projects on the Mall. Congress can overrule the ban.   A14

Ban on Feeding Sharks for Show
The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission banned operators of
interactive shark dives from using bloody bait to lure the predators so
customers could frolic with them. Critics say that luring sharks this way is as
dangerous as feeding black bears in parks. Excursion operators characterized the
commission action as politically motivated and said it would do little to stem
attacks.   A1

Camp Resuming Operations
Two months after a 14-year-old died at an Arizona boot camp for troubled youths,
its owner is set to welcome two dozen children for a 13-weekend program that
starts tomorrow.   A10

Setback for Prescription Plan
A federal judge blocked the Bush administration's program to encourage Medicare
beneficiaries to acquire prescription-drug discount cards.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-12

Youngsters, Aged 8 and 10, Are Focus in Death of Boy, 4
The police in the Bronx questioned two boys who were said by a 5-year-old girl
to have scuffled with her and her 4-year-old brother, Emanuel Barima, in a
hallway just before he was stabbed in the neck, possibly with a pen, and bled to
death.   B1

New Jersey Arena Plan Falters
A plan to build a $355 million arena in Newark and redevelop the Meadowlands
fell apart when a legislative committee canceled a hearing on the issue,
effectively derailing it.   B1

EDUCATION

Tighter Budgets, Higher Fees
The softening economy is leading many state colleges to cut costs and raise
tuitions and fees.   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Virus Killing Salmon
A virus that kills Atlantic salmon but is harmless to people is spreading in
fish farms in eastern Maine, forcing the destruction of hundreds of thousands of
valuable fish and threatening endangered wild salmon.   A10

SPORTS   D1-8

Hewitt and Kafelnikov Advance
Lleyton Hewitt defeated Andy Roddick. He will face Yevgeny Kafelnikov, who beat
Gustavo Kuerten.   D1

Referees Reject Offer
Replacement referees will probably take the field when the N.F.L. season opens
on Sunday, after the officials' union rejected a contract offer.   D1

Bonds Reaches 60
San Francisco's Barry Bonds hit his 60th home run of the season, the fifth
player to reach that milestone.   D8

OBITUARIES   B13

Heywood Hale Broun
The sportswriter was 83.   B13

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Backpedaling on Microsoft
The Bush administration will not seek a breakup of Microsoft and dropped its
claim that the company broke antitrust law by integrating its Internet browser
and Windows.   A1

Criticism Prompts Inquiry
The World Bank is conducting a disciplinary investigation of one of its senior
economists, William Easterly, who published criticism of the bank's record on
fighting poverty.   C1

Chip Maker's Sales on Track
Intel said sales would stay on target for the third quarter, signaling that the
chip industry continues to bump along the bottom of its decline.   C1

Bracing for a Sex-Bias Suit
Executives of the Morgan Stanley Dean Witter securities firm expect the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission to file a sex-bias suit against it soon. The
commission has been investigating since a former sales representative complained
that she had been discriminated against because of her sex.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

WEEKEND   E1-28, E29-40

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Reforming Microsoft; the Weldon connection; a close race in Nassau
County.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E38
TV Listings   E28
Public Lives   B2
Weather   A14

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); INSPECTIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
LAW (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (76%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%);
GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (74%); LOBBYING (74%); BUDGETS (73%); ETHNIC
GROUPS (72%); RACE & RACISM (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); DEFENSE & MILITARY
POLICY (70%); PUBLIC FINANCE (70%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (67%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (67%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (66%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (64%);
ACCOUNTING (62%); NURSING HOMES (62%); LONG TERM HEALTH CARE (62%); ARMED FORCES
(60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (72%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: SHIMON PERES (58%); VICENTE FOX QUESADA (54%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); ALBANIA (92%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); MEXICO
(92%); AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); COLOMBIA (79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER
YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1561 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Conferees Fail To Resolve Their Disputes At Race Talks

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: DURBAN, South Africa, Sept. 6


A last-minute effort to break an impasse over the Middle East at the United
Nations racism meeting here faltered tonight as European and Arab nations failed
to agree on a declaration proposed by the South African government.

Diplomats also remained deadlocked on the question of whether Europe should
apologize for slavery and colonialism, with African nations still demanding an
explicit apology and Europeans insisting on a statement of regret.

It was unclear tonight whether officials would manage to resolve these
contentious issues during the conference, which is scheduled to end on Friday.
As negotiators worked late into the evening, delegates were increasingly
concerned that the conference would close with little accomplished.

South Africa's latest draft of a conference declaration expresses concern about
"the plight of the Palestinian people under foreign occupation," but eliminates
any description of Israel as a racist state. The statement also recognizes the
rights of refugees to return to their homes and properties, an idea that is
strenuously rejected by Israel.

The initiative was reluctantly accepted by European diplomats, who described the
draft as "fairly moderate" compared with other texts that have assailed what
their authors call "the racist practices of Zionism."

Koen Vervaeke, the spokesman for the European Union here, said: "We had a look
at it, and our position is that we can accept it. We are not fully happy with
it, but it meets our minimum requirements. We are giving it a cautious backing."

But the text was greeted with hesitancy by Arab diplomats who have been lobbying
for a tougher stance against Israel. Some supporters of the Palestinians are
still insisting that the Holocaust be described as the "European holocaust," a
notion that offends Jews who view the Holocaust as a singular event in history.

It was such criticisms of Israel in other proposed documents that led the United
States and Israel to walk out of the meeting this week.

"It's not looking very promising," said a European diplomat familiar with the
negotiations and who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "Everybody's going to
keep working here, but it would take something spectacular to make a change."

In Washington, State Department officials said they would not comment on the
latest draft.

"I don't have any responses to hypotheticals at this point," said Richard
Boucher, a State Department spokesman. "Since our departure, we've seen another
couple of days of the same kind of insistence and arguing, and we'll just have
to see how this turns out."

Salman el-Herfi, the Palestinian ambassador to South Africa, acknowledged that
some Arab officials were not satisfied with the declaration, but he said the
group was willing to use it as a basis for talks.

"We are studying the text, in consultation with the other groups," he said. "If
we find that we need more time, we can prolong the conference."

The disputes over the Middle East and slavery have overshadowed this meeting, to
the dismay of its organizers and participants.

The meeting, which is called the World Conference Against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, opened last week with much
hope and ambition. It is supposed to produce a declaration against racism and a
program of action to prevent discrimination. Many people here still hope to
reach some consensus.

But there is little to suggest a resolution despite the efforts of negotiators
from South Africa, Belgium, Norway and the United Nations.

Today's proposal was the second attempt by South Africa to deal with the Middle
East question. The first negotiating team -- with members from Belgium, Norway,
Namibia and South Africa and an Arab representative -- gave up on Wednesday
night.

Ali Khorram, who is in charge of preparing the conference's final reports, said
the process was moving slowly. And he warned that delegates might be unable to
reach agreement on the disputed subjects.

If that were to happen, Mr. Khorram said, the delegates would vote on the
passages in question, with a two-thirds majority needed for approval. He said
there was no question of eliminating the section on the Middle East, even though
it had proved to be so contentious.

"The conference has to deal with all matters regarding racism," said Mr.
Khorram.

Tonight, the diplomats dealing with the questions of slavery and colonialism
said their technical teams had handed over negotiations to senior politicians
because they could not reach a consensus.

"This is the final hour; this is the time of truth," said a Latin American
diplomat familiar with the negotiations. "We desperately need a political
solution."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%); RACE & RACISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); LOBBYING (77%);
REFUGEES (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (68%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD
CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  PALESTINIANS;  SLAVERY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (98%); SOUTH AFRICA (95%); ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (94%); AFRICA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  SOUTH AFRICA;  AFRICA;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1564 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 8, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Yugoslavia: Counsel Rejected

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 74 words


Slobodan Milosevic has rejected a team of lawyers appointed by the United
Nations war crimes tribunal to assist his defense and has no plans to meet with
them, his Belgrade lawyer said. The lawyer, Zdenko Tomanovic, said the former
Yugoslav president still planned to represent himself in his coming trial in The
Hague, where he faces charges of crimes against humanity stemming from Serbia's
repression of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo in 1999.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); ALBANIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO (92%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (85%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1566 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Some Are More Equal

BYLINE:  By Ira Berlin; Ira Berlin teaches history at the University of
Maryland.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1064 words


JEFFERSON'S PILLOW
The Founding Fathers
and the Dilemma of Black Patriotism.
By Roger Wilkins.
163 pp. Boston:
Beacon Press. $23.

"It is a peculiar sensation, this double consciousness," W. E. B. Du Bois wrote
in his celebrated reflection on the meaning of African-American identity. "One
ever feels his twoness -- an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder." In "Jefferson's Pillow: The
Founding Fathers and the Dilemma of Black Patriotism," Roger Wilkins -- a
professor of history at George Mason University, a distinguished journalist and
a scion of an eminent African-American family -- considers Du Bois's classic
statement, asking pointedly, "Can I embrace founders who may have 'owned' some
of my ancestors?"

Wilkins's ringing affirmation of his dual loyalties offers an extraordinarily
thoughtful and illuminating meditation on American history, in which he weaves
family traditions and personal experience to form a deeply moving testament that
is part history and part autobiography. While rarely profound in his judgment
about the past, Wilkins is refreshing in his unpretentious honesty, refusing to
obfuscate the harsh reality of American slavery or conceal his respect for the
founders of the American republic. Wilkins thus stands apart from both those who
would ignore the crimes of the founders by cloaking them in the garments of
historical amnesia and those who would dismiss America's claim to freedom as a
stupendous fraud. For Wilkins, the former+deny the founders' humanity, the
latter history's complexity. Together they deny him and his people a place in
history.

And so Wilkins begins with history, his nation's and his family's. Reviewing the
lives of the great Virginia founders -- Jefferson, Madison, Washington and (his
university's namesake) George Mason, Wilkins pays homage to their achievements
in creating a republic premised on universal equality. That ideal, inscribed in
Mason's Virginia Declaration of Rights and Jefferson's Declaration of
Independence, became the core of his most cherished beliefs, and, as Wilkins
freely admits, "much of the context for my existence, the freedom that I cherish
and the democratic citizenship that I have used relentlessly for the past half
century."

Yet the founders were slaveholders, and substantial ones. At one time or
another, each condemned slavery as evil and recognized the contradiction of his
own stated beliefs to the realities of chattel bondage. None, however, had the
courage to translate his intellectual commitment to universal freedom into
public policy or even individual action. Only Washington freed his slaves,
although Jefferson freed a few favorites, most of whom were kin. Instead, they
"celebrated freedom while stealing the substance of life from the people they
'owned.' "

For Wilkins, the founders' intellectual and moral cowardice had profound
implications. It not only cushioned their own existence -- quite literally:
Wilkins's title refers to the pillow upon which a slave carried Jefferson as a
child -- but it also made them "conveyors of the culture that has done and
continues to do hideous damage to millions of black human beings and to many
more millions of white Americans as well." Wilkins rages that men "so
distinguished and so powerful could have been so timid about using that power in
the cause of freedom." He aches to confront them and demands an accounting:
"Look at the pain you might have avoided and the potential you might have
liberated had you had the capacity to care for human beings like these as deeply
as you cared for yourselves and for people like you." Yet his respect for these
men is no less profound than his anger. Praise for Washington's "iron
discipline," Jefferson's "genius," Madison's "prodigious intellect" and Mason's
"independent spirit" lace the pages of "Jefferson's Pillow." "The founding slave
owners were more than good men," Wilkins emphasizes; "they were great men."

Wilkins then turns to his own family, only a fragment of whose history is known.
It was Wilkins's family -- and by extension millions of other black Americans --
who transformed the founders' words and helped to fulfill their heady promise.
For Wilkins, it is this combination that undergirds -- even necessitates -- his
patriotism. "For me to aspire to be something other than American would be to
renounce all their contributions to this country, all their struggles for space
in which to live their lives, all the things they built, all the wealth they
created, all the love they passed down the generations that came to me."

From this perspective, it might seem that Wilkins has let the founders off too
easily, while burdening slaves and their descendants with unrealizable
responsibilities. The founders knew what was right; they had their
opportunities, and they failed to act. To say, as Wilkins does, that they were
"morally crippled by their culture and politically shackled by the grating chain
that snaked through the new republic and diminished every life it touched"
hardly relieves the great men of their historic responsibility. In like manner,
to rely upon his great-great-grandmother Jeffries's evocation of "the father of
everyone," who "will come through the clouds one day and deliver his black
children," however admirable, strains the imagination.

But there is more to Wilkins's testament than vapid relativism or an inflated
commitment to the genius of the people. At base stands a profound respect for
the integrity of history and the complex and convoluted relationship between
present and the past. Wilkins understands that ignoring the founders'
accomplishments frees them from their historic responsibility as much as a blind
celebration of their achievements. By praising them, Wilkins also holds them
accountable for the pain and suffering they caused and the immoral legacy they
left. More important, it also leaves room for the men and women who built upon
the founders' noble, if imperfect, legacy. When Wilkins declares that he needs
both Thomas Jefferson and his great-great-grandmother "to be who I am and to
live the life I have lived," he extends Du Bois's great insight into the nature
of African-American identity by making clear that the burdens of the past will
ever be part of the present.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); SLAVERY (89%); FAMILY
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HISTORY (74%); WRITERS (72%); PROFILES &
BIOGRAPHIES (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (69%); BIOGRAPHICAL
LITERATURE (66%); PUBLIC POLICY (62%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1569 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 09-09-01: EXHIBIT A;
Blood Sisters

BYLINE:  By Michael Ignatieff

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 74

LENGTH: 467 words


At first sight, this picture looks like an allegory of innocence impaled on the
spear of injustice. The two black, female defendants, dressed in the habit of
the Benedictine order, seem like victims trapped by a phalanx of robed white
men. How could these apparent innocents be guilty of any crime, let alone one so
serious that they must be put behind bulletproof glass for their protection?

Sister Gertrude (at left, above) was the mother superior of a Benedictine
convent in the tormented central African state of Rwanda. Sister Maria Kisito
was a member of the order. In April 1994, with Tutsi rebels advancing on the
capital, the Hutu-dominated government ordered its soldiers and gangs of
militiamen to begin exterminating the minority Tutsi population. Thousands of
Tutsis, fleeing their homes, took refuge in Sister Gertrude's convent, believing
the nuns would shelter them. But Sister Gertrude instead went to local Hutu
militiamen and asked them to "clear" the convent. On April 22, Hutu militiamen
descended on the compound, shooting the Tutsi refugees and slashing them with
machetes; overall, more than 7,000 Tutsis were killed in the massacre.

"I never wanted anybody to die," Sister Gertrude told the court in a whisper.
She pleaded for understanding: if the refugees were not turned over, she said,
"we were all going to perish." But survivors who testified at the trial
remembered her as an accomplice, not as a victim. When 500 of the Tutsis fled to
the convent garage, Sister Gertrude and Sister Maria Kisito brought the
militiamen gasoline. The garage was set alight, and everyone who tried to escape
the flames was hacked to death.

When the Tutsi-led bush army conquered Rwanda in June 1994 and ended the
genocide, the nuns, who are Hutus, escaped to Belgium. That is why they faced a
jury not of their peers but of 12 Belgian citizens in a courtroom in Brussels.
Under Belgian law, crimes against humanity can be tried in Belgian courts even
when the crimes were committed in another country. On June 8, 2001, Sister
Gertrude and Sister Maria Kisito were found guilty and sentenced to 15- and
12-year terms, respectively. It was the first time that citizens of one country
were found guilty of crimes against humanity by a jury of citizens from another.

The picture is not an allegory of innocence, after all, but a study in the
unimaginable disguises of evil. What mixture of terror and hatred led these nuns
to betray the promise of their faith? The Rwandan massacres left in their wake
hundreds of disturbing questions like that one -- How does mass violence
suddenly erupt? Are we all capable of murdering our neighbors? Where does evil
come from? -- but none of them were resolved by the Belgian court. Justice is
built to establish the facts of evil. It cannot explain them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Bastienne Schmidt)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
TESTIMONY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); VERDICTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); SENTENCING (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(77%); ARMIES (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (74%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (70%); ARMED FORCES (69%); MURDER (57%) WOMEN;  NUNS;
HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  PHOTOGRAPHY

PERSON: IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (91%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1573 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 12, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reaction From Around the World

BYLINE:  New York Times staff reports, Reuters, Associated Press, Agence
France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 708 words


EUROPE

EUROPEAN UNION -- European foreign ministers scheduled a rare emergency meeting
for today to discuss a joint response, as officials expressed solidarity with
the United States. The external relations commissioner, Chris Patten, called the
attacks "the work of a madman."

BRITAIN -- British security forces across the world were placed on maximum
alert. Prime Minister Tony Blair pledged that Britain would stand "full square
alongside the U.S." in the battle against terrorism. Queen Elizabeth expressed
"growing disbelief and total shock."


RUSSIA -- Russia put troops on alert. President Vladimir V. Putin held an
emergency meeting of security officials and said he supported a tough response
to the "barbaric acts."

GERMANY -- Chancellor Gerhard Schroder described the attacks as "a declaration
of war against the civilized world." Authorities urged Frankfurt, the country's
financial capital, to close all its major skyscrapers. The new Jewish museum in
Berlin canceled its public opening.

ASIA

AFGHANISTAN -- Taliban officials rejected suggestions that Osama bin Laden, the
Saudi militant whom they are sheltering, could be behind the attacks. Asked if
the Taliban condemned them, Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil said, "We
have criticized and we are now again criticizing terrorism in all its forms."

CHINA -- President Jiang Zemin said he was "shocked" and sent his condolences to
President Bush, while the Foreign Ministry said China "opposed all manner" of
terrorism.

JAPAN -- Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi expressed "great anger" and said
"these acts of terrorism should not be forgiven." Special security precautions
were ordered at all United States military installations.

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL -- Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared a national day of mourning for
today in solidarity with the United States and urged the world to fight
terrorism.

WEST BANK AND GAZA -- Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, expressed shock at
the attacks, and offered condolences and help in hunting the attackers if it was
requested. Several military Palestinian groups denied involvement, but
celebratory gunfire echoed across the West Bank.

IRAN -- President Mohammad Khatami condemned "terrorist" attacks on the United
States, which broke diplomatic ties with Iran after the 1979 Islamic revolution
and has accused Iran of sponsoring terrorism.

IRAQ -- State television hailed the attacks as the "operation of the century"
which the United States deserved because of its "crimes against humanity." Iraq
blames the United States and Britain for prolonging punitive United Nations
sanctions imposed after Baghdad's 1990 invasion of Kuwait and retained after a
United States-led coalition drove Iraqi troops from Kuwait in the 1991 gulf war.


THE AMERICAS

CANADA -- Hundreds of United States-bound flights were diverted to Canadian
airports, including a plane carrying President Glafcos Clerides of Cyprus, who
landed in Montreal.

MEXICO -- Increased security caused enormous traffic jams at the United States
border and officials said they were considering closing the entire border.
President Vicente Fox expressed "solidarity and our most profound condolences."

CUBA -- The government expressed its "pain" and "solidarity" with its longtime
adversary and offered air and medical facilities to help. State television took
the unusual step of interrupting normal programming to announce the United
States "national tragedy" and show CNN's Spanish-language channel live.

AFRICA

LIBYA -- Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi condemned the "terrible" attacks on the United
States and said his country was ready to send aid to the American people, the
official JANA news agency reported.

WORLD

NATO -- At an emergency meeting of the alliance's ambassadors in Brussels, the
secretary general, Lord Robertson, promised the United States that it could rely
on its allies in North America and Europe for assistance and support, and
pledged that those responsible would not get away with it.

UNITED NATIONS -- Diplomats called for swift action by the Security Council to
impose sanctions on any governments or groups found to be responsible. "We are
all traumatized by this terrible tragedy," Secretary General Kofi Annan said.
The headquarters building in New York was evacuated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); AIRLINES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
US PRESIDENTS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); AIRPORTS (77%); BRITISH
PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); DESERT STORM (75%);
ARMED FORCES (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); RELIGION (67%);
PUBLIC TELEVISION (67%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (60%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(53%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  PENTAGON BUILDING

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%) UNITED AIRLINES; AMERICAN AIRLINES

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (51%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (51%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%); ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (57%);
VLADIMIR PUTIN (57%); TONY BLAIR (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%); GERHARD SCHRODER
(53%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); MONTREAL, QC, CANADA
(75%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); FRANKFURT AM MAIN,
GERMANY (79%); QUEBEC, CANADA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (94%); IRAQ (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); ISRAEL (92%); KUWAIT
(92%); CYPRUS (79%); JAPAN (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%); GERMANY (79%);
SAUDI ARABIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); CANADA (75%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1574 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 12, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A DAY OF TERROR: THE ARABS;
Condemnations From Arab Governments, but Widely Different Attitudes on the
Street

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Sept. 11


While Arab governments condemned the attacks in the United States, there was
something of a sense of inevitability in a region whose leaders had warned for
months that American support for Israel could have violent consequences.

In Egypt, President Hosni Mubarak gathered his cabinet for a special meeting.
His statement afterward reflected the general disbelief at scenes unfolding on
television sets.

"I first thought it was because of bad visibility, but I found out that the
weather was clear," Mr. Mubarak, a an ex-fighter pilot, said. "Then I saw
another plane crashing into the tower. The whole situation is horrible. I could
not imagine that this is really happening when I was watching."

In the absence of a credible claim of responsibility, some Arabs said they
believed that the attacks might be the work of an extremist organization in the
United States, as was the 1996 Oklahoma City bombing.

"Nobody is able to pinpoint anything," a spokesman for the Egyptian government,
Nabil Osman, said. "Nobody has any information. Nobody should talk about a
Middle Eastern connection."

In arguing against an Arab link, officials and local experts on extremist groups
pointed to the complex choreography of the attack. But in the Middle East, as
elsewhere, intense speculation focused on Osama bin Laden or related
organization, partly because the attacks involved suicide pilots. Suicide
bombers from extremist Muslim organizations generally believe that they are
fighting for their faith and are promised paradise if they die for the cause.

Animosity toward the United States has been increasing in the region for years.
It has been especially strong in the last year, given what Arabs perceive as the
American policy of blaming Palestinians for renewed bloodshed in the Middle
East. Much Arab news coverage focuses on Israel's American-built arsenal, with
F-16 fighters and rifles, that is used against the Palestinians. Arab leaders
have been warning Washington for months that some violent spillover, including
terrorism, was a virtual certainty.

"What is needed is more cooperation and a boost to relations based on mutual
respect," the Lebanese information minister, Ghazi al-Aridi, said. "Not
relations based on the logic of power or the possession of technology or nuclear
weapons or money."

People hostile to the United States said the Americans were receiving some of
their own back. "The American cowboy is reaping the fruits of his crimes against
humanity," state-run television in Iraq commented.

All Palestinian groups, including the fundamentalist Hamas and Islamic Jihad,
which often carry out suicide bombings against Israeli targets, swiftly denied
any involvement.

"We in Hamas, our battle is on the Palestinian land," said Sheik Ahmed Yassin,
spiritual leader of the group.

But the attack clearly had support on the streets. Palestinians in refugee camps
in Lebanon fired guns in the air in celebration.

The Arab capitals' official statements mostly voiced sympathy for the loss of
life. The Libyan leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, often accused of supporting
terrorists by Washington, offered condolences and help.  The official Saudi
press agency said that such attacks "defy all religious values."

In Tehran, the Iranian capital, President Mohammad Khatami condemned the attack,
expressing "deep sorrow and sympathy" with the victims and all Americans.

"Terrorism is denounced," he said, "and the international community must
identify it and take fundamental steps for rooting it out."

On a shopping street in Tehran, many shop owners had not heard the news. "A
crazy man came here few hours ago and said the Pentagon has been bombed," a
pizzeria owner said. "That's all we heard about America today. Of course, we did
not believe him." Told that the report was true, the man looked stunned.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: JUBILATION AND GRIM SECURITY -- At the Shatila Palestinian
refugee camp near Beirut, there was a celebration yesterday after the attacks in
the United States. In Berlin, the American Embassy was guarded by an armored
police vehicle as security officials went on full alert. (Photographs by Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
HAMAS (89%); SHOOTINGS (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); AIRLINES
(75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); FUNDAMENTALISM (73%); PUBLIC
TELEVISION (71%); RELIGION (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (65%);
REFUGEES (64%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (61%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (60%); IMMIGRATION (60%) TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  UNITED STATES FOREIGN SERVICE

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (87%); HOSNI MUBARAK (72%) BIN LADEN, OSAMA;
MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%);
BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); EGYPT
(94%); ISRAEL (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); LEBANON (93%); GERMANY (92%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  MIDDLE EAST;  LEBANON;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY;
BERLIN (GERMANY);  GERMANY

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1576 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 13, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS;
Reaction From Around the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 970 words


EUROPE

EUROPEAN UNION -- European foreign ministers, at an emergency session in
Brussels, condemned the attacks against the United States, offered help with
search and rescue efforts and in fighting terrorism, and called a Europe-wide
day of mourning for Friday.

BRITAIN -- Prime Minister Tony Blair recalled Parliament from its recess more
than a month early, saying the voices of democracy must speak out after terror
strikes. A spokesman said the government feared that British victims "could run
into hundreds."


RUSSIA -- President Bush spoke twice to President Vladimir V. Putin on ways to
combat terrorism.

GERMANY -- Acting on a tip from the F.B.I., the police in Hamburg searched an
apartment where two men believed to be linked to the attacks in the United
States once lived. The police also said the two men were believed to have lived
in Florida from July 2000 to January 2001.

FRANCE -- President Jacques Chirac plans to go ahead with a scheduled visit to
Washington Tuesday to meet with President Bush. Prime Minister Lionel Jospin
warned against letting the drive to punish terror attacks against the United
States turn into a wider conflict between Islamic countries and the West.

ASIA

AFGHANISTAN -- Fears grew in Afghanistan that the United States would attack the
country for giving refuge to Osama bin Laden, who is suspected of masterminding
terror. Foreign aid workers, fearing retaliation if the United States did
attack, began to leave.

CHINA -- President Jiang Zemin told President Bush that Beijing is ready to join
a campaign against terrorism. About 30 Chinese are missing in the World Trade
Center, officials said.

PAKISTAN -- The head of the Pakistani Interservices Intelligence, who was
visiting Washington, was called into the State Department to meet with Deputy
Secretary Richard L. Armitage.

NORTH KOREA -- North Korea, in its first public reaction to the attacks on the
United States, said it was opposed to all terrorism.

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL -- The country observed a day of mourning and flags flew at half-staff.
President Moshe Katsav donated blood in a gesture to victims of the attacks.

WEST BANK AND GAZA -- Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, also donated blood
and angrily rejected any suggestion that Palestinians had rejoiced over the
attacks, declaring that the Palestinian reaction was one of identification with
American suffering and not satisfaction.

YEMEN -- F.B.I. agents investigating last year's suicide attack on the American
destroyer Cole left Yemen, apparently fearing new attacks, a Yemeni security
official said. He said that the departure was a routine precaution and that no
new threats had been received.

IRAQ -- President Saddam Hussein said the attacks on the United States were the
result of America's "evil policy," contending that the United States exports
corruption and crime through its military forces and its movies. He suggested
the attacks might have been carried out by Americans.

SYRIA -- President Bashar al-Assad called for "global mutual help" to eradicate
terrorism and to protect human rights. The American Embassy in Syria, which the
State Department lists as a state that supports terrorism, closed for a day to
review security measures.

THE AMERICAS

CANADA -- Struggling with more than 240 diverted planes and 30,000 stranded
passengers, Canada reopened its domestic airspace but warned of delays as it
tightened security. Any takeoffs by big jets bound for the United States would
need United States clearance.

MEXICO -- The 2,000-mile border with the United States was in gridlock at major
crossing points as Mexican commuters tried to carry on business in the United
States despite heightened security. Mexican police said they found 33 Iraqis at
a Tijuana hotel, apparently planning to cross the border as immigrants.

CUBA -- Newspaper headlines in the state-controlled press were dominated not by
news of the attacks in New York and near Washington, but by a visit by the
president of Mali.

CHILE -- There was a rash of bomb threats on American and Israeli diplomatic and
cultural buildings, a government security official said. All proved to be false
alarms.

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: -- Firefighters in Johannesburg flew an American flag at
half-staff in a show of respect for their colleagues in New York, while scores
of people placed flowers outside the United States Embassy in Pretoria. A
memorial service was held in Cape Town.

NIGERIA: -- President Olusegun Obasanjo sent "heartfelt condolences" over the
"dastardly act of terrorism." But in heavily Muslim northern cities, there were
open celebrations over the attacks, with posters of Osama bin Laden selling well
in Kano.

WORLD

NATO -- The alliance declared that the terrorist attacks could be considered an
attack on the whole alliance if they were directed from abroad, and invoked
Article 5 of the charter, mandating joint defense, for the first time.

UNITED NATIONS -- The Security Council adopted a resolution condemning the
attacks and called on the world to help find the perpetrators and those who
sheltered them. The General Assembly voted to postpone indefinitely a special
session on children, which had been scheduled for Sept. 19-21 in New York.

WORLD BANK, I.M.F. -- World Bank and International Monetary Fund officials said
they expected that their annual meeting, which was scheduled to take place in
Washington on Sept. 28 and 29, and which has become a prime target of
antiglobalization protesters, would be canceled.

WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION -- Negotiators, saying the attacks had disrupted
consulations with their governments, postponed a decision on admitting China to
the W.T.O. until Monday. The decision means that a meeting planned for Friday to
admit Taiwan would also be put off until next week, under a 1992 agreement that
Taiwan could not become a member ahead of China.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: THE WORKERS OF VOLKSWAGEN held a candlelight vigil yesterday in
an automobile museum in Wolfsburg, Germany, to remember the terror victims.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); RESCUE
OPERATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); EXPORT TRADE (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%);
AL-QAEDA (77%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (77%); POLICE FORCES (74%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (73%); BLOOD BANKS (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); INVESTIGATIONS (63%);
CORRUPTION (60%); BLOOD DONATIONS (60%); RELIGION (51%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); TONY
BLAIR (57%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%); JACQUES CHIRAC (55%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (91%); HAMBURG, GERMANY (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (74%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); EUROPE (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); GERMANY (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); ISRAEL (92%);
BELGIUM (92%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); IRAQ (79%); ASIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); FRANCE (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1577 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 13, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Bosnian Serbs To Plead Guilty

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 99 words


Two Bosnian Serbs accused of atrocities at a prison camp in 1992 have agreed to
plead guilty to a charge of persecution as a crime against humanity, a spokesman
for the United Nations war-crimes tribunal said.

In exchange, prosecutors agreed to drop all other charges against the men. As
part of the deal, prosecutors will ask for 10 to 17 years' imprisonment for
Dusko Sikirica, above, commander of the Keraterm camp, and for 5 to 7 years for
one of his lieutenants, Damir Dosen. In sentencing, tribunal judges are not
bound by deals between prosecutors and defendants.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GUILTY PLEAS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (90%); POWS &
MIAS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (88%); PRISONS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); EUROPE (91%);
NETHERLANDS (74%)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1578 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: FINDING FAULT;
U.S. 'Secular' Groups Set Tone For Terror Attacks, Falwell Says

BYLINE:  By GUSTAV NIEBUHR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 435 words


The Rev. Jerry Falwell said yesterday that the American Civil Liberties Union,
with abortion providers, gay rights proponents and federal courts that had
banned school prayer and legalized abortion, had so weakened the United States
spiritually that the nation was left exposed to Tuesday's terrorist attacks.

Mr. Falwell, a Baptist minister who is chancellor of Liberty University in
Lynchburg, Va., said that "the A.C.L.U.'s got to take a lot of blame for this,"
according to a partial transcript of remarks he made on "The 700 Club," Pat
Robertson's religious program.

In the transcript, distributed by the liberal organization People for the
American Way, Mr. Falwell described the A.C.L.U. as "throwing God out
successfully with the help of the federal court system, throwing God out of the
public square, out of the schools." Referring to the attacks, he said he would
point a figurative finger at those "who have tried to secularize America" and
say, "You helped this happen."

According to the transcript, Mr. Robertson said, "I totally concur."

Asked about his remarks in an interview last night, Mr. Falwell said he was
making a theological statement about how various groups had so offended God that
the attacks could occur. He said he did not intend to shift blame from the
terrorists. "I sincerely believe that the collective efforts of many secularists
during the past generation, resulting in the expulsion from our schools and from
the public square, has left us vulnerable," he said.

He said he did not believe God "had anything to do with the tragedy," but that
God had permitted it. "He lifted the curtain of protection," Mr. Falwell said,
"and I believe that if America does not repent and return to a genuine faith and
dependence on him, we may expect more tragedies, unfortunately."

On "The 700 Club," Mr. Falwell also said that liberal groups were "totally
disregarded by the Democrats and Republicans in both houses of Congress as they
went out on the steps and called out to God in prayer and sang 'God Bless
America' and said, 'Let the A.C.L.U. be hanged.' "

Asked to comment on what Mr. Falwell said, a spokesman for the civil liberties
union said, "We are not are not dignifying it with a response." In a statement,
People for the American Way did not address Mr. Falwell's remarks, but said it
grieved for the victims.

Bill Leonard, dean of Wake Forest Divinity School, said Mr. Falwell's remarks
were "a mistaken effort to sound prophetic." "God created the world with
terrible freedom, and part of that freedom," Mr. Leonard said, is the freedom
humans have "to do terrible evil."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORISM (91%); CHURCH & STATE (91%); TRANSCRIPTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ABORTION (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%); RELIGION IN SCHOOLS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LIBERALISM (89%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CLINICS (78%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%);
HIJACKING (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); LGBT RIGHTS (73%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (72%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (71%) TERRORISM;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%); LIBERTY UNIVERSITY (57%);
PEOPLE FOR THE AMERICAN WAY (57%) AMERICAN AIRLINES; AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; UNITED AIRLINES

PERSON: NIEBUHR, GUSTAV; FALWELL, JERRY (REV)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); VIRGINIA, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1580 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: FINDING FAULT;
Falwell's Finger-Pointing Inappropriate, Bush Says

BYLINE:  By LAURIE GOODSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 928 words


Did God allow the terrorist attacks?

The Rev. Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson set off a minor explosion of their own
when they asserted on television on Thursday that an angry God had allowed the
terrorists to succeed in their deadly mission because the United States had
become a nation of abortion, homosexuality, secular schools and courts, and the
American Civil Liberties Union.

Liberal groups and commentators denounced their remarks yesterday, as did
President Bush, who has long enjoyed the political support of the two
evangelists.

"The president believes that terrorists are responsible for these acts," said a
White House spokesman, Ken Lisaius. "He does not share those views, and believes
that those remarks are inappropriate."

Yet Mr. Falwell's and Mr. Robertson's remarks were based in theology familiar to
and accepted by many conservative evangelical Christians, who believe the Bible
teaches that God withdraws protection from nations that violate his will.

Several conservative theologians and evangelists said in interviews yesterday
that they agreed with the basic notion but rejected the idea that mere humans
can ever know which particular sins lead to which particular tragedies.

The Rev. R. Albert Mohler Jr., president of the Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary in Louisville, Ky., and a friend of Mr. Falwell's, said, "There is no
doubt that America has accommodated itself to so many sins that we should always
fear God's judgment and expect that in due time that judgment will come. But we
ought to be very careful about pointing to any circumstance or any specific
tragedy and say that this thing has happened because this is God's direct
punishment."

Mr. Falwell, chancellor of Liberty University in Lynchburg, Va., and senior
pastor of Thomas Road Baptist Church there, was in Washington yesterday in a
service at the National Cathedral at Mr. Bush's invitation, a spokesman for Mr.
Falwell said.

Mr. Falwell released a statement yesterday on the controversy, saying, "Despite
the impression some may have from news reports today, I hold no one other than
the terrorists and the people and nations who have enabled and harbored them
responsible for Tuesday's attacks on this nation."

"I sincerely regret that comments I made during a long theological discussion on
a Christian television program yesterday were taken out of their context and
reported and that my thoughts -- reduced to sound bites -- have detracted from
the spirit of this day of mourning."

Mr. Robertson yesterday defended Mr. Falwell. "In no way has any guest on my
program suggested that anyone other than the Middle East terrorists were
responsible for the tragic events that took place on Tuesday," he said in a
written statement.

What Mr. Falwell said on Thursday on "The 700 Club," while chatting with the
program's host, Mr. Robertson, was this:

"What we saw on Tuesday, as terrible as it is, could be minuscule if, in fact,
God continues to lift the curtain and allow the enemies of America to give us
probably what we deserve."

Mr. Robertson responded, "Jerry, that's my feeling. I think we've just seen the
antechamber to terror. We haven't even begun to see what they can do to the
major population."

A few moments later Mr. Falwell said, "The abortionists have got to bear some
burden for this because God will not be mocked. And when we destroy 40 million
little innocent babies, we make God mad. I really believe that the pagans, and
the abortionists, and the feminists, and the gays and the lesbians who are
actively trying to make that an alternative lifestyle, the A.C.L.U., People for
the American Way, all of them who have tried to secularize America, I point the
finger in their face and say, 'You helped this happen.' "

To which Mr. Robertson said, "Well, I totally concur, and the problem is we have
adopted that agenda at the highest levels of our government."

Mr. Robertson also issued a press release on Thursday saying that in a country
rampant with materialism, Internet pornography and lack of prayer, "God almighty
is lifting his protection from us."

James Robison, a well-known evangelist in Euless, Tex., and host of the
Christian television program "Life Today," concurred but emphasized a different
catalog of what he saw as sins: arrogance in relationships with Third World and
foreign countries, plundering other countries for resources while supporting
their despots, and indifference to others' poverty and pain.

"Any time you get away from God, you do become vulnerable," Mr. Robison said.
"If it is a parent who stays out all night, the children become vulnerable and
are left to fend for themselves. Bad judgment always leaves the door open to
perpetrators of pain."

Mr. Robison is one pastor called on for advice and prayer by the president. Mr.
Robison said that in August, he spent morning praying with Mr. Bush at the
president's Texas ranch, and counseled that "love can break the conspiracy of
terrorism."

Among evangelicals, the terrorist attacks have unleashed renewed calls for
repentance, prayer and spiritual revival. A nationwide prayer vigil planned for
Saturday is to be broadcast by satellite into 1,500 churches. Next week will
bring newspaper advertisements by evangelical groups calling for the nation to
unite in prayer.

"Many people are calling this a wake-up call, and yet it doesn't help us respond
to God to somehow feel that we've been chastised by this," said Steve Hawthorne,
director of WayMakers, a prayer ministry in Austin, Tex. "It might be wise for
us to examine our lives and our hearts and our practices."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Jerry Falwell has been criticized for remarks after
Tuesday's terrorist attacks. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (93%); TERRORISM (92%);
CONSERVATISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CHURCH &
STATE (76%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(71%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (71%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (71%); BIBLE &
CHRISTIAN TEXTS (68%) TERRORISM;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  ABORTION;
CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;  COURTS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) GOODSTEIN, LAURIE; FALWELL, JERRY (REV); ROBERTSON,
PAT; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LOUISVILLE, KY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); KENTUCKY, USA
(79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1582 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 15, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

America Mourns, and Looks at the Path Ahead;
Falwell's Comments

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 107 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. 'Secular' Groups Set Tone for Terror Attacks, Falwell Says" (news
article, Sept. 14):

The Rev. Jerry Falwell's assertion that the American Civil Liberties Union and
gay rights groups bear some responsibility for Tuesday's terrorist attacks is
appalling, but also ironic. While the terrorists may have taken advantage of the
civil liberties that these secular groups promote, their motivation is hatred
fanned by religious fanaticism and intolerance. Mr. Falwell's comments are a
chilling reminder that religion can be used to justify hatred and intolerance
even in this country.

DAVID GAULD
New York, Sept. 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CHURCH & STATE
(90%); RELIGION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HIJACKING (88%); GAYS & LESBIANS (87%); LGBT RIGHTS
(84%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) TERRORISM;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  MISSING PERSONS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); CHRISTIAN COALITION (59%)
;CHRISTIAN COALITION; AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: GAULD, DAVID; FALWELL, JERRY (REV)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (64%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1583 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weekend of Heartache: Let Us Honor the Dead;
A Different Landscape

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

Re a Sept. 16 New York Times Magazine interview with me and your Sept. 11 Arts
pages profile:

The barbarism unleashed against innocent human beings on Sept. 11 has in an
instant transformed the complex landscape of American consciousness.

I'm filled with horror and grief for those murdered and harmed, for their
families and for all affected forever.

"Fugitive Days," the memoir I've written about my participation in the Weather
Underground and the antiwar movement and the events of 30 years ago, is now
receiving attention in a radically changed context.

My book is a condemnation of terrorism in all its forms. We are witnessing
crimes against humanity. The intent of my book was and is to understand, to tell
the truth and to heal.

BILL AYERS
Chicago, Sept. 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: ;FUGITIVE DAYS (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); BOOK REVIEWS (88%);
TERRORISM (88%); INTERVIEWS (88%); LITERATURE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(87%); HIJACKING (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(66%); MURDER (55%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
MISSING PERSONS;  BOOKS AND LITERATURE

ORGANIZATION: WEATHER UNDERGROUND

PERSON: AYERS, BILL

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1584 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weekend of Heartache: Let Us Honor the Dead;
Divisive Language

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 99 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. 'Secular' Groups Set Tone for Terror Attacks, Falwell Says" (news
article, Sept. 14): Shame on the Rev. Jerry Falwell for attacking and blaming
other Americans during a time of national crisis, when we should all stand
together. Didn't we all learn a lesson this week about the dangers of
intolerance and religious fundamentalism? Perhaps Mr. Falwell needs to be
reminded that it is thanks to groups like the American Civil Liberties Union
that he is able to express his views publicly, however misguided and extremist
they may be.

HILARY DUNST
New York, Sept. 14, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); TERRORISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); FUNDAMENTALISM (88%); HIJACKING (88%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (83%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING
PERSONS;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

PERSON: DUNST, HILARY; FALWELL, JERRY (REV)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (64%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1585 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weekend of Heartache: Let Us Honor the Dead;
Divisive Language

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 133 words


To the Editor:

As Americans are uniting for collective healing, religious extremists are
assigning blame for these tragedies -- amazingly -- on gays, lesbians and others
for having "made God mad" (news article, Sept. 14).

While the majority of the faith community is reaching out to comfort our
country's citizens in a time of great need, the Rev. Jerry Falwell and Pat
Robertson, with their dangerous and divisive rhetoric, have chosen to exploit
the horrific terrorist events for their own political agenda. The media and all
Americans should focus on the commonality of our existence and renew our
commitment to providing a free, safe society for every one of our citizens.

JOAN M. GARRY
New York, Sept. 14, 2001

The writer is executive director of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against
Defamation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%) TERRORISM;  HOMOSEXUALITY;
CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: GAY AND LESBIAN ALLIANCE AGAINST DEFAMATION

PERSON: FALWELL, JERRY (REV); ROBERTSON, PAT; GARRY, JOAN M

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1586 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE ATTACKS: SECURITY;
Envisioning an Expensive Future in the Brave New World of Fortress New York

BYLINE:  By DAVID BARSTOW

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1670 words


Late Friday afternoon, pausing amid the swirl of commuters in the main lobby of
Grand Central Terminal, a young man leaned into his girlfriend and whispered a
thought that in an earlier America would have sounded alarmist and paranoid:
"What's to stop a suicide bomber from taking out this whole place?"

After the suffering of this last week, his words only begin to hint at the
broader question many New Yorkers are now confronting with an almost primal
urgency: What will it take to make this city's public spaces safe from attack?

In interviews after last Tuesday, nine security and terrorism experts tried to
answer this question, envisioning a New York City of maximum security where
money was no object in the pursuit of safety.

They described a city transformed, a city in which antiaircraft missiles might
protect the Statue of Liberty, where Times Square would be converted into a
pedestrian mall to thwart truck bombs, where the stained glass in St. Patrick's
Cathedral would be coated with a shatter-resistant film, where bomb-sniffing
dogs would become an accepted, everyday part of the marble landscape in Grand
Central.

Security options once dismissed as unpalatable, impractical or too expensive
would be embraced, they said. There would be long lines, intrusive and random
searches, new identification systems and a strange new vocabulary of terms like
biometrics, bollards, bomb mitigation containers and smart doors.

"You would have to develop a fortress mind-set," said Joseph R. Rosetti,
formerly vice chairman of Kroll Associates and now senior vice president of IPSA
International, a leading security company. "You harden the most likely targets
and you accept that you're going to be checked and poked and prodded."

You would accept, he said, that your efforts might not stop a terrorist who was
willing to die to make a point or that your efforts might simply push the
terrorist toward a slightly less conspicuous site nearby.

Yet officials at several New York City landmarks said that at least some
elements of this new world are sure to be adopted.

"We're going to look at everything," said Tom Kelly, spokesman for the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees security at Grand Central
Terminal.

"A week ago," he said, "certain things would have been unheard of as safety
options. But now you reassess, you reconsider."

In one telling sign of the times, spokesmen for the American Civil Liberties
Union -- normally quick to take issue with calls for increased profiling, random
searches and surveillance cameras -- declined to comment.

Oddly enough, the strongest misgivings were expressed by the same security
consultants who, with clinical expertise, provided a glimpse of what maximum
protection might look like in New York City, post Sept. 11. These experts were
asked to focus on four New York landmarks: Times Square, St. Patrick's
Cathedral, Grand Central Terminal and the Statue of Liberty. As was once the
case with the World Trade Center, each is central to the city's cultural and
commercial life, and each has been on experts' lists of likely terrorist targets
in the United States.

But Howard Safir, the former New York City police commissioner who is now
consultant to the chairman of ChoicePoint, a security information company,
warned of embracing a "bunker, bomb-camp mind-set." While acknowledging, for
example, that turning Times Square into a pedestrian mall might be the most
effective countermeasure to car bombs, he said that such a step would only
signal defeat. "That's basically caving to terrorism," he said.

He did, on the other hand, suggest the installation of 100 or so surveillance
cameras in Times Square. The cameras, he said, should be integrated with
biometric facial imaging software, allowing the images of all pedestrians to be
compared with photographs of known terrorists.

Biometric surveillance systems were a favorite of each of the security experts
interviewed, but they were only a small part of what Times Square would become.
As things stand now, they said, Times Square is vulnerable to a massive truck
bomb, a favorite of terrorists that could well cause hundreds of deaths,
particularly if it were detonated as crowds lined up for Broadway shows.

While some security consultants argued that the only sure defense is closing
Times Square to all cars and trucks, there were less extreme suggestions. Some
said that truck traffic should be restricted to early-morning hours through
designated routes, where they would be subjected to inspections at checkpoints.

And there would be more: new blast-resistant windows in all stores; specially
reinforced trash cans that absorb the blasts of package bombs; public service
announcements urging people to report all unattended packages; frequent sweeps
with bomb-detection dogs and with laboratory equipment that detects the chemical
traces of explosives; still more surveillance cameras on rooftops of surrounding
buildings to look for anyone intent on attacking with mortars or fragmentation
grenades.

A similar menu of defenses was prescribed for Grand Central Terminal, but
maximum security would demand much, much more. To start with, every single
person working at Grand Central would be subjected to security screening. The
number of entrances would be sharply reduced. Those that remained would, at the
very least, be equipped with systems for detecting weapons and explosives,
although this could result in lengthy delays and long lines.

Jeffrey K. Beatty, president of Total Security Services International, which has
advised the National Football League, the Pentagon and the Statue of Liberty,
proposed setting up lanes that would funnel each person entering Grand Central
though "passive walk-through metal detectors." While these would not require
people to line up as they do at more sensitive airport scanners, the lanes would
be monitored by officers trained in profiling techniques to spot potential
terrorists, he said. Partitions made of materials that absorb shrapnel would be
strategically placed to limit the carnage should a suicide bomber, realizing
that he had been spotted, decided to detonate himself.

Grand Central presents a nightmarish scenario for chemical or biological
attacks, particularly at rush hour. "It has been a major concern to us for
years," said Mr. Kelly, the spokesman for the M.T.A.

There are no known devices that can detect whether someone is carrying chemical
or biological agents, terrorism specialists said. But these specialists did
describe several steps they would take. First, they would equip all
air-conditioning systems in Grand Central with devices that neutralize chemical
and biological agents with pulsing ultraviolet light. Second, they would build
"shelter-in-place areas," large, secure rooms with air-lock entrances that
commuters could dash into should chemical or biological agents be detected.
Third, they would embark on an aggressive campaign of asking commuters to submit
to "voluntary" searches.

St. Patrick's Cathedral was seen as particularly vulnerable, given its
undefended main entrance along Fifth Avenue. "Those steps are nice and
comparatively flat and you could drive right up them," said Norman J. Glover, an
architectural engineer and chairman of the American Society of Civil Engineers'
committee for mitigating the effects of terrorism.

The security experts were unanimous in recommending the installation of bollards
-- huge flower planters -- to deter such an attack, and a few urged the closure
of 49th and 50th Streets just north and south of St. Patrick's. "When it comes
to bombs, you're fighting for feet," Mr. Glover said.

Maximum security would also mean ending St. Patrick's tradition of leaving its
doors wide open to all comers. There would be metal detectors and security
guards -- armed, of course -- and all priests and other employees would be
required to wear identification badges. There would be regular sweeps with
bomb-sniffing dogs before and after each service, and the stained glass windows
would be treated with a special antishrapnel coating.

By contrast, the Statue of Liberty was viewed as relatively secure, mainly
because authorities have long recognized its symbolic appeal to terrorists. It
has surveillance cameras, and anyone who wants to take the stairs up to the
crown must pass through airport-style X-ray and screening equipment. The trash
cans are of the bomb-resistant variety, and its security personnel are trained
in techniques for spotting and reacting to potential terrorists.

But there was a consensus among the experts that the security could be far
tighter yet. For example, all boating traffic should be kept at least a quarter
mile from Liberty Island, and the perimeter ideally should be constantly
patrolled by armed boats, though a floating barrier was deemed a viable option.
What's more, all passengers should be required to pass through metal detectors,
biometric surveillance cameras and bomb-scanning equipment before even setting
foot on the ferries to the statue.

Otherwise there is a risk of someone carrying a satchel full of high explosives
to the island and detonating it at the base. "You would probably crumple the
statue," Mr. Glover said.

The trickiest question involved the airspace over the Statue of Liberty. While
each of the security experts said he would close off the airspace, there was
disagreement over how best to protect it.

Mr. Safir, for one, favored keeping fighter jets on constant alert to respond to
any aircraft approaching the airspace over either Manhattan or the statue. But
others said that antiaircraft-missile systems could be installed. Both
approaches, they agreed, left open the chance of shooting down an innocent
aircraft.

As for the cost of all of this upgraded security, several asserted that the
price would be cheap when compared with the $40 billion already committed by the
federal government to aid New York's recovery efforts. "You could do a hell of a
job," Mr. Rosetti said, "with less than a billion dollars."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Diagram: "Maximum Security"Security consultants agree that there
is no way to eliminate the threat of terrorism at New York City's landmarks. But
even approaching maximum security, experts say, might mean the following drastic
measures. Times Square area (from above) INCREASING SURVEILLANCEPlace cameras at
every corner near the height of street lights. Images could be transmitted to
computers and processed with face recognition software. Suggested camera
locations INCREASING PATROLSAssign police or security officers to each corner
and allow canine explosive detection teams to roam the square. Also establish
vapor-and trace-detection units in the area to detect explosives in suspect bags
or packages. Each dot is possible police or security personnel REINFORCING
BUILDINGSReinforce steel and concrete columns on lower floors and fortify
street-level windows by attaching shatter-resistant film. Also, secure heating,
ventilation and air-conditioning systems to prevent chemical or biological
agents from being introduced. DECREASING TRAFFICRestrict the size of vehicles
going through the square so only small sedans are allowed. When pedestrian
traffic is heaviest, like the start and finish of Broadway shows, stop traffic
altogether with barricades that can rise from beneath the street. Alternatively,
turn the square into a pedestrians-only zone. Possible barricade locations
DECREASING PARKINGEliminate all above-and below-ground public parking in the
area to prevent vehicle bombs from being placed. Current parking garage or lot
INCREASING PUBLIC AWARENESSBroadcast public service announcements thoughout the
square and use some billboard and poster space to promote civic vigilance. As in
the messages at airports, remind citizens to report unattended baggage and cars.
INCREASING ATTENTION TO DETAILSUse heavy, blast-resistant trash cans throughout
the square and place large, thick planters along building fronts. Diagram of
Times Square Area. (Sources: Urban Data Solutions; Jack Plaxe, C.T.I. Security
Consulting; Norman J. Glover, Joint Working Group for Defense Against Chemical
and Biological Terrorism)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (78%); MISSILE
SYSTEMS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); HIJACKING
(75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); BUDGETS (74%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (74%); ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT (73%); URBAN TRANSIT SYSTEMS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); SECURITY
GUARD SERVICES (71%); CITIES (70%); DOGS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(69%); CONSULTING SERVICES (69%); BIOMETRICS (69%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY
(65%); MISSING PERSONS (65%); EXECUTIVES (64%); ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS (53%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;
MISSING PERSONS;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING

PERSON: BARSTOW, DAVID

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (99%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  TIMES SQUARE AND 42ND STREET (NYC);  WASHINGTON (DC);
NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1588 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CONGRESS;
Ashcroft Wants Quick Action On Broader Wiretapping Plan

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


Attorney General John Ashcroft said today that he would press Congress to vote
this week on a package of counterterrorism measures that would dramatically
expand the ability of the Justice Department to place wiretaps on telephones and
computer terminals.

Under intense pressure to move quickly on antiterrorism legislation in response
to the deadly attacks in New York and at the Pentagon, lawmakers said the House
and Senate Judiciary Committees would debate the administration's proposals as
soon as Congress reconvened on Thursday, pushing aside other business.

"We've cleared our calendar," said Mimi Devlin, a spokesman for the Senate
committee.

Mr. Ashcroft said at a news conference today that the Justice Department planned
to complete the draft legislation by Wednesday and would present it immediately
to Congress for a vote.

Although many details of the proposal have not been revealed, Mr. Ashcroft said
the administration would call for new authority to conduct roving wiretaps,
allowing law enforcement officials to eavesdrop on terrorist suspects who moved
from phone to phone, rather than eavesdropping on a specific phone.

The proposals were also expected to include new powers for the Justice
Department to fight money laundering, tougher penalties for those who harbor
terrorists and removal of the statute of limitations, or deadlines, for
prosecuting terrorists.

Civil rights advocates said they were alarmed by the administration's demand
that Congress move so quickly to approve measures that, they warned, could
severely curtail the right to privacy.

"Some of these proposals would seem to involve a fundamental rewriting of the
wiretap laws," said James X. Dempsey of the Center for Democracy and Technology.
"We need deliberate, open scrutiny by the legislative process."

Laura W. Murphy of the American Civil Liberties Union said, "We cannot let our
grief and anger overwhelm our democracy. Now is the time for the people's
representatives to be even more thoughtful and deliberative than usual."

Despite Mr. Ashcroft's request for approval of the package this week,
Congressional officials said lawmakers were not likely to move that quickly,
especially in the Senate.

The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, is a leading Congressional advocate of privacy rights. In an interview
today, Senator Leahy promised quick action on the administration's plan but said
there would be a careful review of the proposals.

"If some of the terrorism penalties are not sufficient, that's easy to change,"
he said.

But he added that "the biggest mistake we could make" was for Congress to
conclude that the terrorism threat was so great because of last week's attacks
"that we don't need the Constitution."

In his news conference, Mr. Ashcroft insisted that the department was being
sensitive to privacy rights as it hurriedly drafted the legislation.

"We are mindful of our responsibility to protect the rights and privacy of
Americans," he said, adding, however, that "we want to make sure that our laws
convey the seriousness of the crime of terrorism."

Mr. Ashcroft, a former senator, has told lawmakers that the Justice Department
needs the package approved this week, though lawmakers will be away until
Thursday to observe the Jewish holiday Rosh Hashana.

"We call upon the Congress of the United States to enact these important
antiterrorism measures this week," he said. "We need these tools to fight the
terrorism threat which exists in the United States."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Director Robert Mueller of the F.B.I., and Attorney General John
Ashcroft, background, discussed counterterrorism proposals yesterday. (Manny
Ceneta/Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WIRETAPPING (93%); TERRORISM (92%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
(79%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); APPROVALS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); HIJACKING
(76%); FINANCIAL CRIME COUNTERMEASURES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); MONEY LAUNDERING (67%); INTERVIEWS (66%) TERRORISM;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  COMPUTERS AND
THE INTERNET;  TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(59%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (74%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN);
SHENON, PHILIP

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1589 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PLACING BLAME;
Falwell Apologizes for Saying An Angry God Allowed Attacks

BYLINE:  By GUSTAV NIEBUHR

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 445 words


The Rev. Jerry Falwell apologized last night for saying that last week's
terrorist attacks reflected God's judgment on a nation spiritually weakened by
the American Civil Liberties Union, providers of abortion, supporters of gay
rights and federal court rulings on school prayer.

After enduring a round of criticism that included a rebuke from the White House,
Mr. Falwell issued a statement saying he regretted his remarks on Thursday on
Pat Robertson's television program, "The 700 Club." On the program, he said that
God, angered by the secular groups,had lifted a "curtain" of protection and
allowed the terrorists to strike.

"I apologize that, during a week when everyone appropriately dropped all labels
and no one was seen as liberal or conservative, Democrat or Republican,
religious or secular, I singled out for blame certain groups of Americans," Mr.
Falwell said in the statement. He said his remarks were "insensitive, uncalled
for at the time and unnecessary."

"The only label any of us needs in such a terrible time of crisis is American,"
he said.

In an interview last night, Mr. Falwell said his remarks on Mr. Robertson's
program ran counter to his lifelong theological conviction that it was
impossible to know whether an event reflected God's judgment.

"I am saying that no human being has the knowledge that any act is an act of
God's judgment and any person is responsible for God's judgment," he said. If
the terrorist attacks did reflect God's judgment, he said, then "that judgment
is on all of America -- including me and all fellow sinners."

Mr. Falwell, chancellor of Liberty University and pastor of Thomas Road Baptist
Church in Lynchburg, Va., drew enormous criticism for his remarks last Thursday,
and not just from liberal groups. On Friday, a White House spokesman said that
President Bush did not share the views Mr. Falwell expressed and believed them
to be "inappropriate."

Mr. Falwell said he had been told to expect such a statement in a phone call on
Friday morning from a Bush aide. He would identify the aide only as "the
president's friend."

"He told me that the White House statement would be that the president thought
they were inappropriate and the president did not concur with them," Mr. Falwell
said. But he said repeatedly that no one pressured him to apologize.

On "The 700 Club," Mr. Robertson twice agreed with Mr. Falwell's remarks, a
transcript shows. But Mr. Falwell said Mr. Robertson had only discussed the
possibility that God could lift his protection.

Mr. Robertson released a statement on Friday saying that no one on his program
had suggested that anyone but terrorists was responsible for last Tuesday's
attacks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
CHURCH & STATE (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
LIBERALISM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); LITIGATION (78%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (78%); HIJACKING (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CONSERVATISM
(77%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (77%); RELIGION IN SCHOOLS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); TRANSCRIPTS (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%);
TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (71%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (63%); LGBT RIGHTS
(57%); ABORTION (57%); GAYS & LESBIANS (57%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%) ;AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) FALWELL, JERRY (REV); NIEBUHR, GUSTAV; ROBERTSON,
PAT

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1590 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cautiously, A Resumption Of Politics

BYLINE:  By DAVID M. HALBFINGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WEST ORANGE, N.J., Sept. 17


No one knows how long it will be before New Jersey voters have any appetite for
politics, or for politicians. But there is an election for governor in seven
weeks, and today, one of the candidates ever-so-gingerly sought to restart his
campaign.

Bret D. Schundler, the former mayor of Jersey City, called a news conference at
his headquarters to say he was resuming the business of politics, but with a new
focus: on finding ways to defend the state against terrorism and to speed the
rebuilding of the New York and New Jersey regional economy.

Mr. Schundler said he would wait until Saturday to make any public speeches or
appearances, but the very act of calling a news conference was a risky move, and
several of Mr. Schundler's aides argued strenuously against it, one campaign
official said today.

Mr. Schundler's Democratic opponent, James E. McGreevey, has been all but
invisible outside Woodbridge, where he is mayor, since the attack on the World
Trade Center last Tuesday. He went to Jersey City with donated food and water,
his aides said, and once accompanied firefighters on a ferry over to the rubble
of the twin towers. On Sunday, he spoke at an interfaith memorial service in
Woodbridge that was not widely publicized.

Mr. McGreevey has studiously avoided saying much of anything that could be
remotely interpreted as political. His campaign is on hold at least until
Wednesday, a spokesman said, after which he will take things day by day. "We
believe the enormity of this tragedy completely eclipses politics as usual,"
said the spokesman, Richard McGrath.

While Mr. McGrath refrained from passing judgment on Mr. Schundler's decision, a
Democratic ally of Mr. McGreevey said this: "To be out there, when New Jersey
has barely begun to mourn, seems untimely, to be polite."

But in fairness, Mr. Schundler is in an almost impossible position. The last
polls taken before the terrorist attack showed him trailing Mr. McGreevey by 19
percentage points, and time is running out. And as a former mayor, Mr. Schundler
has no official post from which to command or lead -- only a campaign office,
where he spoke today with an American flag displayed over one shoulder and
Schundler-for-governor posters plastered on the wall behind him.

Mr. Schundler, whose predilection for speaking off the cuff has caused him
trouble in the past, read from prepared notes and was extremely careful today to
avoid problems. Asked about statements by the Rev. Jerry Falwell that have been
interpreted as partly blaming secularists and civil liberties groups for
bringing on the terrorist attacks, Mr. Schundler said he had not read them and
"don't care to."

Rather, Mr. Schundler spoke at length about how America and New Jersey could
learn much from Israel, where he was visiting with New Jersey Jewish leaders --
and, indirectly, courting Jewish votes back home -- when the trade center was
destroyed. He was unable to return until Friday afternoon because of the
suspension of airline service here.

After expressing his sympathies to the grieving, and thanking rescue workers and
volunteers from Jersey City and all over the state, Mr. Schundler said he
planned to use the rest of the week to "see what we can do in this state to
prepare ourselves." And he said that securing the state from terrorism and
rebuilding the economy would become important issues in what is left of the
campaign. He did not go so far as to compare himself with Mr. McGreevey on those
issues or any others.

Mr. Schundler hinted that a full-throated campaign would be appropriate, at some
point.

"We had elections in the middle of the Civil War," he said. "President Lincoln
hit the campaign trail. President Roosevelt had to do the same during the Second
World War. There's nothing more fundamental to our way of life than democracy,
and allowing the people to choose who their leaders will be."

"So I don't think anybody is suggesting it's poor form for candidates to
campaign for office, no matter how dark an experience the country is going
through," he continued. "But with that said, there are new issues all of us who
are looking at serving in leadership have to familiarize ourselves with."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bret Schundler and James McGreevey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); GOVERNORS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%);
ELECTIONS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (76%); HIJACKING (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); POLLS & SURVEYS (67%); RELIGION (66%) ELECTIONS;  GOVERNORS
(US);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

PERSON: HALBFINGER, DAVID M; MCGREEVEY, JAMES E (MAYOR); SCHUNDLER, BRET D

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (97%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW JERSEY;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1591 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fighting Back, While Preserving Our Values

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 123 words


To the Editor:

Re "Bin Laden Is Wanted in Attacks, 'Dead or Alive,' President Says" (front
page, Sept. 18):

As the world looks to America for moral leadership and strength at this terrible
time, it is critical that President Bush adhere closely to the tenets of
democracy and the laws of human rights.

A war on terrorism is justified and is supported by a vast majority of
countries.

But to state that the United States wants the prime suspect in the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks, Osama bin Laden, "dead or alive" is counter to all American
and international laws of justice and due process. The administration must
conform to the law if it is to maintain world support for actions against
terrorists.

PAMELA STANLEY
New York, Sept. 18, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (88%); WAR ON TERROR (88%); AL-QAEDA (88%); US
PRESIDENTS (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (88%); DUE PROCESS (87%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%) TERRORISM

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%) STANLEY, PAMELA; BIN LADEN,
OSAMA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1592 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1040 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Both Sides Make Moves Toward Peace In Mideast
Yasir Arafat instructed his Palestinian security forces to hold their fire even
in self-defense, and Israel forswore all offensive action and pulled its tanks
and troops out of Palestinian-controlled territory, possibly setting the stage
for the first truce talks since midsummer. Mr. Arafat also said he wanted to
volunteer for the American-led anti-terror effort.   A1

Denial of I.R.A. Role in Colombia
Sinn Fein, the political ally of the Irish Republican Army, turned aside fresh
complaints from the Bush administration about the arrests of I.R.A. terror
suspects in Colombia, saying the party "had no case to answer on this issue."
A7


Bush to Meet Indonesia Leader
President Megawati Sukarnoputri, who leads the most populous Muslim nation, is
to meet President Bush in Washington today. Both leaders share concern over the
threat of violence by militant Islamic groups. Mrs. Megawati's visit has been
criticized by Muslim extremists.   A9

Mass Grave in Belgrade
Serbian investigators have found 269 bodies in the biggest of five mass graves
discovered since the downfall of Slobodan Milosevic, the Belgrade District Court
said. The graves are believed to contain victims of the Kosovo conflict.   A5

Disarming in Macedonia
Ethnic Albanian rebels, reassured by plans for a Western security presence, have
told NATO that they will turn in their remaining guns, even though Parliament
has yet to strengthen civil rights. Both sides had agreed to a Sept. 28 deadline
for amending the Constitution to give ethnic Albanians greater rights.   A5

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A12-18

Democrats Ease Limits On Missile Shield Testing
Senate Democrats, seeking to avoid a partisan debate after last week's terror
attacks, agreed to withdraw a budget provision that would have restricted
certain kinds of spending on missile defense. One restriction would have
required the administration to seek Congressional approval to spend money on
activities that would violate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.   A12

Bush Nominee Withdraws
A Consumer Product Safety commissioner, Mary Sheila Gall, asked President Bush
to withdraw her nomination to lead the agency. Democrats have said Ms. Gall, a
Republican, too often favors business over consumer safety, and last month the
Senate Commerce Committee voted, 12-11 along party lines, against her
nomination.   A18

A Belated Tax Break
Some taxpayers who did not qualify for a rebate check this summer will get 2001
tax relief when they file income tax returns next year, according to a letter
from leading members of Congress to the I.R.S.   (AP)

Mistrial in Lab Fraud Case
A mistrial was declared in Beckley, W.Va., after a jury deadlocked in the case
of a former chemist in the state crime laboratory, who was accused of faking
test results used in trials. The prosecutor said he wanted to retry the case
against the chemist, Fred Zain.   A18

SCIENCE/HEALTH

An Overlooked Artery Disease
Peripheral arterial disease, a narrowing of arteries in the legs and sometimes
the arms that is strongly linked to heart attacks and strokes, is underdiagnosed
and undertreated despite availability of a simple test for detecting it, a study
said.   A13

New Approach on Drug Costs
The Bush administration approved an innovative Florida program to lower
prescription drug costs for people on Medicaid and Medicare. Among the
provisions is one that requires drug makers to provide discounts on their
products in exchange for placement on a list of preferred drugs for Medicaid
recipients.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   A20-23

Trash Transfer Plan Is Postponed
New York City's plan to move most of its residential trash out of the region by
rail was postponed. New Jersey officials say Mayor John T. Gregorio of Linden
might have broken state ethics rules when he helped broker a deal to build a
facility in Linden where New York's trash would be moved from barges to rail
cars.   A20

Campaigns at a Standstill
From the mayor's race to the contests for City Council, what was once one of the
most crowded, chaotic elections in New York's history has practically ground to
a halt before Tuesday's primary.   A20

Synagogues Are Packed
Rosh Hashana services for the Jewish New Year were held amid the ashes of the
World Trade Center, as they were all over the city, where Jews sought to make
some sense of a senseless week.   A23

Crime Reports Drop
With New York City's attention fixed on the worst attack in its history, other
crime news has fallen by the wayside. But it was nonetheless remarkable that a
signed Picasso could be reported stolen in broad daylight.   A20

EDUCATION   A24

DINING   F1-10

ARTS   E1-8

Hard Times on Broadway
Many of Broadway's leading producers and union representatives were scrambling
to make concessions and cut costs to help mend an industry imperiled by plunging
ticket sales and a lack of tourist dollars after last week's terrorist attacks.
E1

SPORTS   D1-8

N.F.L. to Make Up Games
The league will play its full 16-game regular season schedule. But issues
concerning locked-out officials and the playoffs remain unsettled.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

Longer-Lasting Anemia Drug
Amgen said it had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a
new longer-lasting version of its top-selling anemia drug that requires fewer
injections. The approval opens new markets for Amgen.   C9

Layoffs Loom for Honeywell
Honeywell International said it would not meet analysts' earnings estimates and
planned to cut more jobs. It said it expected airlines to reduce purchases of
avionics and cockpit control equipment.   C13

Consumer Price Index Up
Inflation was muted in August, kept in check by falling energy prices, the
government said in a report that could reassure the Federal Reserve Board that
there is room for further interest rate cuts.   C13

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   C14-15

Samuel Z. Arkoff
A low-budget-movie mogul who enticed two generations of teenagers into drive-ins
with movies like "I Was a Teenage Werewolf" and "Wild in the Streets," he was
83.   C14

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Wartime rhetoric; rescuing the airlines; a new Election Day.

Columnists: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E2
Weather   D8
TV Listings   E7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); MISTRIAL
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (89%); TAX LAW (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); TAXES & TAXATION (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); GENOCIDE (88%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (86%); TAX RELIEF
(84%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); EVIDENCE (77%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING
(77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); LITIGATION (75%); ARMED FORCES (72%); FORENSICS (70%); US
POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); RELIGION (68%); TEST LABORATORIES
(68%); BUDGETS (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%); INCOME TAX (64%); APPROVALS
(62%); PRODUCT SAFETY (61%); MEDICAL & DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (60%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (56%); SALES REBATES (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (72%); SINN FEIN (57%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (57%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%)

STATE: WEST VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA
(92%); ALBANIA (92%); ISRAEL (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); COLOMBIA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); INDONESIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1594 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Trial Opens For Pastor

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 113 words


A pastor extradited from the United States last year went on trial yesterday
with his son at a United Nations tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania, on charges of
involvement in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.

The pastor, Elizaphan Ntakirutimana, a Seventh-day Adventist, is the first
church leader to come to trial. He and his son Gerard, a medical doctor, have
pleaded not guilty to charges of genocide and crimes against humanity during
1994, when Hutu extremists massacred more than half a million Tutsis and
moderate Hutus. A prosecutor said the pastor encouraged Tutsi men, women and
children to seek refuge in a church and hospital in Kibuye, then called Hutus to
come kill them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); RELIGION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (84%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: NTAKIRUTIMANA, ELIZAPHAN (REV)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (91%)

REGION: RWANDA;  TANZANIA

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1595 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Ireland: A Sense Of Racism

BYLINE:  By Brian Lavery (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 67 words


More than 80 percent of the members of ethnic minorities in Ireland feel that
racism is a serious problem and that the government is not doing enough to
combat it, according to a survey of 600 people by Amnesty International. Women
reported more racism and discrimination than men; just over half of those
surveyed do not feel confident reporting racist incidents to the police.   Brian
Lavery (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); ETHNICITY (90%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); RACE
& RACISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); ETHNIC GROUPS (88%);
DISCRIMINATION (85%) DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: LAVERY, BRIAN

COUNTRY: EUROPE (90%)

REGION: IRELAND

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1596 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: POLICY AND LEGISLATION;
U.S. WIDENS POLICY ON DETAINING SUSPECTS; TROUBLED AIRLINES GET FEDERAL AID
PLEDGE

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON and ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The Bush administration today announced a major expansion of its power to detain
immigrants suspected of crimes, including new rules prompted by last week's
terrorist attacks that would allow legal immigrants to be detained indefinitely
during a national emergency.

Citing the new powers, the Justice Department said it would continue to hold 75
immigrants arrested in connection with the attacks on the World Trade Center and
the Pentagon. Previously, the department faced a 24-hour deadline on whether to
release detained immigrants or charge them with a crime, or with violating the
terms of their visa.

The new detention powers drew statements of concern from civil liberties
advocates and immigration lawyers. While the pressure on the administration and
Congress to act is immense in the wake of the terrorist attacks, there is rising
concern on the left and the right that the rush to respond could erode basic
constitutional freedoms.

The administration, which had the authority to rewrite the detention rules, is
also expected within days to present Congress with a broad package of
anti-terrorism legislation. Civil liberties and privacy groups are pleading with
Congress not to act hastily on the package.

A draft bill circulating today on Capitol Hill, apparently reflecting the
administration's views, would give new authority to the Justice Department to
arrest immigrants suspected of terrorism, accelerate the process of deporting
them and curtail court appeals.

In announcing the new regulations, Attorney General John Ashcroft said at a news
conference that the government had "a responsibility to use every legal means at
our disposal to prevent further terrorist activity by taking people into custody
who have violated the law and who may pose a threat to America."

Mr. Ashcroft insisted that "we're going to do everything we can to harmonize the
constitutional rights of individuals with every legal capacity we can muster to
also protect the safety and security of individuals."

Under its new powers, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, which is part
of the Justice Department, would normally have 48 hours to decide whether to
release or charge a detained immigrant.

The 48-hour deadline could be waived, however, "in the event of emergency or
other extraordinary circumstance," allowing an immigrant to be held for "an
additional reasonable period of time" without charges.

The new rules would apply to immigrants and foreign visitors who entered the
country legally but who are suspected of committing crimes in the United States,
or who have overstayed a visa or violated other terms of their entry into the
country. They would not apply to citizens.

David Martin, a law professor at the University of Virginia and a former general
counsel of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, said "there's definitely
a civil liberties concern" in the new regulations.

"I don't want to be alarmist about this," Mr. Martin said. "If we're talking
about adding an additional 12 hours or 24 hours to detention, I don't think
that's a problem. But if we are holding people for weeks and weeks, then I think
there will be close scrutiny."

Jeanne A. Butterfield of the American Immigration Lawyers Association said that
in the midst of the crisis created by last week's terrorism, the new rules "may
be reasonable, but no one wants to see this lead to some kind of indefinite
detention."

The Supreme Court has questioned the constitutionality of indefinite detention,
ruling last summer that the government could not order open-ended detention of
illegal, clearly deportable immigrants simply for lack of a country willing to
take them.

Human rights groups have long criticized indefinite-detention laws in other
countries, noting that they are often used by repressive governments to lock up
dissidents for months or years under the guise of "emergency" conditions.

The Justice Department has announced that it will ask Congress for broad new
surveillance authority to place wiretaps on phones and computers and a variety
of other powers to fight terrorism. Mr. Ashcroft has asked Congress to act
within days, and few politicians or advocacy groups have been willing, until
now, to suggest a more cautious response.

But in recent days, more are stepping forward to urge lawmakers and the
administration to slow down, examine the security flaws that led to the attacks
and consider the consequences of various proposals for civil liberties.

Representative Bob Barr, a Georgia Republican and staunch opponent of gun
control, sent a letter to Mr. Ashcroft and Congressional leaders today
declaring, "Before we begin dismantling constitutionally protected safeguards
and diminishing fundamental rights to privacy, we should first examine why last
week's attacks occurred."

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Senate
Judiciary Committee, acknowledged in an interview that there was "a hunger to
act," but added, "My concern is that at some point you've got to stop doing
things that give you a nice press release and start doing things that actually
protect the nation."

Mr. Leahy promised quick -- but careful -- action, adding, "The first thing we
have to realize is this is not either or -- this is not the Constitution versus
capturing the terrorists. We can have both."

And Morton H. Halperin, a longtime official with the American Civil Liberties
Union and a veteran of the State Department under the Clinton administration,
described Mr. Ashcroft's plea for action by week's end as "deeply troubling."

Mr. Halperin, now a senior fellow with the Council on Foreign Relations, added,
"We should not be enacting restrictions on the liberty of Americans without
careful debate. If we do it carefully, we can find an acceptable balance. If we
rush into it, we will do things that deprive people of their liberty without
improving security."

Mr. Halperin was one of the organizers of a coalition of groups, as varied as
the American Civil Liberties Union and Americans for Tax Reform, that met for
the first time on Friday. That coalition, informally known as the In Defense of
Freedom Coalition, has scheduled a news conference for Thursday to declare its
concerns. At the moment, many of these groups are demanding that the
administration's proposals be the subject of open debate and orderly
consideration.

Grover Norquist, the influential conservative strategist who heads Americans for
Tax Reform, said, "I've heard some politicians say we need to pass this this
week -- that's code for, if anybody read it, it wouldn't pass."

Jerry Berman, executive director of the Center for Democracy and Technology,
another member of the new coalition, said, "We've had a history of racing to
judgment and passing inappropriate and wrongheaded and ultimately
counterproductive laws."

Mr. Berman added, "Before you pass legislation in this area, you need to know
what happened. And I have not yet found a story or a statement by any official
that says the failure here was caused by restrictions on electronic
surveillance."

But Ron Klain, who served in the White House and Justice Department under
President Bill Clinton, argued that "it's inevitable at times like this that the
pent-up agenda of law enforcement gets put forward."

"I think there is nothing wrong and probably something right about Congress
acting on these matters relatively quickly," Mr. Klain said.

Moreover, he said, the public may well be ready to recalibrate the balance
between civil liberties and security. "The Constitution is not a suicide pact,"
he said.

Mr. Klain argued that Congress needed, however, to ensure that whatever
trade-off was made actually resulted in a safer society.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft yesterday at a briefing. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. B7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); LAWYERS
(78%); DEPORTATION (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); CORPORATE
COUNSEL (72%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (70%); APPEALS (50%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1597 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Matters;
Our Daily Tribute to Differences Provokes Dislike Among Many

BYLINE:  By JOYCE PURNICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 739 words


As readers of this space must know, Matters is not your most emotional of
columns. A temporary departure from routine, however, for two reasons. One is
Mohammad Salman Hamdani. The other is the Rev. Jerry Falwell.

As the world knows by now, Mr. Falwell said after the bombings in New York and
Washington that God gave the terrorists his green light because he was angry
with America for tolerating the American Civil Liberties Union, People for the
American Way, advocates of abortion rights, feminists, gays, lesbians and other
examples of secular life.

"I point the finger in their face and say, 'You helped this happen' " said Mr.
Falwell, who later tried to apologize. His original remarks read like a memo to
New York: God let suicide bombers kill what could turn out to be more than 5,600
people in the World Trade Center disaster because he disapproved of Sin City.

That was enough to make the blood boil. Then a friend called to say that
neighbors of her parents in Bayside, Queens, may have lost their son, Mohammad
Salman Hamdani, in the buildings' collapse.

Mr. Hamdani, a June graduate of Queens College with plans to be a doctor, must
have gone to the trade center complex to help. He had driven an ambulance to
earn money for school, so he knew how to function in an emergency, said his
mother, Talat Hamdani. "He went to volunteer, he's that kind of a person," said
Mrs. Hamdani, a teacher at a middle school in Jamaica, Queens.

Mrs. Hamdani thinks that her son, 23, was on his way to work as a research
assistant at Rockefeller University on Tuesday morning when he saw the attack
and headed downtown. He takes the elevated No. 7 line -- yes, the same line
condemned for its diversity by that other lover of New York, John Rocker.

Now the Hamdanis, Pakistani Muslims who emigrated from Karachi 22 years ago, are
numb. So is their neighbor, Naomi Fuchs. "Such a wonderful family, such
wonderful boys, they wouldn't ever let me shovel the snow," Mrs. Fuchs said late
Monday afternoon, as she prepared to observe Rosh Hashana.

This is just one of so many wrenching stories of lives destroyed and families
traumatized on Sept. 11, but it somehow crystallizes the elements of the whole
awful tragedy, because it is a reminder of what gives the city its soul. What
makes New York distinct is not so much its size or glamor or audacity, but its
daily tribute to difference, racial, religious, political. New Yorkers live with
their differences as a matter of routine.

It occurred to me this week that the city's everyday reality is precisely what
unnerves the Falwells and infuriates the terrorists. It's a big part of what
normally makes the country so dislike the city that it now purports to admire
(surely not for long).

NEW Yorkers do not all love each other. The city has endured riots and racial
tensions over the years; since the bombings, Muslims and those who appear to be
from the Middle East have been victims of slurs, threats and some attacks,
though other parts of the country have reported more, and more-violent, hate
crimes.

The fact is, while New Yorkers are no strangers to bigotry, most people tolerate
each other. Some celebrate diversity, others just live with it, if only as a
survival mechanism. People are thrown together on subways, in buses, on the
streets, instead of being isolated in cars. New Yorkers are so used to seeing
people in black coats or turbans or dreadlocks that it takes a lot to make them
blink.

The day after the bombing, the acrid smell of disaster still heavy in the air,
thousands of people visited the memorial that sprang up spontaneously in Union
Square Park. Some were crying and lighting candles, others praying, still others
arguing intensely. "War is not the answer," a young man was saying, to which
another answered, "Political systems are changing."

Posters covering the ground like cardboard carpeting were decorated with peace
signs and slogans: "Only violence will stop the violence," said one. "Peace and
love," said another, next to "Never again." The people drawn to the park were as
different as the political sentiments they expressed: balding hippies, college
students in jeans, lawyers in business suits and stiletto heels, women in veils.

The scene was at once sad and encouraging. It said that New York was still New
York. The country will again resent New York. Jerry Falwell will again damn it.
John Rocker may even ridicule it again.

The sooner the better.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); BOMBINGS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CHURCH & STATE
(76%); HIJACKING (76%); GAYS & LESBIANS (76%); FAMILY (75%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (75%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR
HIGH SCHOOLS (65%); ABORTION (56%); ROSH HASHANAH (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: PEOPLE FOR THE AMERICAN WAY (57%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(57%)

PERSON: PURNICK, JOYCE; FALWELL, JERRY (REV); HAMDANI, MOHAMMAD SALMAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1599 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain to Tighten Controls On Its Air and Sea Borders

BYLINE:  By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 19


Britain said today that it would tighten border controls to reduce the number of
people seeking asylum here and to deter terrorists after the attacks on New York
and Washington.

The home secretary, David Blunkett, said the newest controls would include
scanners to be installed on both sides of the English Channel that would be
capable of detecting people hidden in vehicles. He said more immigration
officers would be deployed at the French terminal of the Channel Tunnel to help
stem the flow of illegal crossings, and that closed circuit television cameras,
currently in use at London's Gatwick Airport, would also be installed at
Heathrow Airport. He said, detention centers would be expanded to make room for
asylum-seekers whose applications are rejected.

The announcement reflected fears that terrorists could turn on Britain because
it is a close ally in Washington's effort to build an international coalition
against terrorism. With European justice and interior ministers set to meet
Thursday in Brussels, Mr. Blunkett urged broader security measures to control
the growing flow of fugitives in Western Europe.

Speaking in the channel port of Dover, Mr. Blunkett said the pressure on
Europe's borders "is not just a problem limited to Britain but it is a global
issue of international mobility, which the uncertainties created by the horrific
attack on the United States last week will accelerate."

Even before the suicide attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the
sight of scores of fugitive Afghans, Iranians and Kurds trying to enter Britain
unlawfully through the Channel Tunnel from France had led the authorities to
seek stronger measures to block them.

The Conservative opposition has taunted the government to prove that it is not a
"soft touch" for asylum-seekers apparently drawn to Britain by the prospect of
jobs. In many European countries asylum-seekers are not permitted to find paid
work, but in Britain they may work after an initial six-month wait for their
applications for sanctuary to be processed.

Civil rights groups have criticized the authorities for detaining some
asylum-seekers while they seek approval of their applications for refuge and for
practices including giving asylum-seekers vouchers rather than cash to buy food
and other essentials while they await a hearing.

Last year, more than 80,000 people applied for asylum in Britain.

The authorities said today that some 43,130 applications were still being
processed, twice as many as the government previously acknowledged but far fewer
than the 103,000 it acknowledged in January 2000.

Since last week's attacks in the United States, there have been a

handful of anti-American demonstrations by British-based Muslim groups that are
under surveillance, according to the British police. The demonstrations have
been condemned by mainstream Muslim groups. "Anyone who advocates, incites,
organizes or trains people to kill others in this country will be picked up,"
Mr. Blunkett said today.

Unlike Britain, many European Union countries are signers of the so-called
Schengen agreement permitting free movement without passports across internal
borders such as those, say, between Germany and the Netherlands. British
officials have said in the past that the system encourages free movements by
terrorists or criminals.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); AIRPORTS
(90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (77%); OCEANS
(77%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); BRIDGES & TUNNELS (71%); AIRLINES (70%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); APPROVALS (69%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%);
CONSERVATISM (68%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  TRAVEL
RESTRICTIONS

PERSON: COWELL, ALAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); EUROPE (93%); ENGLAND (91%);
WESTERN EUROPE (79%); BELGIUM (77%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1600 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 21, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Hama Rules

BYLINE:  By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 731 words


In February 1982 the secular Syrian government of President Hafez al-Assad faced
a mortal threat from Islamic extremists, who sought to topple the Assad regime.
How did it respond? President Assad identified the rebellion as emanating from
Syria's fourth-largest city -- Hama -- and he literally leveled it, pounding the
fundamentalist neighborhoods with artillery for days. Once the guns fell silent,
he plowed up the rubble and bulldozed it flat, into vast parking lots. Amnesty
International estimated that 10,000 to 25,000 Syrians, mostly civilians, were
killed in the merciless crackdown. Syria has not had a Muslim extremist problem
since.

I visited Hama a few months after it was leveled. The regime actually wanted
Syrians to go see it, to contemplate Hama's silence and to reflect on its
meaning. I wrote afterward, "The whole town looked as though a tornado had swept
back and forth over it for a week -- but this was not the work of mother
nature."

This was "Hama Rules" -- the real rules of Middle East politics -- and Hama
Rules are no rules at all. I tell this story not to suggest this should be
America's approach. We can't go around leveling cities. We need to be much more
focused, selective and smart in uprooting the terrorists.

No, I tell this story because it's important that we understand that Syria,
Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia have all faced Islamist threats and crushed them
without mercy or Miranda rights. Part of the problem America now faces is
actually the fallout from these crackdowns. Three things happened:

First, once the fundamentalists were crushed by the Arab states they fled to the
last wild, uncontrolled places in the region -- Lebanon's Bekaa Valley and
Afghanistan -- or to the freedom of America and Europe.

Second, some Arab regimes, most of which are corrupt dictatorships afraid of
their own people, made a devil's pact with the fundamentalists. They allowed the
Islamists' domestic supporters to continue raising money, ostensibly for Muslim
welfare groups, and to funnel it to the Osama bin Ladens -- on the condition
that the Islamic extremists not attack these regimes. The Saudis in particular
struck that bargain.

Third, these Arab regimes, feeling defensive about their Islamic crackdowns,
allowed their own press and intellectuals total freedom to attack America and
Israel, as a way of deflecting criticism from themselves.

As a result, a generation of Muslims and Arabs have been raised on such
distorted views of America that despite the fact that America gives Egypt $2
billion a year, despite the fact that America fought for the freedom of Muslims
in Kuwait, Bosnia and Kosovo, and despite the fact that Bill Clinton met with
Yasir Arafat more than with any other foreign leader, America has been vilified
as the biggest enemy of Islam. And that is one reason that many people in the
Arab-Muslim world today have either applauded the attack on America or will tell
you -- with a straight face -- that it was all a C.I.A.-Mossad plot to embarrass
the Muslim world.

We need the moderate Arab states as our partners -- but we don't need only their
intelligence. We need them to be intelligent. I don't expect them to order their
press to say nice things about America or Israel. They are entitled to their
views on both, and both at times deserve criticism. But what they have never
encouraged at all is for anyone to consistently present an alternative, positive
view of America -- even though they were sending their kids here to be educated.
Anyone who did would be immediately branded a C.I.A. agent.

And while the Arab states have crushed their Islamic terrorists, they have never
confronted them ideologically and delegitimized their behavior as un-Islamic.
Arab and Muslim Americans are not part of this problem. But they could be an
important part of the solution by engaging in the debate back in the Arab world,
and presenting another vision of America.

So America's standing in the Arab-Muslim world is now very low -- partly because
we have not told our story well, partly because of policies we have adopted and
partly because inept, barely legitimate Arab leaders have deliberately deflected
domestic criticism of themselves onto us. The result: We must now fight a war
against terrorists who are crazy and evil but who, it grieves me to say, reflect
the mood in their home countries more than we might think.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
HIJACKING (70%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (56%); WAR & CONFLICT (56%);
MIRANDA RULE (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (50%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (50%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (73%); THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (51%) FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); EGYPT (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
KOSOVO (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); KUWAIT (79%);
EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SYRIA;  EGYPT;  ALGERIA;  TUNISIA

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1601 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 22, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Rallies America: Ovations and Doubts

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 114 words


To the Editor:

My parents are Afghans, peace-loving Muslims who appreciate America.

President Bush, in his speech on Thursday, summed it up best: "Afghanistan's
people have been brutalized."

Indeed, so here are some things to do:

The United Nations and world powers must stop the genocide and eliminate the
terrorist camps in Afghanistan. There should be support for a democratically
elected government under United Nations auspices. Exiled Afghan intellectuals,
bureaucrats and technocrats must be helped to return.

The United States has always championed freedom and democracy. Please free the
people of Afghanistan and restore humanity!

MIR HEKMATULLAH SADAT
San Diego, Sept. 21, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(88%); GENOCIDE (88%); TERRORISM (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); RELIGION (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); HIJACKING (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (84%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%) SADAT, MIR HEKMATULLAH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (70%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1605 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 23, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Katherine Biller, Bennett Freeman

SECTION: Section 9; Column 2; Society Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 466 words


Katherine Newman Biller and Bennett Freeman, like many other couples faced with
the travel nightmares after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, were determined
to go ahead with their wedding last Sunday, even though it was to take place a
continent away from their home and the homes of many of the guests.

"Kate and I felt that it was appropriate and important to bring family and
friends together," said Mr. Freeman, 44.

They were planning to marry in Palo Alto, Calif. Some family and friends were
already in the Bay Area, including the bride's parents, Elizabeth Biller Chapman
and Alan Biller, who live in Palo Alto, and the bridegroom's mother,
Thelma-Jeanne Taylor, who is in San Francisco.

But the bridal couple live in Washington; the bride's 84-year-old grandmother,
Sylvia Burack, lives in Brookline, Mass.; and the bridegroom's father, Harry L.
Freeman, is in Chevy Chase, Md.

"The flight, usually 6 hours, took 24," said Mrs. Freeman, 28, who is training
to be a Pilates instructor at Excel Movement Studios in Washington. Their 11
a.m. nonstop flight to San Francisco on the day after the attacks was canceled.
They managed to find a 5 p.m. flight to Los Angeles two days later, which was
delayed until 8 p.m., and then to 9:30. They got there at midnight Pacific time.

"We knew that if we could get to California, we could rent a car and drive to
Palo Alto, if need be," said Mr. Freeman, a former deputy assistant secretary
for democracy, human rights and labor in the State Department, who is now a
business consultant in Washington specializing in corporate social
responsibility.

After a brief stay at an airport hotel, they returned to the airport early
Saturday morning to catch the 8:30 a.m. shuttle to San Francisco. All but one
shuttle -- theirs -- had been canceled. After that, things fell into place, if
only barely.

The luggage with their clothes for the weekend's events turned up in San
Francisco four hours before the rehearsal dinner on Saturday. So did the bride's
grandmother, who had taken one of the first flights out of Logan Airport in
Boston. The bridegroom's father caught a flight from Baltimore to San Francisco.

Of the 14 guests who had to travel by air, 3 couldn't. One couple didn't attend
because of a relative lost in one of the attacks.

The wedding was held as planned in the Wisteria Garden at the Elizabeth F.
Gamble Garden, with Rabbi Sheldon Lewis officiating. The air was redolent with
the scent of wedding flowers, roses growing in a nearby garden and a corsage of
memory for the missing guest and his loss.

"Getting married is important, but in the light of the circumstances, the focus
shifted to everyone who was there," Mrs. Freeman said. "It became a time to
reaffirm life and hold people together. It was a really hard time to be alone."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Bruce Forrester)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM
(78%); MARRIAGE (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (68%);
CONSULTING SERVICES (67%); COACHES & TRAINERS (67%); CORPORATE SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY (63%) WEDDINGS AND ENGAGEMENTS

PERSON: BILLER, KATHERINE NEWMAN; FREEMAN, BENNETT

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%);
BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); BALTIMORE, MD, USA (56%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (95%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1608 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 24, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ENERGY MARKET;
Military Plans Must Ensure Oil Flow

BYLINE:  By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1003 words


Oil, long among the abiding interests of the United States in the Middle East,
will unavoidably help to shape the Bush administration's planning of the war on
terrorism, according to experts on the industry and the region.

Some analysts consider it almost unseemly to bring up such matters when
deliberating on a response to the killing of thousands of Americans. But the
reality, they acknowledge, is that the White House is already analyzing how
various forms of retribution for the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks could affect
American oil supplies.

In the short run, it looks as if supplies are safe. In the immediate wake of the
attacks, leading oil nations like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait gave assurances that
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries would keep output stable.

Ultimately, though, a great deal hinges on how the American retaliation unfolds.
Arab allies of the United States are themselves eager to uproot terrorist
networks, like the one run by Osama bin Laden, because they have long feared
that such groups could topple their governments.

Yet if they align themselves too closely with the antiterrorist efforts and
Washington unleashes a wide campaign that hits many Islamic countries, moderate
Arab governments could be destabilized by uprisings.

"If the United States wants a broad coalition of allies, it needs to have a
narrow list of targets," said Raad Alkadiri, a Middle East specialist at the
Petroleum Finance Company, a consulting firm in Washington. "If they have a
broad list of targets, they will have a narrow list of allies. That's exactly
what the administration is wrestling with now."

In the run-up to an OPEC meeting on Wednesday in Vienna, analysts said, the
United States let the cartel know that it would like output to rise so that
prices would fall in the face of recession. But OPEC fears that this could cause
a price crash by supplying more oil as the demand for it drops.

Most analysts think that Saudi Arabia, OPEC's de facto leader, and others will
assure the United States behind closed doors that they will do what is
necessary, informally, to keep prices on the low side. Oil for November delivery
ended trading in New York on Friday at $25.97 a barrel.

The United States has become so widely disliked in Arab countries in the Middle
East that governments there risk credibility with their own people by aligning
too closely with it. American might and wealth, when compared with the political
weakness and poverty of much of the Islamic world, has kindled some of that
resentment, a range of diplomats and analysts said. Yet more than anything, they
said, Arabs are frustrated with American policy in the Middle East -- in
particular what they consider the unquestioning support for Israel in the
Palestinian uprising.

And many Arabs blame the American thirst for oil for miring them in shaky
economies run by corrupt leaders.

"The resentment grows when people see democracy is fine, dissent is fine in the
United States, but is denied people in the Middle East," said Hanny Megally,
executive director of the Middle East and North Africa division of Human Rights
Watch.

For now, the United States appears likely to focus on targets in Afghanistan as
the Bush administration works to determine what the next steps might be.

Asked whether the administration was considering how any retribution might
affect oil supplies, a spokeswoman for the Energy Department directed questions
to the State Department. Representatives there did not return calls seeking
comment.

But oil industry analysts who have spoken to administration officials said that
the United States and the Persian Gulf nations had agreed that as many tankers
as possible must soon sail with Middle East oil for the markets to be convinced
that OPEC assurances were sincere. So far, that appears to have happened, the
analysts said.

If Washington indeed opts for a wide-ranging response to the terrorist attacks,
hardly anyone expects Arab nations to embargo their oil exports, as they did in
1973, in response to American support of Israel in the Middle East war. A decade
of low oil prices -- and the producing countries' overspending -- have made oil
revenue critical to their budgets.

A full-scale bombing of Iraq could remove two million barrels a day of oil from
the global market. In the past, Saudi Arabia and other gulf nations have made up
for interruptions of the flow of Iraqi oil, and they might do so again. But they
also might have to back away from open support of the United States.

Iraqis have lived under economic sanctions for a decade, and many Muslims think
that Iraq has suffered enough, Middle East experts said.

The Bush administration has indicated that it might use the existing American
military presence in Saudi Arabia as part of any attacks. But those units, there
since the end of the gulf war in 1991 and financed in great part by a
now-struggling Saudi budget, have been considered an affront to the
sensibilities of many Muslims and to national sovereignty by many Saudi
citizens, diplomats and analysts said. The Bush administration must take pains
to consult with the Saudi government about how American troops on its soil will
be used, analysts said.

"The Saudi monarchy is already considered an enemy by those we might be
bombing," said Charles W. Freeman Jr., ambassador to Saudi Arabia during the
gulf war, "so we should consult them if we will be placing them in jeopardy."

An unintended consequence of wide-ranging American attacks on Islamic countries
could be that through popular uprisings, copycats of the radical Taliban leaders
in Afghanistan could rise to power in the gulf region, where two-thirds of the
world's known oil reserves are concentrated.

"We have a dual interest here," said Bill Richardson, energy secretary in the
Clinton administration. "We must have a significant impact on bin Laden's
network, and we have to preserve the stability of regimes like Saudi Arabia,
which is our principal national security and energy ally in the region."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); ENERGY & UTILITY TRADE (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (89%); BUSINESS FORECASTS (89%);
CARTELS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PETROLEUM
EXPORTS & IMPORTS (79%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (79%); OIL & GAS PRICES (79%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); EXPORT TRADE (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
AIRLINES (74%); CONSULTING SERVICES (72%); RECESSION (67%); ECONOMIC NEWS (67%);
RELIGION (66%); POLITICS (65%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON
BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  PRICES (FARES, FEES AND
RATES);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (56%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (72%) BANERJEE, NEELA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AUSTRIA (79%); ISRAEL (79%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1609 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 24, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Victims of '93 Bombay Terror Wary of U.S. Motives

BYLINE:  By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1249 words

DATELINE: BOMBAY, Sept. 21


This city, the financial capital of the world's most populous democracy, knows
the sudden horror of a terrorist attack that seems to come from nowhere.

Eight years ago, as hundreds of brokers hustled to the manic rhythms of the
trading ring in the 28-story Bombay Stock Exchange, someone drove a car into the
basement and detonated a powerful bomb.

The blast sent a hailstorm of glass flying into the lanes around the building.
Shards sliced through the bodies of pushcart vendors. Then, before anyone had
time to assimilate the carnage, more bombs exploded in swift succession across
the city, killing more than 260 people and wounding more than 700.

If any place should rejoice in America's declaration of war on terrorism, it
would seem to be Bombay, a city that has suffered its effects firsthand and
where many people have deep ties to the United States.

Yet there is also a wariness here of America's motives in announcing that every
country must either stand with or against the United States as it goes after
terrorists and the states that harbor them.

India has accused Pakistani intelligence agents of sponsoring the bombings in
Bombay in 1993, a contention Pakistan has always denied. But to get at America's
No. 1 suspect, Osama bin Laden, the United States is working with Pakistan,
which many Indians regard as the principal incubator of terrorism directed
against them.

Some Indians think that despite its righteous call to arms, the world's sole
superpower is mainly interested in fighting the terrorists who struck it, not
the ones who hit them.

"What happened to the United States is deadly and sad," said Gaurav Sanghvi, who
was a 22-year-old broker in the stock exchange building on the day of the blasts
in 1993. "They keep talking about a war on terrorism, but they keep asking
Pakistan to help, and Pakistan supports terrorism."

The Bush administration's seemingly straightforward goal of defeating global
terrorism has inevitably enmeshed it in the tricky, complicated realities of
South Asia. "This is the world's fight," President Bush declared. "This is
civilization's fight."

But for India and Pakistan, the terms of the struggle are not that simple. For
years each of them has accused the other of sponsoring terrorism in their battle
for Kashmir, the Himalayan territory that both claim.

Now, when relations between India and America have been improving, the United
States faces a delicate diplomatic challenge to sustain Pakistan's support for
American military strikes into neighboring Afghanistan while not alienating
India.

The Indian government says it supports America in its hour of need, but the
strains of America's cooperation with Pakistan are showing. Prime Minister Atal
Behari Vajpayee said in an interview with The Times of India on Thursday that
Washington had not yet shown that "it was in a mood to focus on India's bitter
experience of terrorism on its own soil."

India would eventually like the United States to put pressure on Pakistan to
return those accused of carrying out the Bombay blasts -- Muslim gangsters from
Bombay's underworld who India says now live in Karachi -- and to crack down on
the Islamic religious schools and training camps in Pakistan that India believes
breed terrorists. But none of that is happening, at least not now. Indian
officials say no such request has been made to the United States at this point.

India wakes with numbing regularity to headlines that announce the latest
slaughter of innocents in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir, most recently
of beheaded Hindu priests and murdered shepherds. India blames the killings on
Islamic fundamentalist groups in the territory that it says are supported by
Pakistan. Pakistan denies it.

The Indian authorities have built a detailed circumstantial case laid out in
yellowing confidential documents that they say prove that Pakistan was behind
the Bombay attacks.

When Pakistan's military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, visited India in July,
India's home minister, L. K. Advani, raised the issue and the need for an
extradition treaty so that the accused, Dawood Ibrahim, could be returned to
India to face justice.

The general denied that Mr. Ibrahim was in Pakistan, but earlier this month
Newsline, a reputable Pakistani magazine, reported that the main suspects
charged in the Bombay blasts were living in Karachi "under fake names and ID's,
and provided protection by government agencies."

This city and the stock traders who were at the Bombay Stock Exchange when the
bomb exploded eight years ago seem to savor the ironies of the current
situation.

A banner draped on Marine Drive, a broad thoroughfare that sweeps along the
Arabian Sea, says, "Terrorist Attack Expensive Wake-Up Call for U.S.," capturing
the sense here that the United States is finally enduring in one ghastly,
overwhelming incident what India has suffered in countless cruel cuts for more
than a decade.

"It's only when the police commissioner's house is robbed that strict action is
taken," said Rakesh Jhun jhunwala, an investor who was on the trading floor when
the bomb exploded on March 12, 1993.

American State Department reports annually chastise India for human rights
abuses in Kashmir, but leading American politicians are now demanding that the
C.I.A. again be empowered to hire shady operatives with violent pasts and to
assassinate evildoers.

"Generally the feeling here is that whenever there's a bomb blast, India is
asked, 'Where is the proof Pakistan is involved?' " said Deena Mehta, a
stockbroker. "Now that it's happened in America's own backyard, they're not
asking for proof. They're just announcing that the finger points at Afghanistan
and planning to attack."

Still, there is a strong conviction among the peddlers and the brokers who work
in and around the stock exchange that India should help America. Partly, it
grows out of self-interest. The Afghan training camps that America is likely to
strike produce holy warriors battling India in Kashmir, they say.

But there is another more personal undercurrent in the desire to help that goes
beyond politics. Many of the brokers interviewed had studied in the United
States or had friends or family there.

The number of people of Indian descent living in the United States has doubled
in the last decade to 1.7 million. They are linked to their Indian friends and
relatives by e-mail, Internet chat rooms and telephone. Scores of those missing
in the collapse of the World Trade Center are of Indian origin, officials here
say.

"On the street level there are deep roots with America," said Ramesh Damani, who
studied and worked in California for a dozen years before moving back to Bombay
to run his own small brokerage firm. "The country of aspiration is America.
Everyone wants to go to America."

Sanat Dalal, dapper in a brilliant white safari suit, epitomizes the
contradictory tugs of feeling toward the United States. An autographed portrait
of Bill Clinton hangs on the wall of his sleek 12th-floor trading office at the
stock exchange.

He unabashedly admires America's capitalist, individualistic ethos. His son, who
got his master's in business administration at the University of Hartford, lives
and works in Connecticut.

But like many Indians, Mr. Dalal seems baffled that the United States, the
second-largest democracy in the world, has turned to Pakistan, run by a military
government since a coup in 1999, rather than democratic, pluralistic India.
"Americans talk of democracy," he said, "but side with dictators."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: CHAOS IN WAKE OF 1993 BOMBING -- A survivor was led away from
the site of a bomb explosion at the Bombay Stock Exchange on March 12, 1993.
More than 260 people died in bombings that day. (Associated Press); BUSINESS AS
USUAL IN 2001 -- Ramesh Damani, right, with colleagues in his office at the
Bombay Stock Exchange. Mr. Damani studied and worked in California before
returning to Bombay to run a small brokerage firm. (Santosh Verma for The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); STOCK EXCHANGES (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%);
INTERVIEWS (65%); PRIME MINISTERS (60%); TEMPORARY STAND RETAILING (56%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PAKISTAN

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) DUGGER, CELIA W

CITY: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); KASHMIR (79%); DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); ASIA (79%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); SOUTHERN ASIA (55%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  PAKISTAN;  INDIA;  BOMBAY (INDIA)

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1612 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ADVOCATES;
Much of the Policy Criticism Aimed at U.S. Turns Muted

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 829 words


Early in September, Oxfam, the British humanitarian organization, was
circulating a petition calling on the United States to "put health before
wealth" by supporting relaxation of international patent policies that Oxfam
says make vital medicines too expensive for developing countries.

But immediately after the terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon, the petition was removed from Oxfam's Web site. When it returned last
week, the cartoon drawing of Uncle Sam had been replaced with a picture of a
bottle of pills, and the language singling out the United States had been muted.
The group also canceled a news conference at which it had planned to denounce
the United States for its patent stance.

"It was not appropriate given the kind of national trauma that was occurring
here," said Severina Rivera, a senior policy adviser at Oxfam America in
Washington.

Since the terrorist attacks, many other advocacy groups have been canceling
planned actions as well, or have toned down oratory that could be perceived as
insensitive or even unpatriotic.

The Sierra Club has removed the "W Watch" column from its Web site because it
could be perceived as critical of President Bush. It has also stopped its phone
solicitations and pulled advertising from the air. The A.F.L.-C.I.O., the
Mobilization for Global Justice and many other groups canceled plans to protest
at the annual meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. The
bank and fund later canceled their meetings, which were scheduled for the end of
this month in Washington.

Friends of the Earth let the one-year anniversary of its discovery of
unauthorized genetically modified corn in the food supply pass without even a
news release. "No one's interested in gene-altered corn right now," said Mark
Helm, a spokesman for the organization.

Even if activists are broadcasting their messages, few people seem to be
listening. "What we find is a blackout on coverage and attention to activism,"
said Asia Russell, a member of Act Up Philadelphia, which has been campaigning
to have lower priced drugs available to treat AIDS in Africa.

Some groups fear that if they are perceived as unpatriotic it will hurt them in
the long run. "We strongly need to avoid any perceptions that we are being
disrespectful to President Bush," Allen Mattison, director for media relations
at the Sierra Club, wrote in an internal memorandum. "Now is the time for
rallying together as a nation; the public will judge very harshly any groups
whom they view as violating this need for unity."

But several activists say they are concerned that the self-restraint, especially
as expressed in the Sierra Club memorandum, has gone too far.

"This self-censorship is dangerous in itself," said Kristin Dawkins, director of
the globalism program at the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy in
Minneapolis, which is critical of the influence of multinational corporations on
agriculture. "It allows some of the very, very dangerous policies that the Bush
administration is pursuing this very minute to go forward unchecked."

Environmental groups say they are concerned that some proponents of opening the
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling are pushing their cause using
the prospect of energy disruptions from a possible war. Some human rights
groups, while dropping their usual causes, are starting campaigns to oppose any
rush toward war and steps that they perceive would erode domestic civil
liberties in the name of counterterrorism.

Ms. Rivera of Oxfam, a lawyer who normally deals with trade issues, has shifted
abruptly to analyzing international laws regarding military responses. "We have
a position urging military restraint," she said.

The International Action Center in New York had been planning a march in
Washington on Saturday against the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
But with the financial meetings canceled, the group says it will now have an
antiwar demonstration in Washington the same day, said Teresa Gutierrez, a
national co-director.

She dismissed concerns that such demonstrations would be unpopular. "We went to
the vigils at Union Square with some caution and sensitivity and found there was
no problem in handing out antiwar fliers," she said.

Some groups are continuing with their campaigns. The Organic Consumers
Association went ahead last week with planned leafleting outside Starbucks
outlets to protest the use of genetically modified ingredients and to promote
the sale of coffee grown by people earning what the association said was a
decent wage.

Ronnie Cummins, national director of the association, said about 20 of 300
volunteers nationwide postponed distributing the leaflets.

Mr. Cummins said he received one irate e-mail message "from somebody who said it
was a shame and why didn't we move to Afghanistan." But he added that his
volunteers said that Wall Street resumed business "and so did our criticism of
corporate behavior."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PETITIONS (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); GLOBALIZATION (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%);
ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (87%); GENERIC DRUGS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); PATENTS (77%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (77%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (77%); HIJACKING
(77%); CENSORSHIP (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); TELEMARKETING (73%); AIDS & HIV
(73%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (73%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (72%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); AIDS & HIV TREATMENT (72%); DRUG PRICES (72%);
AGRICULTURE REGULATION & POLICY (72%); GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD (71%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (70%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); AGRICULTURE (68%); CORN
FARMING (68%); POLITICS (66%); AIRLINES (64%); GENETIC ENGINEERING (63%);
ANNIVERSARIES (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  CENSORSHIP;  UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

ORGANIZATION: OXFAM AMERICA (92%); SIERRA CLUB (55%); AFL-CIO (55%);
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%) POLLACK, ANDREW; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1613 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Move: Room for Guns and Butter?;
'Enduring Freedom'

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 102 words


To the Editor:

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld must remember that there is a double
meaning to "Enduring Freedom," his new name for the war against terrorism
("Renaming an Operation to Fit the Mood," news article, Sept. 26).

"Enduring" means "tolerating" as well as "persevering."

Americans will criticize the war effort and dissent from particular
administration antiterrorist policies. Mr. Rumsfeld has a patriotic duty to
endure -- not try to squelch -- such discomforting free speech.

FRANZ ALLINA
Bronx, Sept. 26, 2001

The writer is a member of the board of directors, Committee to Protect
Journalists.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JOURNALISM (88%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (88%);
WRITERS (88%); TERRORISM (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (85%); COUNTERTERRORISM (85%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (82%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1615 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Next Chapter, Is Technology an Ally?

BYLINE:  By KATIE HAFNER

SECTION: Section G; Column 2; Circuits; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1644 words


OVER the last two weeks, computer scientists and others who think about
technology have wondered aloud about its likely role in countering terrorism --
or in carrying it out. Have the limitations and dangers of technology been
overlooked? Where, on the other hand, might technological innovation emerge or
be redirected as a result of recent events?

For Ray Kurzweil, an expert in artificial intelligence and an innovative figure
in computing, the events are already accelerating technologies that allow work,
and people, to be dispersed rather than centralized. Security experts like Peter
Neumann point to the renewed interest -- and perhaps unfounded confidence -- in
technologies to confirm identities and track movements.

"Overendowing high-tech solutions is riskful," Dr. Neumann said, "in the absence
of adequate understanding of the limitations of the technology and the frailties
and perversities of human nature."

Mr. Kurzweil and Dr. Neumann, a computer scientist at SRI International, a
research group in Menlo Park, Calif., were among six technology experts invited
by Circuits to assess the challenges ahead. The other participants were Bruce
Sterling, a science fiction author who writes frequently about technology;
Lawrence Lessig, a professor at Stanford Law School who has written extensively
on law and the Internet; Severo Ornstein, a retired hardware engineer and one of
the computer scientists who worked on the original Arpanet, the precursor to the
Internet; and Whitfield Diffie, the inventor of public key cryptography, a
method of encoding electronic communications.

Each has been in the public eye for a decade or more, thinking and writing about
the promise and peril of technology. Some are more sanguine than others about a
high-tech society.

Their discussion, conducted last weekend by e-mail, touched on technology's
possible uses in fostering security and on the issues that will arise along the
way. Here are excerpts from the conversation.

Q. -- What role will technological innovation play in responding to terrorism?

LESSIG -- These attacks could spur a great deal of technological innovation. The
hard question is whether the innovation will be tailored to protect privacy as
well as support legitimate state interests in surveillance and control. We as a
culture think too crudely about technologies for surveillance. The conflict is
always framed as some grand either/or. But if we kept pressure on the innovators
and, in particular, the government, to develop technologies that did both, we
could preserve important aspects of our freedom, while responding to the real
threats presented by the attacks.

KURZWEIL -- The Sept. 11 tragedy will accelerate a profound trend already well
under way from centralized technologies to distributed ones and from the real
world to the virtual world. Centralized technologies are subject to disruption
and disaster. They also tend to be inefficient, wasteful and harmful to the
environment. Distributed technologies, on the other hand, tend to be flexible,
efficient and relatively benign in their environment effects.

In the immediate aftermath of this crisis, we already see a dramatic movement
away from meetings and conferences in the real world to those in the virtual
world, including Web-based meetings, Internet-based videoconferencing and other
examples of virtual communication.

Despite the recent collapse of market value in telecommunications, bandwidth
nonetheless continues to expand exponentially, which will continue to improve
the resolution and sense of realism in the virtual world. We'll see a great deal
of innovation to overcome many of the current limitations.

DIFFIE -- Revision of the air traffic control system together with that of other
industrial command and control phenomena will push reliability and security in
computing and computer communications. Such systems may provide a testing ground
for the command and control of ballistic missile defense systems in which
response times may be slower but the spectrum of phenomena requiring analysis
will be broader.

Attempts to control the use of cryptography and other security measures will
make the development of improved command and control networks more difficult and
may impede this task by limiting the people who can contribute to approved
government and contractor personnel.

LESSIG -- This "scenario of terror" was not low tech, for its impact was not
just the impact of the souls who were lost. As powerful was the effect of a
world watching as it occurred. The technology of a networked world meant that
scores of television cameras would be trained on the south tower, to capture the
horror of the delayed second impact. And the extraordinary impact of these
killings in two cities is the product of a heavily integrated -- technologically
integrated -- world community. Terrorists take advantage of this technology to
have the effect they seek. Elsewhere, in places without this technology, it
would not have the same effect.

DIFFIE -- Larry, this is a great observation. I wonder if it will be possible to
discover whether the attackers had that subtlety of thought.

Q. -- Larry Lessig says that the hard question is whether innovation will be
tailored to protect privacy as well as support legitimate state interests in
surveillance and control. Do you agree that we as a culture tend to think too
crudely about technologies for surveillance? Where do you think the trade-offs
should be?

NEUMANN -- The most elaborate technological measures are likely to be
inadequate, misused and subverted.  Surveillance is all too easily misused.
Trapdoors in cryptography to facilitate law enforcement can be misused. Existing
system security is seriously flawed. As a result, we must avoid expecting
technological security measures to be adequate in protecting privacy. So,
ultimately, we have a double-edged sword. Techniques to protect can be used to
subvert, attack or otherwise compromise human rights, nation states and
organizations. The problems are inherently human, and technology can be used for
good or bad.

STERLING -- The question is badly put. I don't worry much about Big Brother
states surveilling average citizens. It's just not cost-effective, and what Mom
says in Peoria just doesn't interest the serious power players in spydom. I do
worry plenty about sneaky political operatives carrying out dirty-tricks
campaigns against the private lives of prominent politicians. The payoff there
is huge. It can destabilize legitimate governments more effectively than
terrorism.

I don't think there's a good trade-off here. If we're going to use surveillance
as a weapon, then we should trust our democratic traditions and arm the
population with it.

KURZWEIL -- The nature of these terrorist attacks and the organization behind it
puts civil liberties in general at odds with legitimate state interests in
surveillance and control. The entire basis of our law enforcement system, and
indeed much of our thinking about security, is based on an assumption that
people are motivated to preserve their own lives and well-being. That is the
logic behind all of our strategies from law enforcement on the local level to
mutual assured destruction on the world stage. But a foe that values the
destruction of both its enemy and itself is not amenable to this line of attack.


LESSIG -- This is a critically important insight. The real problem we face is
not slowness in technological innovation. The real problem is slowness in legal
and civil rights innovation in response to the technological change. It was not
until the late 1960's that the Supreme Court finally held that wiretapping was
regulated by the Fourth Amendment.

The reason for this failing has lots to do with the way lawyers think. We are
reactive traditionalists. It is hard to think creatively. But if we used the
same kind of innovative creativity that our Framers used in crafting our
government, we could craft creative balances between technological capabilities
and human weakness. Technologies can't be guaranteed to be used only for the
good. But technologies placed within well-crafted institutional structures can
be made more likely safe than not.

DIFFIE -- (Disclosure: I am in the protection business.)

In my view the natural trade-off is a broad public right to inquire (i.e.,
listen to the radio, point infrared sensors around, make video recordings,
analyze the data from the sensors with computers, etc.) and the right of the
individual to employ protection from surveillance (cryptography, insulated
walls, wearing a mask, using pseudonyms, etc.). This presumes a commercial right
to make and sell products that support the individual's desire for privacy.

I read in the documents of the revolutionary era a recognition of a broad right
of the individual to act on self-perceived interest and generally not to be
required to cooperate with someone else's view of those interests. This seems to
me roughly what freedom means. The trends in contemporary society that most
bother me are not so much government use of wiretaps or video cameras but such
things as the requirement that cash transactions over $10,000 be reported to the
I.R.S., that I must show identification to travel, etc.

ORNSTEIN -- I think there is a genuine tension between the desire for security
and for privacy/individual freedom. This is just an instance of the more general
conflict between the needs and desires of the individual and those of the larger
society.

Today's technology permits small numbers of people to wreak a disproportionate
amount of havoc. (Without jet airplanes, the hijackers couldn't have done much
damage with their box cutters.) I suspect the debate about where to draw the
security line will probably be ongoing and will depend on how much damage occurs
in the future: The more damage, the tighter we'll circle the wagons.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Discussing terrorism and technology were, clockwise from top
left, Ray Kurzweil, an expert on artificial intelligence; Severo Ornstein, who
helped create the Arpanet; Lawrence Lessig, a law professor; Bruce Sterling, an
author; Peter Neumann, a computer scientist; and Whitfield Diffie, who invented
public key cryptography. (Photographs by, top left, Michael Lutch for The New
York Times; top right, center right and bottom left, Peter DaSilva for The New
York Times; bottom right, Associated Press; and center left, Michael Damas for
The New York Times)(pg. G4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Interview

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COMPUTER SCIENCE (91%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); PRODUCT
INNOVATION (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); COMPUTATIONAL RESEARCH (76%); CRYPTOLOGY (75%); TRANSPORTATION SUPPORT
SERVICES (73%); MISSING PERSONS (69%); LAWYERS (67%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY
(66%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (66%); LAW SCHOOLS (66%); WRITERS (66%); ONLINE SECURITY &
PRIVACY (66%); VIRTUAL REALITY (60%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (56%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (51%) COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  TERRORISM;  PRIVACY;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MISSING PERSONS

COMPANY: SRI INTERNATIONAL (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8733 NONCOMMERCIAL RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS (56%)

PERSON: HAFNER, KATIE; KURZWEIL, RAY; NEUMANN, PETER; STERLING, BRUCE; LESSIG,
LAWRENCE; ORNSTEIN, SEVERO; DIFFIE, WHITFIELD

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (75%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (87%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: ; NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1616 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PRISONERS;
Taliban Enlisting Eager Recruits of Many Lands

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: DUAWO, Afghanistan, Sept. 27


In this desolate corner of Afghanistan, where barren cliffs rise steeply from a
narrow river bend in the Panjshir Valley, the opposition alliance fighting the
Taliban holds some 300 prisoners of its long and losing war in a fly-infested,
mud-brick building.

Nearly all are in their early or mid-20's, poorly educated and formerly students
at Islamic schools in Pakistan or Afghanistan, where they were instructed of
their duty to defend Islam and the Taliban.

At least 17 among the prisoners here come from foreign countries, some as
distant as China or Yemen, volunteers who received only a few weeks of
rudimentary training before being sent to the front lines.

Within weeks, they were captured by the opposition forces of the Northern
Alliance, who make them available to journalists in their effort to gain
international support and to show just how varied and far-reaching a threat
they, and the world, face in radical Islam.

Indeed, the new commander of the alliance, Gen. Muhammad Fahim, said in an
interview today that the ranks of the Taliban included tens of thousands of
foreign fighters, including many Pakistanis, though the alliance has a
reputation for exaggerating its claims.

Two of the prisoners here, the more educated and the seemingly more determined,
who say they have been interviewed scores of times, claim to have been schooled
in hijacking and bomb-making at the training camps of Osama bin Laden, the
wanted terrorist.

Their loyalty to Mr. bin Laden and their willingness to kill Americans has no
limits, they boast. "If bin Laden tells me to kill myself in a suicide attack, I
will do it," said Obeida Rahman, a Yemeni prisoner.

Three are Pakistanis of Burmese descent who vow to liberate their homeland for
Islam, though they acknowledge they have never set eyes on it. "I have a
target," said one of them, Muhammad Sale Hayat, 25.  "My target is freedom for
Burma."

Two others, Abdul Jalil and Nur Muhammad, Muslims from Xinjiang, an autonomous
region of western China, say their goal is to return home and set up an
independent Islamic state there.

Sons of retired government bureaucrats, both said they came to Kabul in 1999
with two others of the Uighur minority to study to become Islamic preachers.
Their families, religious and middle-class, supported them.

Once they arrived, however, their teachers urged them to fight alongside the
Taliban militia, which has fought its way to control over about 90 percent of
Afghanistan since overrunning the capital in 1996.

After two months, they did. With only two weeks of basic training at a
Taliban-run camp, they departed for the front line. They were captured after a
single night.

Both men said their devotion to Islam was fueled by the repression of the
Chinese government, which has long feared a Muslim secessionist movement in
western China -- and its potential links to the Taliban.

"The Chinese don't allow people to study at madrassahs," Mr. Jalil said,
referring to the Islamic schools. "They don't allow people to grow beards."

But both men criticized the attacks on the World Trade Center, saying it was
wrong to kill civilians. They hoped that the United States would help them set
up an independent homeland in China, a cause even they acknowledged was a long
shot.

"Yes, I want an independent Xianjing," Mr. Jalil said. "But we can't do it
alone. There are only two of us. My people are very weak compared to the Chinese
government."

Years of imprisonment had steeled devotion in some of the prisoners from
Pakistan and eroded it in others.

"In Pakistan I will start a jihad," Ali Akbar, a 25-year-old Pakistani, said.
"Because our government is helping the enemies of Islam."

Another, Muhammed Israr, a 26-year-old with a sixth-grade education, said he
believed in Islamic rule but had had enough. Asked what he would do if freed, he
said, simply, "I would go back home."

Yet another, a 25-year-old with no education who gave his name as Nasrullah,
vowed in front of his jailers to take up arms if released. "I will fight again,"
he said.

Asked as a group whether they supported the attack on the World Trade Center,
most of the foreign volunteers said yes. Mr. Rahman, the Yemeni trained in a
camp with ties to Mr. bin Laden, said that Palestinians have been dying for 50
years and argued that American sanctions are killing Iraqi children.

Asked if there would be a war, the men said that depended on whether the United
States attacks Afghanistan. Asked who would win, they said Muslims would. "God
willing, we will win," they said in unison. "God willing, we will win."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abdul Jalil, left, and Nur Muhammad, Taliban volunteers from
Xianjing in western China, said they hoped to return and set up an Islamic
state. (Alan Chin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HIJACKING (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (77%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (76%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (76%); MILITARY TRAINING (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); INTERVIEWS
(73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
MISSING PERSONS;  ISLAM;  PRISONS AND PRISONERS

ORGANIZATION: ;NORTHERN ALLIANCE (ANTI-TALIBAN FORCE); TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) ROHDE, DAVID

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NORTHWEST CHINA
(72%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); CHINA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
MYANMAR (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1619 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Year of Intifada Sees Hardening on Each Side

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Sept. 27


After the second intifada began here a year ago, Haran al-Rikib, who is 16,
found new work in the Gaza Strip.

Now, he spends most days by a rutted road with other boys and young men in dusty
sandals and faded jerseys. When a solitary driver pauses at the curb, they crowd
around his car, and perhaps the driver will pick Haran to climb into the
passenger seat. Then they will drive a mile or so, past an Israeli pillbox
bristling with semiautomatic weapons. Once out of sight of the post, Haran will
get out of the car, cross the street and wait for a driver headed the other way.

Haran is a worker in the new economy here, mining the darkening seam that runs
through this new intifada, between Palestinians' desperation and Israelis' fear.
A solitary driver in a car, the Israeli soldiers reason, is a potential suicide
bomber. A potential suicide bomber, the driver reasons, is a probable Israeli
target. Haran and his friendly competitors -- a few of whom started work even
before this intifada, when demand and supply were much lower -- solve everyone's
problem, for about one shekel, or less than 25 cents, a ride.

"It's a scary job," he said, because the soldiers have been known to shoot at
cars. But he added: "I got used to it. I wish I didn't have to do it, but I have
to work."

His father, he explained, used to work in Israel, but since the intifada began,
the Israelis have not permitted him or other Palestinians to cross the Gaza
boundary. So Haran became a paid passenger, earning about 10 shekels a day.

Among the many facts upon which Israelis and Palestinians disagree is the date
that this intifada began. Palestinians date it to Sept. 28, 2000, when Ariel
Sharon, who is now the prime minister of Israel, paid a visit to the site sacred
to Jews as the Temple Mount and to Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary, while he was
surrounded by hundreds of policemen.  Israelis tend to date it to the day before
that, when a soldier was killed in a bomb attack in Gaza, or the day after, when
Palestinians rioted over Mr. Sharon's visit and four were shot dead by the
Israeli police.

For all their disagreements about the intifada, people on opposite sides
describe similar effects: the fear and desperation have unified Israelis,
unified Palestinians, and hardened each population against the other. Before the
first intifada, which began in December 1987, the warring parties had not tried
talking peace; now they have, and so far they have not achieved it.

After the first year of the first intifida, the Israeli group Peace Now held a
rally in Tel Aviv that drew more than 100,000 people. "This intifada had the
opposite effect," said Galia Golan, a leader of the group. "The peace camp has
had tremendous difficulty. We couldn't get 100,000 out today."

Shaul Goldstein,the leader of a West Bank settlers' group, described a process
of disillusion and unification over the last year. "Everything was changed," he
said. "The focus of the year before last was on tourism, on building, on
education and expanding. This year, the focus was on staying alive, on shelters,
and bulletproof vests, and bulletproof buses."

He said he had detected a change as well in other Israelis' attitudes toward
settlers. Settlers were no longer regarded, he said, as "some kind of cowboys on
the West Bank -- no, we are Jews under attack."

The solution, he said, "is to fight them, and to win the war."

At the end of the first year of the first intifada, Yasir Arafat, the
Palestinian leader, recognized Israel's right to exist and began pursuing a
political resolution. On Wednesday, he met with the Israeli foreign minister,
Shimon Peres, in hopes of reviving peace talks. But in the last year, by almost
any polling measure, Palestinians have become more militant. In a poll released
this week by the Jerusalem Media Center, 85.3 percent of Palestinians said they
supported continuing the intifida -- even though only 53 percent said they were
optimistic that it would achieve its goals.

The tallies of the dead are disputed. This week, the Palestinian Human Rights
Monitoring Group reported that 560 Palestinians were killed in the last year;
since the report was issued on Monday, at least six more have died violently,
despite the current cease-fire. Early today, Israeli tanks and troops opened
fire on the Rafah refugee camp, killing 3 Palestinians, wounding 24 and
destroying several buildings from which the Israeli Army said Palestinians had
carried out attacks. Soldiers later killed two more Palestinians, including a
15-year-old boy.

During the first year of the first intifada, more than 300 Palestinians were
killed.

In the last year, 177 Israelis have been killed, according to the Israeli
government. In the first year of the first intifada, the number of Israelis
killed was 11.

Yitzhak Shamir, the prime minister during the first intifada, was once asked
what would happen to the Palestinians if they ever switched from throwing stones
to shooting guns. "There will not be even a memory of them left," was his reply.
So far, this intifada, more like a war than a civilian uprising, has proved him
wrong.

Ismael Abu Shanals is a structural engineer who studied in Colorado and Vermont,
which he found beautiful. He is also a leader -- a political one, he says -- of
the radical Islamic group Hamas. He said he honed his Hebrew and his anger at
Israel while serving eight years in Israeli prisons after the first intifada.
Now he likes to listen to the Israeli radio from his comfortable home in Gaza,
and he is amazed by what he hears. "The Israeli community is open -- they cannot
hide everything," he said.

Recently, he said, he heard a report in which a couple bickered over who should
go to the grocery store. Each was afraid to go, he recalled with a laugh. "Can
you imagine, in a free state, when you enter a grocery store, you'd see soldiers
in front of the door searching your bags?" he said. "The Israelis' living has
been totally affected by the intifada."

He said the use of suicide bombings, a cause of such fears, was not a "main
strategy" and insisted it came about spontaneously. But he acknowledged that it
was effective. "This is what we discovered," he said. The Israelis first turned
civilians into targets, he argued, adding, "So why is the world asking
Palestinians to respect Israeli citizens?"

The only solution to the conflict, he said, was for the United States to impose
peace. The Americans, he said, should say: "Palestinians will not be satisfied
-- it's O.K. Israelis will not be satisfied -- it's O.K. But this is the
situation. Live with it."

Besides the Israelis' fear, Mr. Abu Shanals named as achievements of the
intifada the increased unity among Palestinians and Arab nations and Palestinian
disillusion with peace talks -- effects similar to those described, for very
different reasons, by Mr. Goldstein and Ms. Golan.

Some on either side of the conflict sound disillusioned with being
disillusioned, fed up with the subject. Monzer Akila, 27, runs a small shop in
Gaza repairing and selling sewing machines. "Are you going to talk about
politics?" he asked, when a reporter entered his darkened store. "I hate
politics."

Mr. Akila's business is all but dead, and he predicted that nothing would change
unless the United States put pressure on the Israelis to make peace. He has one
sister in Texas and another in Virginia, and he feels trapped in Gaza. "I'll do
my best to leave this place," he said. "I can't live here anymore. There is no
future for young people here. No future."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ariel Sharon visiting Jerusalem's most sacred site a year ago.
(Agence France-Presse) Chart: "A LOOK BACK -- Toll in the Intifada"In the last
year, about 800 people have died in violent clashes between Palestinians and
Israelis. Totals of Palestinian deaths can vary widely among sources. Graph
tracks the deaths per week of Palestinian, Israeli Arab, and Israeli Jews from
September 2000 through September 26, 2001, including the weeks of the major
suicide bombings.(Sources: Palestinian Red Crescent Society; Israeli Ministry of
Foreign Affairs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); BOMBINGS (88%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); SHOOTINGS (70%); ARMED
FORCES (68%); RELIGION (66%); PRIME MINISTERS (62%); RIOTS (61%) PALESTINIANS;
PUBLIC OPINION

ORGANIZATION: PEACE NOW (ISRAEL)

PERSON: BENNET, JAMES

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (97%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1620 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 29, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The End of the Beginning

BYLINE:  By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1424 words


Rudy Giuliani is being mercurial again. Nostradamus is falling off the
best-seller list. CNN's ratings have dropped 70 percent from their post-attack
peak. Jay Leno delivers a joke linking Osama bin Laden to Anna Nicole Smith.
(Had it been funny, I'd repeat it.) Scattered among the bulletins of widespread
layoffs are austere TV commercials in slo-mo black-and-white in which
corporations pledge their solidarity with the American spirit.

Nothing has changed.

Then you pass by a fire station, and you see the snapshots of the dead, the
flowers, the candles, the crayon drawings in which earnest young minds try to
parse the irrational. This is grief served up raw, unmediated by artful "Band of
Brothers" cinematography. No matter where you are in New York, a city where
people like to think of themselves as being in control, the vertigo of Ground
Zero still seems only a block or two away.

Everything has changed.

As we straddle this incredible moment, poised between a glimpse of Armageddon
and a future only a fool would predict, there is rampant hunger for certainty --
a precious commodity far harder to track down than anti-anthrax antibiotics. In
truth we don't know where we are -- or where all our enemies are. We're in
limbo. The best we can do is try to differentiate between what has not changed
and what has, and, most important, to figure out what hasn't changed but should.
If we can't have certainty, maybe we can have clarity.

Terrorists can't alter the fundamental human equation. People are still capable
of being both angels and pigs. Countless Americans have given untold millions to
help families maimed by the attacks. Other Americans ignored Warren Buffett,
Jack Welch, the Treasury secretary and other optimists by betting against a
"patriotic rally" on Wall Street and short-selling stocks when the markets
reopened in a swoon. Countless Americans raised a flag to show their love of
country and their solidarity with the thousands lost on Sept. 11. Other
Americans wrapped themselves in the flag to engage in patriotic one-upmanship,
with some news stars (though, commendably, ABC News soon forbade this) sporting
lapel effusions large enough to dwarf that of the country's commander in chief.
NBC now affixes every frame of sitcom swill like "Emeril" with its promotional
peacock logo outfitted in the stars and stripes -- maybe the first good argument
for a constitutional amendment banning flag desecration.

But some things have changed, and they are not small. A country that during its
boom became addicted to instant gratification -- and to a post-gulf-war military
policy predicated on the idea of a silver bullet fired safely (and often
indiscriminately) from on high -- is so far willing to let its government take
its time and choose its means of battle. Of all the statements from Americans
since Sept. 11, few have been more reassuring than a representative opinion
voiced by Ryan Clark, a 19-year-old firefighter in Lewiston, Idaho, to a New
York Times/CBS News pollster: "I would like to see quick justice, but if you
jump the gun and attack the wrong person, it's not going to accomplish
anything."

The country's patient mood has matched that of its president. In a matter of
days, George W. Bush moved from rhetoric drawn from a Steve McQueen TV western
of his adolescence, "Wanted: Dead or Alive," to an exquisitely calibrated, adult
speech that drew the essential distinctions between "Islamic extremism" and
Islam, between the Taliban and "Afghanistan's people," between a TV-ready war of
"instant retaliation and isolated strikes" and "a lengthy campaign" whose
clandestine operations may be "secret even in success."

But since that address, Mr. Bush is being given both less credit than he
deserves from some quarters -- and too much from others. Liberals -- who, let's
face it, assumed that the president would go off on a half-cocked, unilateral
cowboy bombing spree -- must concede that he has put on the brakes. And in doing
so, he stood up to a considerable chorus within his own constituency urging
otherwise.

Such was the hysteria on the right after Sept. 11 that National Review's Web
edition disseminated a call from the TV commentator Ann Coulter to "invade the
hijackers' countries, kill their leaders and convert them to Christianity."
Presumably her targets include Saudi Arabia and Egypt, the home states of most
of the 19 identified hijackers. Then came the "open letter" signed by William
Bennett, Richard Perle, Gary Bauer and editors of The New Republic and The
Weekly Standard threatening to brand Mr. Bush as a wimp -- guilty of "surrender
in the war on international terrorism" -- if he bucked their demand to attack
Iraq. Mr. Bush has to date blown off these influential armchair generals, coming
down in favor of the more incremental, less unilateral strategy of an actual
general, Colin Powell.

Mr. Bush has so far turned aside other wish lists from the right as well,
including The Wall Street Journal editorial page's patriotic call for the
president to use his high poll ratings in the aftermath of a mass murder to push
divisive judicial appointments through the Senate. Mr. Bush's quick condemnation
of Jerry Falwell's and Pat Robertson's effort to blame America first, notably
its gays and lesbians, for the attacks not only forced the TV blowhards to a
hasty retreat, but also hammered in, perhaps for years to come, how Taliban-like
America's own homegrown mixture of fundamentalism and politics can be. As the
president jettisoned these former allies, so he nimbly embraced a former bete
noire, big government, to pump up the economy and airport safety -- even to the
point of creating a new federal agency, the Office of Homeland Security, whose
name, though presumably not its mission, has an almost Stalinist ring to it.

But the fact remains that, as far as the war goes, the Bush administration
hasn't acted yet. The president's policies are a work in progress, subject to
further about-faces. All sweeping judgments and bestowals of carte blanche on
his leadership are laughably premature. Only in a foreshortened Hollywood
scenario can an unproven leader change in an instant, with one speech, into a
giant. Washington's rush to canonize Mr. Bush -- he's already been likened to
Lincoln by the capital's dean, David Broder -- is gaseous complacency of the
sort that got us where we are today.

This is a time for more skepticism, not less, especially from news organizations
tempted to blur the line between jingoism and journalism. Until CBS News and The
Associated Press blew the whistle this week, the White House's excuse for the
president's elusiveness on Sept. 11 -- a phoned-in threat to Air Force One --
was widely reported as fact, not the spin it was. The administration, whose
efforts to restrict civil liberties have even brought Bob Barr and Maxine Waters
together in opposition, is so eager to stifle dissent in the media that its
press secretary publicly denounced a smart-aleck as benign as a late-night comic
-- in this case Bill Maher -- for a tasteless wisecrack.

In this atmosphere, boosterism can drive out information, especially at a time
when we prepare to bond with regimes that abuse human rights and wink at
terrorists in their own midst. From our flag-decorated TV screens you would
hardly know that the Taliban's internal opposition and our would-be fellow
freedom fighters, the ragtag Northern Alliance, is anathema to Pakistan, our
other frail new ally. Or that Pakistan and its military, with its dozens of
nuclear weapons, are riddled with bin Laden sympathizers. (USA Today, which has
been aggressive on this story, reports that "12,000 Pakistani parents named
their newborn sons Osama last year," with 5,700 others opting for Jihad.)

Maybe it's now time to resuscitate irony from the deathbed to which it was
recently consigned as well. Certainly it's an irony worth contemplating that, as
the columnist Geneva Overholser has pointed out, the press largely ignored
public Senate testimony a mere seven months ago in which the C.I.A. director,
George Tenet, said that Mr. bin Laden's "global network" was the "most immediate
and serious" terrorist threat to America.

The more we know now, the better, because knowledge is an antidote to the
anxiety of change, and more change is the only certainty ahead. We can go back
to watching all the late-night comedy we want, hopping on planes and rooting for
Barry Bonds. But still the reality remains that another shoe will drop and that
we have no idea whose, or when, or where.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (78%); BESTSELLERS (78%); TERRORISM
(77%); TELEVISION COMEDIES (77%); ANTHRAX (72%); LAYOFFS (71%); TELEVISION
ADVERTISING (71%); ANTIBIOTICS (66%); CINEMATOGRAPHY (54%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

PERSON: RUDY GIULIANI (74%); JAY LENO (72%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (72%); JACK WELCH
(50%); WARREN BUFFETT (50%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1625 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's About-Face: Support for U.S. on Terror

BYLINE:  By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 29


Despite a history of condemning American incursions abroad and a chronic fear of
encirclement by the West, the Chinese government has expressed strong support
for the new American war on terrorism. It even seems to accept the idea of
limited American military strikes in China's own neighborhood.

Like Russia, which has also performed a stunning about-face, China has practical
reasons for supporting a campaign against violent Islamic fundamentalists.
Though it has been spared any bloody conflict comparable to that in Chechnya,
China fears the emergence of unrest and terrorism at home, most immediately in
the largely Muslim frontier province of Xinjiang, where a stewing separatist
movement has occasionally set off bombs or attacked the police.

But the Chinese leaders also see an opportunity in the current crisis to meet a
broader goal: to forge an improvement in overall relations with the United
States and other Western countries, according to policy experts and diplomats on
both sides of the Pacific.

"The Chinese government understands that if the United States can be attacked
like this, so can China," said Lu Gang, professor of Russian studies at East
China Normal University in Shanghai. "Beijing is hosting the 2008 Olympics, and
if the menace of international terrorism isn't extinguished by then, China could
face a direct and serious threat."

"I'm hopeful that this event will help the United States and China find more
common ground and lead to an improvement in relations," Mr. Lu added. "Not just
an improvement, but a major improvement."

Western diplomats here say it is too soon to tell if Chinese-American relations
will be transformed, but they do not describe the hope as far-fetched.

China's leaders are watching, warily, to see how the geopolitics of Central Asia
will be redrawn as the confrontation with the Taliban plays out. They are deeply
worried about the fate of their nuclear-armed ally Pakistan, which could be torn
apart. They hope that their fledgling alliance with Russia and nearby Muslim
states of the former Soviet Union, largely meant to counter groups like the
Taliban, can be strengthened.

At the same time, Beijing does not relish seeing a new Western military
beachhead so near its homeland, and like Moscow it fears that Washington might
go overboard in its retribution.

Still, the Chinese can quietly rejoice in the shift in Washington's priorities
toward a shared concern. Many Chinese and Western scholars say that if China can
join meaningfully in the antiterror campaign, mutual trust may build and the
obsession of Republican hawks with a "China threat" may fade.

"For China, this is a chance for a fresh start with the Bush administration,"
said Chas. W. Freeman, a defense consultant and former diplomat in Washington
who was in Beijing right after the Sept. 11 events speaking with officials and
scholars.

The smoothing of economic and political ties with the West is a prime goal of
the leaders here, who see domestic development and stability as their overriding
challenge and who are already bracing for new pressures as the country enters
the World Trade Organization.

Beijing officials know that vital differences over Taiwan and human rights will
not disappear. But to the extent that China's internal opponents resort to
terrorist tactics, officials have indicated, they do expect more sympathy from
abroad. "There should be no double standards," a spokesman said last week.

For now, the Chinese are still hedging their bets about the American-led
campaign. Since the day of the hijackings and attacks, the television and press
here have had instructions to keep their reporting on a modest keel -- factual,
but not nearly as extensive or emotional as coverage in most media worldwide.
Diplomats here think this reflects the ruling party's reluctance to stir up
public passions too much before it is sure about China's official stance.

But so far both sides have "sent the right signals," as a European diplomat here
put it, with China publicly acknowledging the enormity of the crimes and the
need for a robust American response, and the United States, for its part, taking
unusual care to gain multilateral support.

China has said it will not become directly involved in the current military
campaign, although in a sign of the cooperative mood a team of Chinese security
specialists just visited Washington for rare exchanges that American officials
called useful.

It has left intentionally vague just how much American military action it could
countenance, apparently waiting to see what happens first.

Still, the contrast with China's vitriolic reaction to the Kosovo war is stark.
This time, it has simply said that any immediate punitive measures should be
justified by evidence, be precise and "consistent with the United Nations
Charter and international law," a vague call that American actions will arguably
meet in any case.

But if the United States is to keep China and many other countries on board, it
will need to seek a strong United Nations role in the prolonged war against
terrorism, diplomats here say.

Even before this month's attacks, China and Russia had forged an unusual form of
regional collaboration against unrest, joining with four neighboring Muslim
states -- Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan -- in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. Formally started last June, the group is to share
intelligence and is establishing a regional antiterrorism center, intended to
monitor threats like the Taliban-supported rebels in Uzbekistan.

China and Russia have also signed a broader friendship agreement; it is a
largely symbolic measure intended to offset what both countries have seen as
dangerous American dominance in the world.

The new ties that each country has formed with Washington in recent weeks, and
the American bows toward multinational cooperation, could have the surprising
effect of reducing the drive for China and Russia to build a stronger alliance.

"If the United States doesn't act too unilaterally in this antiterror campaign
-- if China and Russia can feel that they are included -- then they won't have
so much incentive to join together in opposition to American hegemony," Mr.
Freeman said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chinese border guards return to their post after checking cars
from Pakistan at the Khunjerab Pass. Above them loom peaks of the Karakorum
Range. China shares a border with Afghanistan and has tightened security on its
western side since the terrorist attacks in the United States. (Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); TALIBAN (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%);
RELIGION (76%); FUNDAMENTALISM (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (72%); OLYMPICS (66%); ETHNIC &
CULTURAL STUDIES (66%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); EAST CHINA (92%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%);
XINJIANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); PAKISTAN
(92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1627 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Arab-Americans, a Time of Disquiet

BYLINE:  By ROBERT WORTH

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1907 words


THE day after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon,
Abdel Sharab was tending his store in southwest Yonkers as usual when two local
men burst in and began cursing him. One threatened to bomb the store, which
sells Middle Eastern food.

"I told them you can't say that, it's a felony," Mr. Sharab recalled, standing
over a counter display of sugar-dusted Turkish Delight.

The men left without doing any harm, and one of them came back later and
apologized, Mr. Sharab said. Other local people, hearing about the incident,
have come to his store to express their support and offer help.

Still, he seemed shaken as he recounted other incidents of Arab-Americans being
threatened or harassed merely because they come from the same part of the world
as the suspects in the Sept. 11 attack.

"All Americans are victims of this," Mr. Sharab said. "We love the flag just as
much as they do."

The anxiety spawned by the attacks is palpable in southwest Yonkers, where most
of Westchester County's roughly 20,000 Arabs live. Until recently, the cluster
of Middle Eastern restaurants, markets and stores here known as "Little Arabia"
drew little notice. But business is down in the wake of the attacks, several
merchants said, and they keep a nervous eye on the street.

"Many Arab Muslims feel we have suffered a double blow," said Ahmed al Khatib,
the director of the National Muslim Merchant Association and a member of the
Westchester American Muslim Association. "Hundreds of Arabs worked in the World
Trade Center, and many are missing. I myself know of 20, and their families are
devastated."

At the same time, Mr. Khatib said, Muslims have seen their religion unfairly
characterized as a violent faith that lends itself easily to terrorism. Many
Arab-Americans say their friends and families have been threatened, harassed and
cursed in the street. District Attorney Jeanine Pirro's office is investigating
four possible bias attacks since Sept. 11, including one in which a man sprayed
mace in the face of an Arab-American store owner in Ardsley.

In Westchester, most Muslim women were afraid to go out while wearing
traditional Muslim headdress, known as the hajib, Mr. Khatib said.

Even if the current wave of suspicion subsides, there are fears that
Arab-Americans could suffer disproportionately from layoffs as the economy heads
toward a recession, said Joseph Sayegh, a former head of the Westchester Arab
American Foundation. There could be similar damage to the community's efforts to
gain political representation, he added. No Arab-American has held elective
office in Westchester, though two are running for seats on the Yonkers City
Council this fall.

Most of the Arabs in Yonkers are not Muslims but Christians of Jordanian or
Lebanese descent -- a distinction that is lost on many who have threatened or
harassed them, said Majed Samarneh, president of the Arab American Council of
Westchester.

The first Arabs came to Yonkers in the mid-1950's, said Issa Ereifej, executive
director of the Arab American Foundation. They were Jordanian Christians, and
that group continues to be the most well-educated and affluent in the community,
with many professionals and business owners. Most of them came to the United
States in search of better jobs rather than for cultural reasons, and were
followed by Arabs from other countries, with a growing portion of Muslims.

As in Brooklyn and Queens, which have the largest Arab populations in the East,
many left in the 1980's to try their luck in Arizona and California or to join
the even larger Arab enclave in Detroit, Mr. Ereifej said. But others continued
to arrive from the Middle East.

Today, the Arab community in Yonkers is roughly the same size as the two other
major suburban Arab communities in the region, Jersey City and Paterson, N.J.

All the Middle Eastern restaurants, markets and stores in Yonkers now have
American flags placed prominently in their windows, and often a statement of
solidarity with the victims. Many local merchants seemed especially eager to be
friendly.

"Salaam aleikum," said Niazy Tawfik, 62, as he greeted a reporter entering the
Madaba Deli on South Broadway. "That means 'peace on you.' We say that all the
time."

Muhammad Khalil, the owner of the deli, said there had been no real trouble so
far.

"Two detectives came in the day after the attack," he said. "They said there was
a threat to blow up the store. Maybe they just wanted to look around and see if
we had any bombs here," he added with a smile. "Anyway, they said they would
come back the next day with dogs, but they never came back."

Others have said the police and local governments have been helpful, and seem
eager to make the Arab community feel safe. But they also know their
neighborhoods may well become targets for law enforcement in the domestic
struggle against terrorism.

Ten days after the terrorist attack, Abbas Hamideh was speaking to a reporter in
front of the apartment building his family owns in Yonkers when a group of armed
men from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the New York City Police
Department walked up and asked to speak to him.

As it happened, the agents only wanted to ask him some questions about a man
named Muhammad Hamideh who apparently sent an e-mail boasting of his involvement
in the terrorist attacks. Mr. Hamideh told them he had no relatives by that
name, and after a few more questions they thanked him and went on their way.

Still, as the agents walked away Mr. Hamideh, who was born and raised in this
country, seemed uneasy.

"That's the first time I've been questioned," he said. "I wonder if they'll be
back."

One side effect of the added scrutiny, Mr. Hamideh said, has been reluctance to
criticize American policy in the Middle East.

Mr. Hamideh, for instance, is co-chairman of Al-Awda, a Palestinian human rights
group that has been strongly critical of United States support for Israel. The
group had planned a march on the Israeli mission in Manhattan for Sept. 23, but
called it off after the attack.

"We decided it would be very insensitive, while the city is torn apart," he
said. The group also received a death threat from someone who said he planned to
kill group members at the rally.

Perhaps the most painful thing for many Muslims like Mr. Hamideh has been a
public perception of Islam as a violent or anti-American religion.

"Believe me, these terrorists are not Muslims," said Muhammad Ali, 56, a lay
spiritual leader of the Westchester Muslim Center who wore a long white beard,
and was dressed in a full-length white jalabia and the traditional Muslim cap,
or kaffiyeh.

He pointed to a verse in a bilingual copy of the Koran that forbids suicide, and
to another that forbids murder. "We need to bring the news to people, to show
them this is not the way of Islam," he said.

The Muslim Center's mosque, a brick building shielded by hedges on Brookfield
Road in Mount Vernon, is the largest in Westchester.

Most of the center's 1,000 members are from Pakistan, Bangladesh and India, but
there are smaller clusters from other countries, and about 10 percent are
African-Americans, said Shafi Bezar, the chairman of the center's board.

As they arrived for Friday prayers at 1 p.m., about 150 men removed their shoes
in the vestibule and sat down on a green rug to listen to a 20-minute sermon
before the five minutes of prayers began. The women pray in a separate room
downstairs that houses the center's school.

Imam Hafiz Amjad announced "the conduct of a Muslim" as his theme for the day.
He emphasized the importance of moderation, and spoke about the dangers of
extremes, mentioning the terrorist attack as an example.

The previous week, the sermon addressed the attack and its victims.

Several leaders of the Arab and Muslim communities have made special efforts to
reach out to Christian and Jewish leaders.  In Rockland County, Dr. Mohamed S.
Bhana, former president of the Rockland Islamic Center, attended the Jewish New
Year ceremonies at Temple Beth Torah in Upper Nyack.

After the prayer, as men milled around eating a catered Pakistani lunch in front
of the mosque, several said they had been far less concerned about their own
safety than about that of their wives and children.

Some of the children attend Darul Arkam, Westchester's only Muslim school, which
is in the basement of the Muslim Center's mosque. Founded two years ago, the
school has grown rapidly, and now has 105 students, mostly from lower
Westchester. It offers classes in English and Arabic for children in
kindergarten through fourth grade.

On the outside, it seemed like the safest possible place for a Muslim child. As
the men arrived for prayer, laughing children played tag on a sheltered lawn
next to the mosque with their teacher, a young woman in a black gown and hajib.
At one point a police car nosed gently into the center's parking lot, and the
officer leaned out and asked with a smile if everything was all right.

But one parent who gave her name only as Fatima said she was moving her children
to a conventional public school. She was worried that her child's isolation in
Muslim school would make him more vulnerable to discrimination, she said.

And when asked about their experiences over the last two weeks, several teachers
spoke bitterly of insults and a climate of fear. All of them said they had been
afraid to wear their hajib in public, sometimes even to go outside at all.

"Yesterday when a man was cursing me in front of my children I felt so weak,"
said Lydia Haider, who came to this country from Yemen at age 11. "And a woman
shouted at my friend in the street, 'You better pray to God that he'll forgive
you for this.' "

Ms. Haider added that the expressions of bias seemed particularly unfair because
Americans do not seem to care when Muslims lose their lives in other countries,
particularly Israel.

"Six thousand people are important, but millions of people have been killed
because of U.S. policies," Ms. Haider said. "Isn't that terrorism too?"

Another woman who identified herself only as Shereen said that an assistant in a
Westchester doctor's office refused to speak to her, and then told her she
should have her tubes tied so that she could have no more children.

Nazim Khan, the principal of the school, said: "I don't see why we're being
treated like this. We're law-abiding citizens." His own wife, he added, who had
never gone in public without her hajib for 25 years in this country, went
without it during the week after the attack.

Even in the more affluent suburbs of central and northern Westchester, Muslim
women have been anxious.

"For the first week I did not leave the house," said Malika Niazi, 43, who lives
in Chappaqua and with her husband arranges a weekly prayer meeting for 50 Muslim
families in a room provided by the Mount Kisco Presbyterian Church.

Ms. Niazi's daughter Zareen said one of her Muslim classmates at Horace Greeley
High School had reported being harassed, and there were several anti-Muslim
notes on a message board in the school in the week after the attack.

But the school administration has been very kind and supportive, she said, and
she and the other Muslim students felt safe.

And one good side effect of all the scrutiny has been that Americans, after a
few missteps, seem to be learning more about their Muslim fellow citizens.

"I'm finding that the press is starting to show Islam in its true light," Ms.
Niazi said. "That's a wonderful thing."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Students at Darul Arkam, Westchester's only Muslim school, play
with a teacher during recess at the school in Mount Vernon. Below, Abbas Hamideh
and his wife, Kajida, and son, Muhammad, are among the many Arab Muslims in the
county. (Photographs by Chris Maynard for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Outside
the Westchester Muslim Center in Mount Vernon, are Lydia Haider, left, Maysa
Abdallah and Kulsoom Butt. F.B.I. agents leave the Yonkers apartment building
owned by the family of Abbas Hamideh, right, after questioning Mr. Hamideh and
his relatives about a man with the same last name. (Photographs by Chris Maynard
for The New York Times)(pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (86%); RETAILERS (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%); RECESSION (77%);
ECONOMIC NEWS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); RESTAURANTS (73%); FELONIES (71%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (69%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (66%); LAYOFFS (60%); CITIES
(50%); CITY GOVERNMENT (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company


                             1629 of 1629 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Temporal Vertigo

BYLINE:  By John Sifton; John Sifton is a human rights attorney and humanitarian
aid worker. The views expressed here are personal reflections and do not
represent the organization for which he worked. For security reasons, it is not
named here.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 3554 words


I got my last haircut in Kabul, but Sept. 11 found me standing on John Street in
lower Manhattan with about 20 volunteer rescue workers, amid masses of scorched
paper and debris, watching fires burn near where the World Trade Center used to
be. A recently returned humanitarian aid worker, I had rushed downtown when the
towers collapsed. Brushing dust and ash out of my hair -- still short from my
haircut -- I felt the low-level shock that came often in Afghanistan, the kind
of shock I felt when I saw dead bodies, starving children, Taliban enemies hung
from lampposts by cable. I marveled at the fact that I was feeling this familiar
emotion in the financial district of Manhattan, an unusual place to be in shock.
For a moment I felt that I had somehow not escaped Afghanistan, that I had
brought its disaster home with me to New York.

I have spent most of the past year working in Afghanistan and Pakistan for one
of the international nongovernmental organizations that implement humanitarian
aid programs for people suffering or fleeing from Afghanistan's multiple crises:
civil war, persecution by the Taliban and by anti-Taliban military forces,
economic stagnation, severe drought and food and water shortages. We were the
welfare state for a failed state.

Of course, everything has changed now. Relief workers from international groups
and the United Nations have been evacuated from Afghanistan in response to an
expected military strike by the United States. Humanitarian operations have been
severely curtailed, and an increasing number of refugees are pouring out of
Afghanistan into Iran and Pakistan. "The country was on a lifeline," one of my
colleagues said, "and we just cut the line."

Like many countries suffering from political instability, Afghanistan is a
complicated and weird place. In some areas, there are few traces of modern life.
Goods are carried by donkey or camel, and oxen plow the ground. Old men with
long beards sit beneath trees, fingering prayer beads, their skin brown and
wrinkled. Many rural people live as their ancestors probably did 400 years ago:
iron pots over the fire, clothes they made themselves and babies delivered by
candlelight.

In other parts of the country, life is more complicated. Taliban troops speed
around Kabul in their clean new Toyota pickup trucks, tricked-out, hip-hop
ghetto rigs. On the sides they have painted pseudo-American phrases: "City Boy,"
"Fast Crew," "King of Road." Inside, young solemn-looking Taliban men sit in
their black holy dress, sporting Ray-Bans.

The juxtapositions can make your mind reel. Donkey carts carrying computer
equipment. Hungry children digging through garbage piles using shovels from a
Mickey and Minnie Mouse sand-castle set.

The number of people displaced from their homes is enormous. Populations of the
desperate roam around, begging for money and scraps of food. People eat wild
plants, garbage, insects and old animal parts discarded by butchers. In one
camp, an old man showed me a bowl filled with rotten cow bowels, grass poking
out in places. "This is what we eat, sir!" he said, wiping away tears with his
fist.

I often had a strange feeling in Afghanistan, a sort of temporal vertigo. It was
impossible for me to get a proper sense of time. Like many former cold-war
battlefields, Afghanistan is partly frozen in time; most of its urban buildings
and infrastructure were completed in the 1960's and 1970's during the height of
Soviet and American spending on foreign aid to the developing world. The
telephone in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Kabul is one of those heavy
models from the 1960's; in a pinch, you could probably knock someone out with
the handset. There is an old telex machine in one of the offices, sitting dusty
in the corner, making you think it's 1976. Then you see the American and Soviet
military remnants from the 1980's: broken old Soviet tanks painted and lined up
in town squares, a mural on a wall in eastern Kabul showing a holy warrior with
a Stinger antiaircraft launcher on his shoulder. And still there are antique
doors on some buildings with designs from the 13th century. History presents
itself in a disorderly montage, like one of those heuristic displays in
natural-history museums -- dinosaurs, the bronze age, the renaissance, space
travel -- rearranged at random: pre-cold-war, post-cold-war, cold war, Buddhist
antiquities, Kalashnikovs. The timelessness of this jumbled history made me feel
like an old museum curator: time-transcendent, fascinated and lonely. This is
perhaps why I felt so crazy at times.

Taliban troops and police are always easy to spot. They have black flowing
robelike clothes, long hair and big silky black turbans with long tails running
almost to the ankles. (These accouterments are meant to identify them as direct
descendants of Muhammad.) They are often tall and imposing, even impressive.
"The Taliban troops are like gangsters," a colleague told me when I first
arrived. "Tough guys." But there is often a particular dandyism in them; many
wear black eyeliner (part of the descendant-of-Muhammad costume), and their hair
is long and curly. I once saw one buying Prell shampoo at the bazaar. They carry
themselves like supermodels.

The reputation for religious conservatism in the Taliban obviously doesn't come
from their foppish troops. It comes instead from the leadership in the southern
city of Kandahar, who founded the Taliban in the early 1990's. They are
considered mullahs now, but 10 years ago they were essentially no more than a
collection of seminary teachers from the rural south. These "original Taliban"
are the ones who present the decrees barring women from work, making men wear
long beards and prohibiting me from entering the country with "pork products or
lobsters" (as one recent decree dictated). These are the people who proudly call
themselves "the Mosquitoes of Islam," proclaiming, "Islamic faith is a bright
light: we seek to be so close to it that we catch fire."

In urban Afghanistan, crime was rare (one of the seldom-mentioned upsides to
Taliban authority), and expatriates were treated with a good deal of respect by
government officials and the military. "He who believes in Allah and the
hereafter shall perform good service for his guests," reads a sign in one small
government office in the north. This is a telling poster. It might seem strange,
but aid workers were considered guests of Afghanistan, and the title bestowed a
special status on us. Even if we were seen as an enemy of sorts (perhaps by a
particularly grumpy mullah), we were guests -- distrusted and carefully
examined, but still welcomed.

In our humanitarian work, my colleagues and I interacted with neither the
black-robed troops nor the mullahs from Kandahar. We dealt mostly with the "new
Taliban" -- the civil servants who in recent years have appeared from between
the cracks to run the country for the predominantly illiterate and uneducated
"original Taliban." These people form the real bureaucracy of Afghanistan.
Though they now sport the same flowing black turbans and long hair as the
troops, many were ordinary municipal leaders a few years ago, local politicians.
For the most part, they are opportunists who saw the direction the wind was
blowing when the Taliban took power and adjusted accordingly; they grew out
their beards and put on black robes and became Talibs.

Of course, these new leaders' commitment to the moral righteousness of the Talib
movement is questionable. Many seem fascinated by Americans and the West, eager
to learn more English, more American phrases and more about America. (One
afternoon, a Talib in Kabul kept me in his office for an hour to go over some
English grammar rules and ask about New York and the "Hollywood movie company.")
Still, the new Taliban follow the orders of the Taliban leadership. The decrees
are enforced.

The summer wind up in Mazar-i-Sharif in the north is just absurd -- you feel as
if you are on another planet. The temperature is usually well over 100 degrees
and the wind blows about 40 to 50 miles an hour almost every day, raising huge
clouds of dust that hang hundreds of feet over the desert. You feel as if you're
standing in front of a space heater in a dusty attic at the height of summer.
Your nostrils fill with dust and dry up; your eyes turn to red slits. You have
to wrap a turban around your head and nose and drink a great deal of water. It
is a war against desiccation.

On a particularly windy and hot day in June, some colleagues and I took an
almost insane trip from Mazar-i-Sharif west into the scorching Iranian Plateau,
to a province called Jozjan, to gather some information about the drought crisis
areas there.

We started out at 5 in the morning to avoid some of the heat and drove for hours
through the desert -- or what I thought was desert. I learned later that it was,
in normal years, productive agricultural land. The heat and dust were intense.
The car rocked in the wind, and sometimes visibility was reduced to only a few
car lengths. To pass the time, the young Afghan staff members told me about
their time in the jihad when they bombed Soviet installations from the
mountains. I recited hip-hop verses at the request of one of the young Afghans,
who wanted to know "about the African people with black skin in America" who
"sing, but without music, like shouting." We drank huge amounts of water.

We arrived in a small village called Aqchah, a dusty and extremely windy trading
town. We stumbled out of the car, clothes soaked with sweat and filthy from the
dust, and walked into the local Taliban office to "check in." (One must indulge
in this courtesy in order to avoid problems later.) Then we sat for an hour with
the entire village leadership -- 15 or so men with long beards who argued among
themselves about what sorts of aid projects might keep more people from leaving
town for the city. (We had this sort of meeting all the time.)

We drank a lot of tea. The men spoke in Persian, and my interpreter just filled
me in on essentials. In the next room, through the doorway, a man with a large
knife stood cutting fat from a sheep carcass hanging from the ceiling. Every so
often, the man would come halfway into the doorway in his blood-stained apron,
knife in hand, join the conversation briefly, make a point and then go back to
his butchering in the next room. The others listened to him with respect, but I
never found out why. Our meeting finished when the tea ran out.

We drove through another desert -- a real desert -- to arrive in the capital of
Jozjan, Shiberghan. The trip took about three hours. We arrived dusty,
wind-blasted and spacey. We staggered into the local Taliban office -- a
bombed-out building without windows -- to check in. The local liaison official
for international relief workers in Shiberghan was about 22 years old. We were
invited into his office, a room facing the courtyard with no furniture, just a
rug on the floor and a phone. After the regular introductions, the young
official explained that he would need to "ensure my safety" by supplying me with
guarded accommodations. I insisted that this wouldn't be necessary. I told the
official that I did not fear for my safety. I even flattered him and said that I
was sure that his city was exceedingly safe. Still, after 15 minutes, he stood
up, put on his black turban and left to go secure my lodging.

We had to wait for more than two hours. We got bored. I examined a curious
calendar on the wall that displayed a map of Afghanistan surrounded by planes,
tanks and ships all labeled "U.S. ARMY" and all pointing missiles toward the
center of Afghanistan. Various Taliban functionaries came and went -- new Talibs
mostly. Finally, the official returned to inform me that I would be staying at a
hotel reserved "for foreign dignitaries" (this is how my interpreter translated
it) called Dostum's Castle. It was obvious that this was an honor, so I made an
effort to thank him profusely, despite the fact that I did not want to go. I
insisted, however, that the Afghan staff accompany me. He obliged me at least on
this point. Off we went.

Dostum's Castle. What can I say? It was chintzy Soviet-style public architecture
combined with low-rent Miami design: long frosted-glass windows and a faux
marble facade. There were peacocks on the front lawn -- peacocks -- and a
swimming pool filled with algae-plagued water.

Inside, it was like "The Shining." We walked down long wide corridors with dark
red carpeting; each of the hotel-room doors had a padlock on it. We were the
only guests. The air-conditioner in my room sounded like a Harrier jet, and
there were bullet holes in the furniture.

The bathroom in our room didn't work, so we had to go down two floors to use
another one. On the landing of the stairs two floors down, there was a large
landscape painting, about 16 feet by 12 feet, of a pond, some flowers, a forest
and a few animals. The heads of the three animals had been cut out of the
painting to comply with Taliban aesthetic restrictions: the creation of images
of living beings is forbidden under the Taliban's kooky interpretation of
Islamic law. This left a decapitated deer standing by a pond and a headless
beaver sitting on a tree stump.

I considered the piece as I stood on the landing. A terrible painting in the
style of Bob Ross, done entirely with two shades of green and one shade of brown
and then vandalized by Taliban police trying to ensure its innocence before God
without destroying it altogether. In its own way, I thought, it is a
post-postmodern masterpiece. But surely I could add still more to this artwork.
I could buy it from the Taliban, sell it for a fortune in New York and give the
money to the Afghan opposition. Yes. Participatory political art. It just might
be crazy enough to work. How much would a rich New York liberal with a sense of
irony pay for this, this bad art, vandalized by the Mosquitoes of Islam and then
sold to raise money against them? A new school: censorship as an art form unto
itself. Politics as art. Art-dealing as art. I could be rich.

I was still chuckling to myself when one of the Afghan engineers came down the
stairs. "What are you laughing about?" he asked. "I don't know," I answered.

The next day was a nightmare: human suffering on a shocking scale. Displaced
persons without enough food to eat were drinking water taken from muddy ponds --
mud really. "They're drinking mud," I said into my tape recorder. "They're
drinking mud." I remember one particular experience especially. We were in a
windy camp for displaced persons, and a man was showing us the graves of his
three children, who had died of disease on three consecutive days: Thursday,
Friday and Saturday. It was Monday, and he had buried his last child the day
before. After he described all this, we stood around the graves in the strangely
loud silence of the wind, hot as an oven, and the man absent-mindedly adjusted a
rock atop one child's grave.

It was a very emotional moment, yet I didn't really feel sad. I was just
fascinated by the realness of it all. You look out an office window, and you see
a displaced family living in a bombed-out school, sleeping on the balcony and
cooking some birds they caught, doves. This is their life. They can't change the
channel.

There are no channels, in fact. We are "off the grid," not linked up with the
world's information sources or any of its culture. There are no telephones
outside the cities. There is no television reception. We have no access to
"entertainment." There are no theaters, films, galleries or circuses. The
Taliban has even banned music. All this is in contrast with the Western world,
with its many reality-altering and distance-distorting mechanisms: television,
cellphones, the Internet. Again, there seems to be a time warp. Sometimes it
feels as if we have been brought back not just to a time before modern
entertainment but to a time before art -- a time in which reality was just more
real, a time without images and ideas and representations, only actual events.

And yet moments here often seem cinematic to me. I constantly see things as
scenes. Here we are walking in Kabul, near some women in their concealing blue
burqas; goats are running by and an ancient Soviet tank lies gutted by the side
of the road. Here we see the schoolchildren running by in their little Taliban
uniforms, black turbans hanging to their knees, yelling to me in robot English:
"Hello! Hello! How are you?" And here we are at the U.S. government club in
Peshawar, over the border in Pakistan, sitting by the pool with some Belgian
journalist, drinking Grand Marnier and orange juice and talking about German
novels. I feel outside myself seeing these scenes play out: absurdities that
seem so normal while they're happening.

There is a propensity among some aid workers (usually younger ones) to work
endless hours during a crisis. You cannot take a break, it is argued, when
children are hungry. You cannot sleep, have a beer or lie in your bed. You have
to act. And so you work endlessly. And then, inevitably, you crack: you go nuts,
start acting righteous and weird, and your colleagues come to despise you.
Ultimately, your organization evacuates you on psychological grounds -- a
procedure churlishly referred to as a "psycho-vac." You end up back home:
unemployed, asocial, crazy, useless and pathetic.

I remember a story that a friend told me about an aid worker she worked with in
Albania. During the Kosovo crisis, they were working together in a huge new
refugee settlement across the border with inadequate sanitation facilities.

"We had to get 5,000 latrines built, like immediately. But I'll tell you, he was
gone, man -- his brain was fried by trauma. He had been at Goma" -- in the Congo
-- dead bodies and hacked-off limbs in a pile, and they had to clean it up. I
guess he was scarred. Anyway, he got like a pound of pot from some Albanian
mafia playboy in Tirana. He would drink huge amounts of that terrible instant
coffee, Nestle's -- I think they put speed in that stuff. He was high all the
time. He didn't talk to anyone. He just drank that crank coffee and smoked pot.
He worked like a madman. But we did it, man. We built those 5,000 latrines. They
psycho-vac'd him a little later though. He lost it."

Just a few weeks ago, on an unusually cool summer evening in southeast
Afghanistan, I was sitting with some colleagues at an outdoor restaurant above a
small pond beneath the beautiful mountain ranges southeast of Kabul. We were
enjoying a rare night of relaxation away from the madness of our work. We sat on
carpets, drinking tea, waiting for food and enjoying the evening sky.

The pond below was unnatural -- the result of a small hydroelectric dam built by
Soviet contractors decades before -- but it was pretty enough, and we were
enjoying the scene. We had come to have some fried fish, a rare dish in this
landlocked country.

We watched as a young boy climbed down to the pond to retrieve our dinner, some
fish previously caught but still alive, swimming in a burlap bag laid in the
water. In Afghanistan, dried to the bone by three years of drought and enduring
a decreasing food supply, the sight of both fish and water was strange.

Some Taliban troops appeared from the nearby road. "We are here for fish!" they
announced in Pashtu. (My interpreter told me this later.) They sat beside us. My
colleagues stiffened.

"Is he a Muslim?" one of the Talibs asked, indicating me. (He appeared,
incidentally, to be very stoned.) My interpreter answered in the negative.
"Christian?" the Talib asked.

My interpreter turned to me. "Are you a Christian?" he asked.

"Basically," I answered.

My interpreter translated this, somehow.

Questions began to fly: "Is he an American?" the Talib asked. "Where is America?
How close is America to Saudi Arabia? Are there Muslims in America?"

My interpreter turned to me again. "These are very uneducated peasant people
from the south." I nodded.

"Is this a problem?" I asked. "Should we leave?"

"No. They are bemused by you."

The Talibs ordered some fish. Although we had ordered our dinners first, the
owner gave the Talibs our fish and started to cook some more for us. The Talibs
ate with gusto, spitting bones onto the floor, fish catching in their beards.
When they finished, they rose and went to the next room for prayers.

Our fish arrived. We began to eat, but soon the Talibs returned and sat down
with us. "Which province are you from in America?" one of them asked. I told
them I was from New York. "This is a place with many black people, from Africa,
is this right? Very dangerous." I tried to explain that this was a
misperception.

One Talib began to help himself to our fish, taking it from our basket as though
he hadn't just eaten. "The black people are very dangerous," he said. "I hear
that they are very tall. How tall are they?"

I tried my best. There is only so much that can be translated from one language
to another, from one culture to another.

After a while, the Talibs rose to leave. Amazingly, the one who had stolen from
our bowl of fish wiped his hands on my turban, lying untied on the ground next
to me. Then he started to leave, but turned back, and a smile came across his
face.

"God bless America," he said in English, inexplicably.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Everywhere, contrasts: Donkey carts on one street and Taliban
soldiers in souped-up pickups on another. (Associated Press; Sniffing for mines
outside the old royal palace in Kabul. (Arthur Fox/Gamma)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISASTER RELIEF (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); MAMMALS (89%); FOOD CHARITIES (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); VOLUNTEERS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
STARVATION (77%); FOOD CRISES & SHORTAGES (77%); REFUGEES (77%); DROUGHT (77%);
CIVIL WAR (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (76%); WAR &
CONFLICT (72%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (70%); WATER CRISES & SHORTAGES (66%);
ARMED FORCES (66%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (62%); HIP HOP CULTURE (60%); MOTOR
VEHICLES (60%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
