
                              1 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Human Rights Case Against Attacking Iran

BYLINE: By Shirin Ebadi and Hadi Ghaemi.

Shirin Ebadi, the 2003 winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, is the founder of the
Center for Defense of Human Rights in Tehran, Iran. Hadi Ghaemi is a researcher
for Human Rights Watch.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 725 words


DURING her tour of Europe, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has given
assurances that a military attack by the United States on Iran ''is simply not
on the agenda at this point.'' But notwithstanding Ms. Rice's disavowal, recent
statements by the Bush administration, starting with President Bush's State of
the Union address and Vice President Dick Cheney's comments about a possible
Israeli military attack on Iran, are reminiscent of the rhetoric in the months
leading up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003. And Ms. Rice herself made clear that
''the Iranian regime's human rights behavior and its behavior toward its own
population is something to be loathed.''

American policy toward the Middle East, and Iran in particular, is often couched
in the language of promoting human rights. No one would deny the importance of
that goal. But for human rights defenders in Iran, the possibility of a foreign
military attack on their country represents an utter disaster for their cause.

The situation for human rights in Iran is far from ideal. Security forces
harass, imprison and even torture human rights defenders and civil society
activists. The authorities attack journalists and writers for expressing their
opinions and regularly shut down newspapers. Political prisoners languish in
jails. Superfluous judicial summonses are routinely used to intimidate critics,
and arbitrary detentions are common.

But Iranian society has refused to be coerced into silence. The human rights
discourse is alive and well at the grassroots level; civil society activists
consider it to be the most potent framework for achieving sustainable democratic
reforms and political pluralism.

Indeed, American readers might be surprised to know how vigorous Iran's human
rights organizations are. Last fall, when security forces unlawfully detained
more than 20 young journalists and bloggers because of what they had written,
independent Iranian organizations like the Center for Defense of Human Rights,
the Association of Journalists for Freedom of Press, and the Students
Association for Human Rights campaigned for their release.

This outcry, in tandem with support from the international community and human
rights organizations like Human Rights Watch, led to the release of detainees.
In fact, so great was the criticism of the abuses committed during these
detentions that some of Iran's most senior government officials came out in
favor of releasing the detainees.

Independent organizations are essential for fostering the culture of human
rights in Iran. But the threat of foreign military intervention will provide a
powerful excuse for authoritarian elements to uproot these groups and put an end
to their growth.

Human rights violators will use this opportunity to silence their critics by
labeling them as the enemy's fifth column. In 1980, after Saddam Hussein invaded
Iran and inflamed nationalist passions, Iranian authorities used such arguments
to suppress dissidents.

American hypocrisy doesn't help, either. Given the longstanding willingness of
the American government to overlook abuses of human rights, particularly women's
rights, by close allies in the Middle East like Saudi Arabia, it is hard not to
see the Bush administration's focus on human rights violations in Iran as a
cloak for its larger strategic interests.

Respect for human rights in any country must spring forth through the will of
the people and as part of a genuine democratic process. Such respect can never
be imposed by foreign military might and coercion -- an approach that abounds in
contradictions. Not only would a foreign invasion of Iran vitiate popular
support for human rights activism, but by destroying civilian lives,
institutions and infrastructure, war would also usher in chaos and instability.
Respect for human rights is likely to be among the first casualties.

Instead, the most effective way to promote human rights in Iran is to provide
moral support and international recognition to independent human rights
defenders and to insist that Iran adhere to the international human rights laws
and conventions that it has signed. Getting the Iranian government to abide by
these international standards is the human rights movement's highest goal;
foreign military intervention in Iran is the surest way to harm us and keep that
goal out of reach.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (97%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WRITERS (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
FOREIGN POLICY (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (78%); TORTURE (74%); IRAQ WAR (73%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS
(71%); STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (66%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (50%) Freedom and
Human Rights; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (91%); DICK CHENEY (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) Shirin
Ebadi; Hadi Ghaemi

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); ISRAEL (92%);
IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iran; Iran

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thinking of Home And of Human Rights

BYLINE: By ARIELLE LEVIN BECKER

SECTION: Section 14CN; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1159 words


HE has prosecuted war criminals from Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, advised
the United Nations on criminal law in Cambodia, Guatemala and East Timor, and
joined a legal brief challenging the indefinite detention of an American citizen
at Guantanamo Bay.

But throughout his career as a human rights lawyer, Payam Akhavan had never
turned his focus to the place that inspired him to work for human rights: Iran,
the nation his family fled when he was 9 years old.

''I sometimes feel perhaps I went seeking justice around the world rather than
my own country because it is much easier,'' said Mr. Akhavan, a former legal
adviser to the prosecutor's office of the international criminal tribunals at
The Hague.

Last month, nearly 30 years after his family left Iran, Mr. Akhavan changed
that, turning his human rights experience toward his homeland. Along with two
other Iranian immigrants, Ramin Ahmadi, a doctor, and Roya Hakakian, a
journalist, Mr. Akhavan opened the Iranian Human Rights Documentation Center, an
organization in New Haven aimed at compiling an authoritative account of human
rights violations in Iran since 1979.

Financed through a two-year, $1 million grant from the State Department's Human
Rights and Democracy Fund, the center will also attempt to document current
abuses in Iran. The goal, the organizers said, was to enable Iranians to come to
terms with human rights violations over the last 25 years by acknowledging the
abuses and holding those responsible accountable -- necessary steps for progress
toward democracy.

For the three founders of the center, it will also reflect a coming to terms
with their own pasts.

Like Mr. Akhavan, Dr. Ahmadi built his career around concerns for human rights.
A professor of internal medicine and epidemiology at Yale, Mr. Ahmadi founded
the Center for Health and Human Rights at Griffin Hospital in Derby, which
trains medical students and residents in community and public health ways to
address human rights issues. At the moment, he is assisting tsunami victims in
Sri Lanka with a team of doctors from the area.

Dr. Ahmadi has investigated the toll war crimes took on survivors in Chechnya
and East Timor, but, like Mr. Akhavan, he had never found a way to focus on
Iran, which he left as an 18-year-old refugee in 1982.

''We have used our expertise everywhere except in the case of Iran,'' Dr. Ahmadi
said.

By focusing on holding individuals accountable for human rights violations, the
organizers said they believed they could make inroads.

Owen Fiss, a Yale Law professor who serves on the center's board, said the plan
was to rely on the accounts of Iranians living outside Iran, many of whom have
carried documents and memories of human rights abuses in Iran for years. The
organizers also want to develop an online method for people in Iran to report
human rights violations.

Mr. Akhavan said the next step would likely be to identify people who can be
held responsible, and eventually be brought to trial if the political situation
in Iran changes. Since the center has opened, he said organizers have begun to
establish ties with nongovernmental human rights organizations and activists
with access to documents about abuses in Iran. They have also identified
witnesses who could testify about torture and other experiences, he said.

''Ultimately, the goal is to use this information in order to encourage
accountability in order to move away from a culture of impunity,'' he said.
''Dealing with past human rights abuses is as much about settling accounts from
the past as it is paving the way for the future, and if people have committed
widespread human rights abuses if these crimes go unanswered, there is a sort of
latent aggression which will continue to haunt the political culture in many
generations to come.''

The past they hope to overcome includes years of disappearances, executions
based on trials without due process and torture in prisons. Dissidents often
languished in prison on false charges, according to a 2003 State Department
report, and, since the establishment of the Islamic Republic of Iran in 1979,
some political prisoners have been tortured and executed.

Ms. Hakakian chronicled this period in her book, ''Journey From the Land of No:
A Girlhood Caught in Revolutionary Iran,'' which traced her own coming of age
against the events that formed the current regime: the fall of the Shah in 1979,
the Ayatollah Khomeini's rise to power amid widespread celebration and support
among Iranians, and the collapse a short time later of the transitional
government, replaced by a harshly repressive regime.

Though Ms. Hakakian and her friends initially welcomed the 1979 revolution as an
escape from the secret police force and restrictions of the Shah's regime, they
soon found their lives even more restricted. The older sister of a friend was
jailed and tortured for supporting a banned opposition group. A teacher told Ms.
Hakakian that she would be imprisoned for a composition she wrote criticizing
war. She left Iran for the United States in 1985, at age 18, claiming political
asylum. Ms. Hakakian completed college here and earned a graduate degree before
spending five years as a television producer. In the United States, she rarely
spoke of her experiences back home. ''When you have been a refugee, abandoned
all your loves and belongings, your memories become your belongings,'' she wrote
in her book.

It was only after living more than a decade in the United States, and with some
coaxing from friends, that Ms. Hakakian began to write about her time in Iran.
Afterward, she worried that many other Iranians had not recorded their stories,
leaving most narratives on the revolution and Iran's last quarter century to
accounts from the Iranian government or the writings of non-Iranians.

''I'm living in a time when everything I learn and read about Iran is someone
else's account,'' she said. ''To say that it's frustrating is an
understatement.''

Ms. Hakakian described the center as a way to establish a new history of
post-revolutionary Iran, an attempt to show images of Iranians besides those she
often sees in news stories, of ''fist-waving zealots.'' Without hearing from
Iranians themselves, she said, Americans will likely view Iranian culture with
fear.

The organizers say they have taken care to emphasize the nonpolitical nature of
the center.

''We are not against the government of Iran,'' Mr. Akhavan said. ''We simply
want to hold the government accountable to international human rights
standards.''

Mr. Akhavan, who serves a senior fellow at Yale's Orville H. Schell Jr. Center
for International Human Rights, said he feared repercussions if the center was
perceived as political or interested in a particular outcome apart from
protecting human rights.

''There is a certain intimacy and engagement which makes it much more difficult,
much more agonizing, but at the same time, much more compelling,'' Mr. Akhavan
said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Payam Akhavan, a lawyer, and two other Iranian immigrants
opened the Iranian Human Rights Documentation Center in New Haven. (Photo by
Thomas McDonald for The New York Times)
 Along with Mr. Akhavan, Roya Hakakian, a journalist, top, and Ramin Ahmadi, a
doctor, opened the center aimed at compiling an authoritative account of human
rights violations in Iran since 1979. (Photos by Susan Farley, above, and George
Ruhe, below, for the New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL LAW (89%); EPIDEMIOLOGY (86%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
LAWYERS (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SCIENCE
FUNDING (71%); PHYSICIAN FELLOWSHIPS & RESIDENCIES (68%); INTERNAL MEDICINE
(68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%); GRANTS & GIFTS (66%); TSUNAMIS
(61%) Freedom and Human Rights; Iranian-Americans

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) Iranian Human Rights Documentation Center

PERSON: Payam Akhavan; Ramin (Dr) Ahmadi; Roya Hakakian; Arielle Levin Becker

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (70%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); TIMOR-LESTE
(93%); RWANDA (92%); CUBA (92%); CAMBODIA (88%); SRI LANKA (79%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (52%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 1, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Recruits A Rough Ally To Be a Jailer

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.; Souad Mekhennet contributed reporting from
Frankfurt for this article, and Stephen Grey from London.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1810 words


Seven months before Sept. 11, 2001, the State Department issued a human rights
report on Uzbekistan. It was a litany of horrors.

The police repeatedly tortured prisoners, State Department officials wrote,
noting that the most common techniques were ''beating, often with blunt weapons,
and asphyxiation with a gas mask.'' Separately, international human rights
groups had reported that torture in Uzbek jails included boiling of body parts,
using electroshock on genitals and plucking off fingernails and toenails with
pliers. Two prisoners were boiled to death, the groups reported. The February
2001 State Department report stated bluntly, ''Uzbekistan is an authoritarian
state with limited civil rights.''

Immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks, however, the Bush administration turned
to Uzbekistan as a partner in fighting global terrorism. The nation, a former
Soviet republic in Central Asia, granted the United States the use of a military
base for fighting the Taliban across the border in Afghanistan. President Bush
welcomed President Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan to the White House, and the
United States has given Uzbekistan more than $500 million for border control and
other security measures.

Now there is growing evidence that the United States has sent terror suspects to
Uzbekistan for detention and interrogation, even as Uzbekistan's treatment of
its own prisoners continues to earn it admonishments from around the world,
including from the State Department.

The so-called rendition program, under which the Central Intelligence Agency
transfers terrorism suspects to foreign countries to be held and interrogated,
has linked the United States to other countries with poor human rights records.
But the turnabout in relations with Uzbekistan is particularly sharp. Before
Sept. 11, 2001, there was little high-level contact between Washington and
Tashkent, the Uzbek capital, beyond the United States' criticism.

Uzbekistan's role as a surrogate jailer for the United States was confirmed by a
half-dozen current and former intelligence officials working in Europe, the
Middle East and the United States. The C.I.A. declined to comment on the
prisoner transfer program, but an intelligence official estimated that the
number of terrorism suspects sent by the United States to Tashkent was in the
dozens.

There is other evidence of the United States' reliance on Uzbekistan in the
program. On Sept. 21, 2003, two American-registered airplanes -- a Gulfstream
jet and a Boeing 737 -- landed at the international airport in Tashkent,
according to flight logs obtained by The New York Times.

Although the precise purpose of those flights is not known, over a span of about
three years, from late 2001 until early this year, the C.I.A. used those two
planes to ferry terror suspects in American custody to countries around the
world for questioning, according to interviews with former and current
intelligence officials and flight logs showing the movements of the planes. On
the day the planes landed in Tashkent, the Gulfstream had taken off from
Baghdad, while the 737 had departed from the Czech Republic, the logs show.

The logs show at least seven flights were made to Uzbekistan by those planes
from early 2002 to late 2003, but the records are incomplete.

Details of the C.I.A.'s prisoner transfer program have emerged in recent months
from a handful of former detainees who have been released, primarily from
prisons in Egypt and Afghanistan, and in some cases have alleged they were
beaten and tortured while being held.

The program was created in the mid-1980's as a way for the C.I.A. to transfer
crime suspects arrested abroad to their home countries. After Sept. 11, the
C.I.A. used it to send prisoners suspected of being senior leaders of Al Qaeda
to a half-dozen countries for detention. American intelligence officials
estimate that the United States has transferred 100 to 150 suspects to Egypt,
Jordan, Syria, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Uzbekistan.

A senior C.I.A. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said he would not
discuss whether the United States had sent prisoners to Uzbekistan or anywhere
else. But he said: ''The United States does not engage in or condone torture. It
does not send people anywhere to be tortured. And it does not knowingly receive
information derived from torture.''

Ilkhom Zakirov, a spokesman for the Uzbekistan Foreign Ministry in Tashkent,
also declined to comment on whether Uzbekistan accepted terror suspects from the
United States. He declined to address the accusations from human rights groups.
But human rights activists say that because Uzbekistan's record is well known,
it raises questions about why the C.I.A. would send suspects there.

''If you talk to anyone there, Uzbeks know that torture is used -- it's common
even in run-of-the-mill criminal cases,'' said Allison Gill, a researcher for
Human Rights Watch who is working inside Uzbekistan. ''Anyone in the United
States or Europe who does not know the extent of the torture problem in
Uzbekistan is being willfully ignorant.''

Craig Murray, a former British ambassador to Uzbekistan, said he learned during
his posting to Tashkent that the C.I.A. used Uzbekistan as a place to hold
foreign terrorism suspects. During 2003 and early 2004, Mr. Murray said in an
interview, ''C.I.A. flights flew to Tashkent often, usually twice a week.''

In July 2004, Mr. Murray wrote a confidential memo to the British Foreign Office
accusing the C.I.A. of violating the United Nations' Prohibition Against
Torture. He urged his colleagues to stop using intelligence gleaned in
Uzbekistan from terrorism suspects because it had been elicited through torture
and other coercive means. Mr. Murray said he knew about the practice through his
own investigation and interviews with scores of people who claimed to have been
brutally treated inside Uzbekistan's jails.

''We should cease all cooperation with the Uzbek security services -- they are
beyond the pale,'' Mr. Murray wrote in the memo, which was obtained by The
Times.

Mr. Murray, who has previously spoken publicly about prisoner transfers to
Uzbekistan, said his superiors in London were furious with his questions, and he
was told that the intelligence gleaned in Uzbekistan could still be used by
British officials, even if it was elicited by torture, as long as the
mistreatment was not at the hands of British interrogators. ''I was
astonished,'' Mr. Murray said in an interview. ''It was as if the goal posts had
moved. Their perspective had changed since Sept. 11.''

A Foreign Office spokesman declined to address Mr. Murray's allegations. Last
year, Mr. Murray resigned from the Foreign Office, which had investigated
accusations that he mismanaged the embassy in Tashkent. An inquiry into those
allegations was closed without any disciplinary action being taken against him.

The strategic partnership between Washington and Tashkent, based initially on
the Americans' use of Uzbekistan's military base, was formalized at a March 2002
Oval Office meeting between President Bush and President Karimov. Muhammad
Salih, the leader of Uzbekistan's pro-democracy Erk Democratic Party, who is
living in exile in Germany, said the relationship had strengthened Mr. Karimov's
hand.

''It's been a great opportunity for Karimov,'' Mr. Salih said. ''But President
Bush has to also think about human rights and democracy. If he wants to have a
collaboration on antiterror matters, he should not close his eyes on other
things that Uzbekistan is doing, like torture.''

At a news conference last month, President Bush was asked what Uzbekistan could
do in interrogating a suspect that the United States could not.

''We seek assurances that nobody will be tortured when we render a person back
to their home country,'' Mr. Bush said.

The State Department and human rights groups have continued to report on human
rights abuses against Uzbeks in prison.

The State Department's latest human rights report on Uzbekistan, issued in
February, said: ''Torture was common in prisons, pretrial facilities, and local
police and security service precincts.'' In addition, the State Department
report noted that in 2003 the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture
''concluded that torture or similar ill-treatment was systematic.''

Amnesty International and other groups have documented specific cases. In the
summer of 2002, Amnesty International reported, Fatima Mukhadirova, a
62-year-old Tashkent shopkeeper, was sentenced to six years of hard labor after
denouncing the government for the death of her son, Muzafar Avozov, in a
Tashkent prison.

An independent examination of photographs of the body, conducted by the
University of Glasgow, showed that Mr. Avozov died after being immersed in
boiling water, human rights groups reported. The examination said his head had
been beaten and his fingernails removed.

Human rights activists pressed for Ms. Mukhadirova's release. She was freed
shortly before a planned visit by Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld in
February 2004.

Human rights activists say that the United States has a difficult balancing act
to maintain in its dealings with Uzbekistan.

''The relationship between the U.S. and Uzbekistan is problematic,'' Ms. Gill of
Human Rights Watch said. ''It can be useful that the U.S. is powerful enough to
push for certain concessions. That being said, the U.S. should not be saying
that Karimov is a partner, is an ally, is a friend. The U.S. should send the
message that Uzbekistan won't be considered to be a good ally of the United
States unless it respects human rights at home.''

The delicate diplomatic balance played out in the early spring of 2004, after a
series of suicide bombings in Tashkent killed 47 people, many of them Uzbek
police officers. The government cracked down against people on religious
grounds, setting off international condemnation.

Three months later, despite the urgings of the Uzbek foreign minister, Sodik
Safoyev, the State Department said it would cut $18 million in military and
economic aid to Uzbekistan because of its failure to improve its human rights
record.

But the next month, on Aug. 12, 2004, Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the
Joint Chief of Staffs, visited Tashkent. He met with President Karimov and other
officials, and he announced that the Pentagon would provide an additional $21
million to help Uzbekistan in its campaign to remove its stockpile of biological
weapons.

General Myers said the United States had ''benefited greatly from our
partnership and strategic relationship with Uzbekistan.''

While he noted that there were genuine concerns about Uzbekistan's human rights
record, General Myers said: ''In my view, we shouldn't let any single issue
drive a relationship with any single country. It doesn't seem to be good policy
to me.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: American soldiers of the 25th Infantry Division arrived in
Uzbekistan last year to reinforce the troops already based there. Since Sept.
11, 2001, Uzbekistan has received more than $500 million in American aid. (Photo
by Burt Herman/Associated Press)
Muhammad Salih, the leader of Uzbekistan's pro-democracy Erk Democratic Party,
who is living in exile in Germany, has urged the United States not to ignore
Uzbekistan's poor record on human rights. (Photo by Hans Rudolf Oeser for The
New York Times)
 President Bush welcomed President Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan to the White
House in 2002 to form a partnership to combat terrorism. (Photo by Paul J.
Richards/Agence France-Presse)(pg. 22)Map of Uzbekistan highlighting Tashkent:
Tashkent is said to hold dozens of terror suspects for the C.I.A. (pg. 22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PRISONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
TALIBAN (75%); BORDER CONTROL (74%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (74%);
HIJACKING (74%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(72%); RELIGION (72%); AIRPORTS (71%); AIRLINES (60%) Terrorism; Biological and
Chemical Warfare; Pentagon Building; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking;
Terrorism; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; World Trade Center (NYC); Torture; Prisoners of War; Foreign Aid;
Freedom and Human Rights

COMPANY: BOEING CO (51%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (71%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) State
Department; Defense Department

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (51%); BA (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (51%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (51%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (51%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (51%)

PERSON: Don Jr Vannatta; George W (Pres) Bush; Islam (Pres) Karimov

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UZBEKISTAN (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); ASIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (78%); CENTRAL
EUROPE (53%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karzai Is Urged to Prosecute War Crimes

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Jan. 29


The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission urged President Hamid Karzai on Saturday to make a
commitment to bringing war criminals to justice after a long era of human rights
abuses.

Sima Samar, the chairwoman of the commission, and Louise Arbour, United Nations
high commissioner for human rights, presented Mr. Karzai with a national survey
and recommendations on transitional justice -- or dealing with past war crimes
and human rights abuses so it can move on.

The commission's conclusions were that more than 70 percent of Afghans had
suffered a loss or injury in the past two decades of war and that Afghans
urgently wanted to see war criminals brought to justice and removed from public
office.

''Of central importance is the need to address past and present human rights
violations so as to ensure that those responsible for egregious abuses do not
succeed in wielding power,'' Ms. Arbour told Mr. Karzai and others at a ceremony
at the presidential palace.

She called for a ''courageous system of justice'' to redress wrongs and create a
stable foundation for Afghan society.

The report presented to Mr. Karzai recommends that he take actions symbolic and
substantive to address the abuses of the past, including building monuments,
supporting criminal investigations and prosecutions, and arranging for
reparations for the victims, as well as vetting public officials to keep those
who committed abuses out of power.

The comments of the human rights commissioners, and the survey results, go
against the current policy of the United Nations mission in Afghanistan and Mr.
Karzai's own government, which have for the past three years avoided pursuing
suspects in war crimes in the interests of stability.

The United Nations, which has commissioned a compilation of human rights abuses
in Afghanistan during the past 25 years, has repeatedly delayed the publication
of the report, apparently, diplomats in Kabul said, for fear of destabilizing
the fragile political process, since many who have been accused of war crimes
remain in powerful positions around the country.

Ms. Arbour said the United Nations project had been intended to support the work
of the Afghan commission and had been given to it as source material.

Ms. Samar, whose husband and his three brothers were arrested and executed in
the Communist era, said her conclusion was that Afghans wanted urgently to see
justice brought, in the belief that it would contribute to stability, rather
than undermine it.

She said that it might not be easy to carry out, but that the president would
have the support of the people. ''Without justice we cannot have long-term
peace, and stability and national unity,'' she said.

Afghans have suffered so many abuses under various governments that many say
they see the past two decades as a seamless era of terror.

Under the Communists, thousands disappeared into prisons. In 10 years of Soviet
occupation, which ended in 1989, one million died and five million, a third of
the population, were forced to flee Afghanistan as villages across the country
were indiscriminately bombed.

After the Soviet occupation, factional fighting destroyed many towns and much of
Kabul, the capital, and killed tens of thousands of people. The Taliban
followed, instituting a repressive rule and waging war against its foes for
seven years.

The survey, ''A Call for Justice,'' was conducted over eight months. It is the
first broad consultation with the Afghan people about what they want to do now
about the suffering they experienced during two decades of conflict. The Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission asked more than 6,000 people, using
questionnaires and focus groups, whether they had suffered and how, and what
form of justice they wanted, if any.

The commission reported finding a very high level of human rights violations and
described them as ''staggering statistics in comparison to any other conflict in
the world.''

Of the 2,000 people who joined focus group discussions, 500 said they had
experienced a death among relatives, and 400 said someone in their immediate
family had been tortured or detained, and 69 percent considered themselves
victims of human rights violations over the last 23 years of violence, it
reported.

Among the 4,151 questioned in the survey, 76.4 percent said they wanted to see
war criminals brought to justice now or within five years, and 90 percent wanted
more than criminal justice -- like vetting public officials and removing
offenders from office, setting up a system for investigating and recording what
happened in the previous eras and arranging for reparations for the victims.

An element of the desire for justice is frustration that abuses still occur, the
report says. ''There is immense support for removing war criminals from
positions of power,'' and a ''strong concern among the people about current
abuses and how to stop or prevent these,'' the report says. The commission
reports that Afghans have a strong desire to call to account people who
committed abuses and that a majority of those surveyed say doing so would
improve peace and stability.

Although Mr. Karzai has tried to include warlords and other powerful players in
his government, and is pursuing a policy to bring former Taliban members into
the fold to achieve stability, the commission report says that only holding
people accountable for past crimes will bring lasting stability and peace.

''It is no longer viable for the political process to proceed independently from
any accountability considerations,'' it said. ''This approach will undermine
true peace and security.''

                             --------------------


Mine Kills 9 Afghan Soldiers

 KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, Jan. 29 (AP) -- A land mine exploded Saturday near a
truck carrying Afghan soldiers near the border with Pakistan, killing nine
soldiers and wounding one, an Afghan commander said.

The attack was one of the worst in months as Afghan and American security forces
have tried to prevent militants from planning major violence against elections
for Parliament this spring.

The 10 soldiers, from a border guard unit, were on a road near Spinbaldak, a
frontier town in southern Kandahar Province, the unit's commander, Abdul Raziq
Khan, said by telephone from Spinbaldak. He said the mine had been freshly laid
and he blamed Taliban fighters.

''They are coming over the border from Pakistan to carry out these attacks,'' he
said.

The only survivor was taken to a nearby French special forces base for
treatment, he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Men danced for Hamid Karzai last month in Kabul's stadium, where
the Taliban once conducted executions. (Photo by Shah Marai/Agence France-Presse
-- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); POLITICS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); POLLS & SURVEYS (77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); ARRESTS (72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (71%); TERRORISM (70%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; Public Opinion; Freedom
and Human Rights; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED
NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (93%); SIMA SAMAR (58%) Carlotta Gall; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. 'Thumbs Its Nose' At Rights, Amnesty Says

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 25


In coordinated broadsides from London and Washington, Amnesty International
accused the Bush administration on Wednesday of condoning ''atrocious'' human
rights violations, thereby diminishing its moral authority and setting a global
example encouraging abuse by other nations.

In a string of accusations introducing the organization's annual report in
London, Irene Khan, Amnesty's secretary general, listed the abuse of detainees
at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, the detention of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and the so-called rendition of prisoners to countries known to practice
torture as evidence that the United States ''thumbs its nose at the rule of law
and human rights.''

Defending its human rights record as ''leading the way,'' the White House
dismissed the accusations as ridiculous and unfounded.

Ms. Khan labeled the United States detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, where
more than 500 prisoners from about 40 countries are being held, as ''the gulag
of our times.''

In Washington, William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty International
USA, urged President Bush to press for a full investigation of what he called
the ''atrocious human rights violations at Abu Ghraib and other detention
centers.''

''When the U.S. government calls upon foreign leaders to bring to justice those
who commit or authorize human rights violations in their own countries, why
should those foreign leaders listen?'' Dr. Schulz said. ''And if the U.S.
government does not abide by the same standards of justice, what shred of moral
authority will we retain to pressure other governments to diminish abuses?

''It's far past time for President Bush to prove that he is not covering up the
misdeeds of senior officials and political cronies who designed and authorized
these nefarious interrogation policies,'' he said. ''So Congress must appoint a
truly impartial and independent commission to investigate the masterminds of the
atrocious human rights violations at Abu Ghraib and other detention centers, and
President Bush should use the power of his office to press Congress to do so.''

In response, Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, said: ''I think the
allegations are ridiculous, and unsupported by the facts. The United States is
leading the way when it comes to protecting human rights and promoting human
dignity. We have liberated 50 million people in Iraq and Afghanistan. We have
worked to advance freedom and democracy in the world so that people are governed
under a rule of law, that there are protections in place for minority rights,
that women's rights are advanced so that women can fully participate in
societies where now they cannot.''

''We've also -- are leading the way when it comes to spreading compassion,'' Mr.
McClellan said. ''The United States leads the way when it comes to providing
resources to combat the scourge of AIDS.'' Amnesty's language was among the
strongest it has used and represented a sense in human rights groups that the
treatment by the United States of prisoners in Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantanamo
Bay had diminished its standing.

''It's not because the United States is the worst human rights abuser in the
world but because it's the most influential,'' said Kenneth Roth, the executive
director of Human Rights Watch, via phone from New York. ''United States
disregard for international human rights standards is damaging those
standards,'' he said, referring to some governments with poor human rights
records ''citing the U.S. record to justify their own.''

In a separate telephone interview, Dr. Schulz of Amnesty International USA
acknowledged his organization had used ''strong language'' because it felt that
''the United States has betrayed a very fundamental principle that this country
stands for.''

The focus on what Dr. Schulz called ''the failure of global leadership'' was a
shift from times when Amnesty International concentrated on issues like the
death penalty, which it opposes, in countries like China, and the plight of
refugees.

Ms. Kahn said the Bush administration had ''gone to great lengths to restrict
the application of the Geneva Conventions and to 'redefine' torture.''

''It has sought to justify the use of coercive interrogation techniques, the
practice of holding 'ghost detainees' (people in unacknowledged incommunicado
detention) and the 'rendering' or handing over of prisoners to third countries
known to practice torture,'' she said.

She also criticized the European Union and some United Nations institutions,
saying the Security Council had ''failed to muster the will to take effective
action in Darfur'' in Sudan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); WOMEN (78%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); PRISONS (76%); APPOINTMENTS (74%); NAVIES
(74%); EXECUTIVES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (62%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%)
Central Intelligence Agency; Amnesty International

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%) Alan Cowell

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (94%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan  ; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Defends Chastising of U.S.

BYLINE: By LIZETTE ALVAREZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1125 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 3


An official of Amnesty International said Friday that the term gulag in its
annual report to describe the United States prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
was chosen deliberately, and she shrugged off harsh criticism of the report by
the Bush administration.

The official, Kate Gilmore, the group's executive deputy secretary general, said
the administration's response was ''typical of a government on the defensive,''
and she drew parallels to the reactions of the former Soviet Union, Libya and
Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini, when those governments were accused of human
rights abuses.

The report, released May 25, placed the United States at the heart of its list
of human rights offenders, citing indefinite detentions of prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay, prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib in Iraq and secret renditions of
prisoners to countries that practice torture. But it is the use of the word
gulag, a reference to the complex of labor camps where Stalin sent thousands of
dissidents, that has drawn the most attention.

President Bush called the report ''absurd'' several times, and said it was the
product of people who ''hate America.'' Vice President Dick Cheney told CNN that
he was ''offended'' by the use of the term and that he did not take the
organization ''seriously.'' And Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld called the
comparison ''reprehensible.''

Amnesty has fired right back, pointing out that the administration often cites
its reports when that suits its purposes. ''If our reports are so 'absurd,' why
did the administration repeatedly cite our findings about Saddam Hussein before
the Iraq war?'' wrote William F. Schultz, executive director of the group's
United States branch, in a letter to the editor being published Saturday in The
New York Times. ''Why does it welcome our criticisms of Cuba, China and North
Korea? And why does it cite our research in its own annual human rights
reports?''

In a telephone interview on Friday, Ms. Gilmore, the second-ranking official in
Amnesty, said ''gulag'' was not meant as a literal description of Guantanamo but
was emblematic of the sense of injustice and lack of due process surrounding the
prison.

''The issue of the gulag is about policies and practices,'' she said. ''You put
people beyond the reach of law, you locate them in facilities where families
can't access them, you deny them access to legal representation, you attempt to
prevent judicial review.''

She added, ''This creates the likelihood that the people who are there have
nothing to do with criminal conduct or that it is a breach of the Geneva
Convention.''

In its 308-page human rights report, Amnesty International pointed to an
''impunity and accountability deficit,'' and called on Congress to conduct ''a
full and independent investigation of the use of torture and other human rights
abuses by U.S. officials'' as a starting point in ''restoring confidence that
true justice has no double standards.''

Long used to biting criticism, the group said this was the first time one of its
reports had drawn the public wrath of the United States president and vice
president, its secretary of defense, its secretary of state and the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Ms. Gilmore said the response was telling. ''When we
see a government at this level engaging in rhetorical attacks and avoiding
dealing with the details or the facts,'' she said, ''we interpret that as being
a sign that we are starting to have an impact.''

Ms. Gilmore said Amnesty International has been working on terrorism-related
human rights violations for more than two years. It was a natural progression
and a predictable course of action, she said, to place the United States, a
defender of democracy and human rights, at the forefront of the annual report of
human rights violations.

The International Committee of the Red Cross, the F.B.I. and United States
courts have criticized the detention policies at Guantanamo Bay, she said. In
addition, Ms. Gilmore said, the detention policy has been expanded to apply to
jails in countries like Egypt, Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. The creation of an
archipelago of detention centers, she said, was another factor in the choice of
the term gulag.

There has been no internal discussion about the wisdom of having used the term
and certainly no sense of regret, Ms. Gilmore said, although the group has found
the unrelenting focus on the word, and not the contents of the report,
irritating. ''On the other hand,'' she added, ''we're getting more airing of our
message than we would have otherwise.''

So far, Washington's reaction has galvanized support for Amnesty International,
she said. In the past week, the United States branch of the group has reported
an increase in memberships, donations and volunteers.

The fact that the United States was prominent on the list came as little
surprise internationally, she said.

''I think it's a dangerous game the U.S. administration is playing, to attack
civil society in this manner,'' Ms. Gilmore said. ''Civil society is essential
to a robust democratic society. For the Bush administration to think that it's a
legitimate political strategy to attack a nongovernmental organization of
Amnesty's standing signals a ruthlessness that is deeply troubling.''

While the substance of the report was defended by human rights organizations and
others, several said Amnesty International had erred in using the word gulag, if
only because it allowed the Bush administration to change the conversation.

''I think it was a rather serious misjudgment to use the term gulag,'' said Sir
Nigel Rodley, a professor of law at the University of Essex and chairman of the
Human Rights Center there. ''The basic criticism of some of the problems are
very real and it has given the administration the opportunity to divert from the
substance of the concern.''

Sir Nigel, who said that having been Amnesty International's legal adviser from
1973 to 1990 he represents the old guard, also said that the organization should
have avoided using an inflammatory term that did not precisely apply. He also
said the ''lapse'' lent credence to a growing chorus of concerns that Amnesty,
which was founded in 1961 to lobby for political prisoners and has since
expanded into the areas of poverty, domestic violence and AIDS, had overextended
itself and lost focus.

Reed Brody, special counsel with Human Rights Watch in New York, said he thought
the Bush administration had taken cover behind semantics. ''We're concerned that
the debate over the label is obscuring the real issue,'' he said. ''That the
United States is locking people up without due process possibly for the rest of
their lives.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
PRISONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ANNUAL REPORTS (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); DUE PROCESS
(75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); EXECUTIVES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); MISCONDUCT (71%); GENOCIDE (70%); IRAQ WAR (69%); NAVIES
(65%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (65%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (63%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (61%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Amnesty
International

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%) Lizette
Alvarez; Kate Gilmore; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (97%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CHINA
(79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Condemns Meatpackers On Job Safety

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 936 words


For the first time, Human Rights Watch has issued a report that harshly
criticizes a single industry in the United States, concluding that working
conditions among the nation's meatpackers and slaughterhouses are so bad that
they violate basic human rights.

The report, released yesterday, frequently echoes Upton Sinclair's classic on
the industry, ''The Jungle.'' It finds that jobs in many beef, pork and poultry
plants are sufficiently dangerous to breach international agreements promising a
safe workplace.

The report notes that meatpacking's injury rate is more than three times that of
American private industry over all: 20 injuries per 100 meatpacking workers in
2001, as against 5.7 in all industry.

It describes plants where exhausted employees slice into carcasses at a frenzied
pace hour after hour, often suffering injuries from a slip of the knife or from
repeating a single motion more than 10,000 times a day. It tells of workers'
being asphyxiated by fumes from decaying matter, of legs cut off, of hands
crushed.

''Meatpacking is the most dangerous factory job in America,'' said the report's
author, Lance Compa, who teaches industrial and labor relations at Cornell and
is a former union organizer and negotiator. ''Dangerous conditions are cheaper
for companies, and the government does next to nothing.''

Responding to that criticism, Richard Fairfax, director of enforcement for the
federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, said the agency
vigorously oversaw the industry for excessive line speed and other problems.

''We have a strong enforcement program'' in meatpacking, Mr. Fairfax said, ''and
a strong compliance assistance program.''

The industry itself dismissed the report's conclusions, noting that the number
of reported injuries was declining and saying packing companies did their utmost
to make their plants safe.

J. Patrick Boyle, president of the American Meat Institute, said the report was
''replete with falsehoods and baseless claims.''

''In fact,'' Mr. Boyle said, ''there are so many refutable claims and
irresponsible accusations contained in this 175-page report that it would take
another 175 pages to correct the errors.''

The industry also disputed two other conclusions of the report: that packing
companies violate human rights by suppressing employees' efforts to organize,
often firing those who support a union, and that they flout international
agreements by taking advantage of workers' immigration status -- in some plants,
two-thirds of the workers are illegal immigrants -- to subject them to inferior
treatment.

''Every country has its horrors, and this industry is one of the horrors in the
United States,'' said Jamie Fellner, director of the United States program for
Human Rights Watch, a private watchdog based in New York that most often
investigates abuses abroad. ''One of the goals of Human Rights Watch is to
promote the understanding that workers' rights are human rights. The right to
organize and the right to have a safe place to work are human rights no less
than the right not to be tortured.''

The report, ''Blood, Sweat and Fear: Workers' Rights in U.S. Meat and Poultry
Plants,'' focuses on three companies: Tyson Foods for poultry, Smithfield Foods
for pork, and Nebraska Beef. Mr. Compa based the report on interviews with
workers, company responses, regulatory reports, court testimony going back over
the past decade and judicial rulings.

''Nearly every worker interviewed for this report bore physical signs of a
serious injury suffered from working in a meat or poultry plant,'' the report
says. ''Meat and poultry industry employers set up the workplaces and practices
that create these dangers, but they treat the resulting mayhem as a normal,
natural part of the production process, not as what it is -- repeated violations
of international human rights standards.''

The report also says that to save themselves money, companies frequently
pressure injured employees not to file workers' compensation claims.

Officials of Nebraska Beef did not respond to telephone inquiries seeking
comment about the report.

But Gary Mickelson, a spokesman for Tyson, said: ''We're disappointed by the
report's misleading conclusions, but not surprised given the author's extensive
ties to organized labor. Ensuring our team members are treated fairly is an
integral part of the way we do business.''

Dennis Treacy, Smithfield's vice president for environmental, community and
government affairs, faulted the report for dealing at length with what an
administrative law judge for the National Labor Relations Board found to be
dozens of labor law violations eight years ago against workers trying to
unionize the company's pork processing plant in Tar Heel, N.C.

''They make no mention of the current situation of our plants or anybody
else's,'' Mr. Treacy said. ''We're proud of our plants.''

He said that worker safety was one of Smithfield's highest priorities and that
the company was appealing a ruling by the labor relations board that upheld the
judge's decision.

That decision found violations, described in the report, that included dismissal
of pro-union workers, stationing sheriff's deputies at plant gates to intimidate
workers and orchestrating a physical assault on union supporters.

In issuing the report, Human Rights Watch called on federal safety officials to
increase enforcement and slow the line speed in packing plants, urged state
officials to enforce workers' compensation laws more vigorously, and sought
strengthened enforcement against companies' firing and intimidating workers who
want to unionize.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A meat processing plant in 1906, left, the year Upton Sinclair
wrote ''The Jungle,'' and the current Smithfield Foods plant in Tar Heel, N.C. A
report suggests that conditions have improved little. (Photo by Corbis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); OCCUPATIONAL
HEALTH & SAFETY AGENCIES (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); POULTRY PROCESSING (90%); MEATS (90%); ANIMAL SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TRANSPORTATION
SUPPORT SERVICES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%);
FACTORY WORKERS (78%); DEREGULATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); MEAT
PROCESSING & PRODUCTS (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%); IMMIGRATION (76%); LABOR
UNIONS (75%); PORK (73%); POULTRY (73%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (69%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (60%) Meat; Freedom and Human Rights; Industrial and Occupational
Hazards; Labor; Regulation and Deregulation of Industry; Meat

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY & HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION (82%); AMERICAN MEAT INSTITUTE (59%) Human Rights Watch;
Occupational Safety and Health Administration; American Meat Institute

PERSON: Steven Greenhouse; Richard Fairfax

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              9 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S.-Installed Government in Iraq Is Cited by U.S. for Rights Abuses

BYLINE: By BRIAN KNOWLTON; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


The State Department on Monday detailed an array of human rights abuses last
year by the Iraqi government, including torture, rape and illegal detentions by
police officers and functionaries of the interim administration that took power
in June.

In the Bush administration's bluntest description of human rights transgressions
by the American-supported government, the report said the Iraqis ''generally
respected human rights, but serious problems remained'' as the government and
American-led foreign forces fought a violent insurgency. It cited ''reports of
arbitrary deprivation of life, torture, impunity, poor prison conditions --
particularly in pretrial detention facilities -- and arbitrary arrest and
detention.''

The lengthy discussion came in a chapter on Iraq in the department's annual
report on human rights, which pointedly criticized not only countries that had
been found chronically deficient, like North Korea, Syria and Iran, but also
some close American allies, including Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan.

The allegations of abuses by an Iraqi government installed by the United States
and still heavily influenced by it provided an unusual element to the larger
report. The report did not address incidents in Iraq in which Americans were
involved, like the abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib, which came to light in
2004.

A senior State Department official said the criticism of Iraq was in keeping
with the administration's approach. ''What it shows is that we don't look the
other way,'' the official said. ''There are countries we support and that are
friends, and when they have practices that don't meet international standards,
we don't hesitate to call a spade a spade.''

The official said Iraqi officials accepted that there had been problems and were
correcting their practices. ''The Iraqis are not in denial on this,'' the
official added.

The report emphasized the larger accomplishments of the Iraqi people, as
symbolized by the successful elections of Jan. 30. But it gave extensive details
about complaints that the government had violated human rights provisions of the
transitional law put in place by the United States and the Iraqi Governing
Council shortly after the 2003 invasion.

These included reports that police officers in Basra were involved in killing 10
Baath Party members; that the police in Baghdad arrested, interrogated and
killed 12 kidnappers of three police officers on Oct. 16, 2004, and that
corruption was a problem at every level of government.

The document cited without comment a report by Human Rights Watch, an
independent advocacy group, that ''torture and ill treatment of detainees by
police was commonplace,'' allegedly including ''beatings with cables and
hosepipes, electric shocks to their earlobes and genitals, food and water
deprivation.''

In one case, the report said, enough evidence had been gathered ''to prosecute
police officers in Baghdad who were systematically raping and torturing female
detainees.'' Two of them received prison sentences, while four were demoted and
reassigned.

Prison conditions in Iraq had shown ''significant improvement'' after the fall
of Saddam Hussein, the department said, but many prisons still fell short of
international standards.

There were also reports of police officers making false arrests to extort money
from the families of detainees, and of an Iraqi ministry having members of a
political party arrested in order to occupy their offices. ''Reportedly,'' the
document said, ''coerced confessions and interrogation continued to be the
favored method of investigation by police.''

The broader annual report, which is required by Congress and is formally titled
the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, described rights abuses in other
allied countries in notably tough language.

The report said that the Saudi record of abuses in 2004 ''far exceeds the
advances,'' that Egypt's and Pakistan's records were poor, and that Jordan had
''many problems.'' It criticized all four countries over allegations of abusing
and torturing prisoners.

But the document also struck optimistic notes at times. It cited the success of
democratic elections in Afghanistan, Iraq and Ukraine, and suggested that
developments in those places, coming as President Bush continued to promote
democracy as a counter to terrorism, might be helping to embolden people
elsewhere to shed a hopelessness about change.

In much of the broader Middle East, ''people are increasingly conscious of the
freedom deficit in the region,'' Under Secretary Paula J. Dobriansky said in
introducing the report.

The official attention paid to Egypt and Saudi Arabia is not new, but some of
the language in the report was unexpectedly sharp. In Saudi Arabia, for example,
it said: ''There were credible reports of torture and abuse of prisoners by
security forces, arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detentions. The religious
police continued to intimidate, abuse and detain citizens and foreigners. Most
trials were closed.''

Egypt, it said, restricted many basic rights, and its security forces continued
to mistreat prisoners, leading to at least 10 deaths in custody.

The report on Iraq also covered the year in which the prisoner abuses at Abu
Ghraib were uncovered.

An acting assistant secretary of state, Michael G. Kozak, was asked Monday how
that scandal had affected the administration's latest evaluation. ''Look,'' he
said, ''the events at Abu Ghraib were a stain on the honor of the U.S.; there's
no two ways about it.''

What mattered, he said, was whether a government worked to redress the abuses
that do occur. ''I think you've seen the U.S. being very active,'' he said.

The report, coming days after some critics suggested that President Bush had
been insufficiently tough with President Vladimir V. Putin, listed several
complaints about Russia. It criticized the central government's consolidation of
power at the expense of the regions, its restriction of news media, and its
allowing of political pressure to taint the judiciary.

It said China, which has a growing commercial relationship with the United
States, continued to abuse prisoners, harass activists and restrict religious
practices.

North Korea was condemned for continued ''brutal and repressive'' treatment of
its people; Iran for allowing citizen's freedom to ''deteriorate;'' and Syria
for widespread use of torture, poor prison conditions and mass arrests of Kurds.

Sudan's human rights record was called extremely poor, both for restricting
freedoms and for the continuing violence by government-linked militias in Darfur
Province.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(79%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); POLITICS (61%); TERRORISM (60%) Freedom
and Human Rights; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; United States
International Relations; Elections; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and
Government; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: State Department

PERSON: Brian Knowlton

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); EGYPT (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); JORDAN (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); UKRAINE (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Saudi Arabia; Egypt; Ukraine; Afghanistan; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Said to Step Up Religious Persecution of Minority in Its West

BYLINE: By JOSEPH KAHN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, April 11


China has stepped up a campaign of religious persecution against its minority
Uighur population in the western region of Xinjiang even though the government
has already eliminated any organized resistance to Beijing's rule there, two
leading human rights groups said in a joint report to be released Tuesday.

The groups, Human Rights Watch and Human Rights in China, quoted secret
Communist Party and government documents as detailing a range of new policies
that tighten controls on religious worship, assembly and artistic expression
among Xinjiang's eight million Turkic-speaking Muslims, including strict rules
on teaching religion to minors.

China adopted some of the measures, the groups said, after it persuaded the Bush
administration that a little known Uighur exile group, the East Turkistan
Islamic Movement, was responsible for terrorist acts and belonged on America's
list of leading terrorist threats. The groups said China has used isolated
terrorist acts to justify a wholesale crackdown on its Uighur Muslim population.

''China is using the suppression of religion as a whip over Uighurs who
challenge or even chafe at Chinese rule of Xinjiang,'' Brad Adams, Asia director
at Human Rights Watch, said in a statement. ''In other parts of China,
individuals have a little more space to worship as they choose. But Uighur
Muslims are facing state-ordered discrimination and crackdowns.''

China has waged a long-term battle against what it describes as ''splittist''
forces in its two sprawling but lightly populated border regions of Xinjiang and
Tibet. The Beijing government has promoted rapid economic development in both
areas, while encouraging migration of Han Chinese, the dominant ethnic group, to
offset the influence of Tibetans and Uighurs in their home communities.

The Chinese government has long maintained that it allows religious freedom in
both areas, opposing only those people who use religion to advocate
independence.

But the human rights groups said that in practice the authorities in Xinjiang
have adopted ever-more-intrusive controls, including intensive political vetting
of imams, surveillance inside mosques and screening of literature and poetry for
even vague hints of dissent.

Even prosaic complaints about the government or the quality of life that might
no longer be taken as threatening in other parts of China are often viewed as
veiled support for separatism in Xinjiang, the report said.

Although these and other human rights groups welcomed the release of Rebiya
Kadeer, Xinjiang's best known political prisoner, before the United Nations
Human Rights Commission's annual meeting last month, the report's authors said
they detected no signs of a general easing of conditions in the region.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (89%);
POLITICS (89%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); DISCRIMINATION
(78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (77%); TERRORISM (74%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%);
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(66%); RESEARCH REPORTS (66%); ETHNICITY (65%); POETRY (61%); WRITERS (61%)
Freedom of Religion; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government  ;
Freedom of Speech and Expression; Islam

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%) Human Rights Watch; Human Rights in China

PERSON: Joseph Kahn

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (97%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); XINJIANG, CHINA (91%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (74%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%); TIBET (92%); TURKEY (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: China; Xinjiang Province (China); China

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan to Offer Plans for Change In U.N. Structure

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1050 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 20


Secretary General Kofi Annan will propose sweeping changes to the United Nations
on Monday that would expand the Security Council to reflect modern realities of
global power, restructure the discredited Human Rights Commission to keep rights
violators from becoming members and redefine terrorism to end any justifications
of its use for national resistance.

Mr. Annan will make the recommendations in a speech to the General Assembly
aimed at restoring confidence in the United Nations that lapsed after bitter
divisions over the war in Iraq, charges of mismanagement and corruption in the
oil-for-food program, and revelations of sexual misconduct by blue-helmeted
peacekeepers.

His proposals, drawn from conclusions of an independent panel in November, will
be the subject of a gathering of heads of government in September that hopes to
reinvigorate the United Nations at a time when its value is being widely
questioned.

The speech, while making the case for the relevance of a revised United Nations,
will also be seen as a bid by Mr. Annan to shore up his stewardship. While he
has maintained much of his once-vaunted reputation abroad, he has come under
pointed criticism in Washington, where some members of Congress have called on
him to resign before completing his term in office at the end of 2006.

''If any report has Kofi Annan's name all over it, it is this one,'' said Mark
Malloch Brown, Mr. Annan's outspoken new chief of staff.

The measures were outlined in a 63-page report from Mr. Annan titled ''In Larger
Freedom: Towards Development, Security and Human Rights for All.'' The report
was released Sunday after details from drafts emerged in The Los Angeles Times
and The Washington Post.

Mr. Annan said the Human Rights Commission had been undermined by allowing
participation by countries whose purpose was ''not to strengthen human rights
but to protect themselves against criticism or to criticize others.'' In recent
years, the commission's members have included Cuba, Libya and Sudan.

''As a result,'' he said, ''a credibility deficit has developed, which casts a
shadow on the reputation of the United Nations system as a whole.''

He recommended replacing the 53-nation Human Rights Commission with a smaller
council, whose members would be chosen by a two-thirds vote of the 191-nation
General Assembly, rather than by regional groups. ''Those elected,'' he said,
''should undertake to abide by the highest human rights standards.''

Mr. Annan called for a definition of terrorism as any act ''intended to cause
death or serious bodily harm to civilians or noncombatants'' aimed at
intimidating governments, populations or international organizations. ''We must
convince all those who may be tempted to support terrorism that it is neither an
acceptable nor an effective way to advance their cause,'' he said.

Regarding the Security Council, Mr. Annan left it up to the General Assembly to
decide between basic ideas proposed in November, but he urged the body to reach
a decision before the September meeting.

The council now has 5 veto-bearing members -- Britain, China, France, Russia and
the United States -- and 10 members elected to two-year terms. One alternative
would add 6 permanent members -- likely candidates are Brazil, Germany, India,
Japan, Egypt and either Nigeria or South Africa -- as well as 3 two-year term
members. The other would create a new tier of 8 semipermanent members chosen for
renewable four-year terms and one additional two-year seat to the existing 10.

Veto power is coveted by nations seeking permanent status; they are likely to
continue to press for it even though both recommendations, as now written, limit
the veto to the five original permanent members.

The report also reinforces a policy of ''zero tolerance'' for sexual
exploitation by peacekeepers. Mr. Annan urged countries furnishing troops to
prosecute wrongdoers in the absence of United Nations authority to do so.

In what appeared to be a reference to the Bush administration's bent for taking
aggressive action to project and protect American interests, Mr. Annan said,
''In today's world, no state, however powerful, can protect itself on its own.''

The spokesman for the United States mission, Richard A. Grenell, said that it
was too early to give a full reaction but that ''we have been eager to receive
the secretary general's reform ideas and are now giving his new report every
consideration.''

Mr. Malloch Brown said he thought Washington would welcome Mr. Annan's human
rights proposal -- which he described as ''more ambitious than anyone had
contemplated or expected'' -- and his endorsement of a nonproliferation system
that Robert C. Orr, the assistant secretary general for policy coordination and
strategic planning, noted had been championed by the nominee to be the new
United States ambassador, John R. Bolton.

But Mr. Malloch Brown said Washington would probably not be happy with Mr.
Annan's insistence that developed nations set aside 0.7 percent of their gross
national incomes for aid to developing countries -- the United Nations estimates
the United States' level at 0.15 percent -- or with his reliance on the Security
Council to codify rules on using military force and pre-emptive action.

On the dispute between the United States and the United Nations over the use of
force, Mr. Orr said: ''Certainly Washington has expressed concerns about this,
but in fact the discussion has been very constructive. There is not universal
agreement on this, but like many parts of the package, we are not starting with
agreement; we hope to end with agreement. What you can say is that the U.S. has
engaged very sincerely on these discussions, and that's very encouraging.''

                             --------------------


U.N. Peacekeeper Is Killed in Haiti

 PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, March 20 (Reuters) -- A United Nations soldier from Sri
Lanka and two other people were killed in a gunfight on Sunday as United Nations
troops and the Haitian police evicted rebel former soldiers from a police
station they had occupied for months. The soldier was the first peacekeeper
killed by violence since the international forces were sent in last June after a
revolt drove President Jean-Bertrand Aristide into exile.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHICS (77%); CORRUPTION (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (77%); MISCONDUCT (76%); SEX OFFENSES (75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%) Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Ethics;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Sex
Crimes

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (65%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC (53%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO
(53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%);
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) United Nations; Security
Council (Un); United Nations Commission on Human Rights; United Nations

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (65%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (65%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (53%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (53%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (53%)

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Calls Deadly Uzbek Crackdown a 'Massacre'

BYLINE: By C.J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 7


Uzbekistan's crackdown on a prison break and mass protest last month has been
labeled a massacre in a report by a prominent human rights group, which says
responsibility for many of the deaths lies with the Uzbek government.

The group, Human Rights Watch, based in New York, issued the report on Tuesday,
providing the most extensive independent review to date of the failed uprising
in the northeastern Uzbek city of Andijon.

Drawing from interviews with more than 50 witnesses, it corroborates and expands
upon previous reports of a brief armed revolt that became an antigovernment
protest, which the authorities broke up with rifle and machine-gun fire.

The report also provides accounts from two witnesses of Uzbek troops moving
among the bodies on the street the morning after the crackdown, shooting wounded
people who had survived the night. ''There was a systematic effort to
slaughter,'' said Kenneth Roth, the organization's executive director.

The violence in Andijon on May 13 has fueled renewed worries about the stability
of Uzbekistan, a repressive post-Soviet state that is an ally of the Bush
administration in the fighting in Afghanistan and other counterterrorism
efforts.

With the release of the report, Human Rights Watch renewed calls by several
international organizations and Western governments for an independent
investigation.

Uzbekistan had flatly refused to allow such an investigation in the weeks after
the crackdown but has since signaled it might offer limited cooperation. State
Department officials say they are not yet sure what degree of cooperation the
Uzbek government would consent to.

Human Rights Watch also urged the United States to suspend negotiations for a
long-term American presence at the Uzbek air base, situated near the Afghan
border, unless Uzbekistan accepted an investigation. ''There is something
unseemly, to say the least, about negotiations for a base agreement with a
country that has just massacred hundreds of its own citizens,'' Mr. Roth said.

Also on Tuesday, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Geneva-based
aid organization, announced that it still had not yet been able to get access to
those injured and arrested in the crackdown, in spite of repeated attempts.

The committee noted that many Uzbeks still do not know whether their missing kin
are dead or injured or were arrested or fled. It said a response from the Uzbek
government ''has become urgent.''

The Uzbek government has shown flashes of intransigence toward Western
organizations in recent weeks. On Monday the United States Peace Corps announced
that it had suspended its program in the country after the Uzbek Foreign
Ministry denied visas to the corps' volunteers.

Uzbekistan, strategically situated but economically underdeveloped, has been
racked by ruinous economic policies, corruption, clan rule and harsh
restrictions on freedom of expression, assembly and conscience. The United
Nations has criticized it for its extensive use of torture.

Since the crackdown, it has defended itself with a mix of defiance and blame
directed at the armed men who raided the prison.

Human Rights Watch said those men, whose number it estimated at 50 to 100, had
committed serious crimes. But it said the government response was indiscriminate
and out of proportion.

The report echoed another independent report, written by the Brussels-based
International Crisis Group, which found no public evidence that the revolt was
led by Islamic extremist groups or had religious aims.

The Uzbek president, Islam A. Karimov, has insisted, without providing public
evidence, that the uprising was carried out by international terrorist groups
that seek to create an Islamic state. Human Rights Watch said it found no
evidence of the president's assertion.

''The protesters spoke about economic conditions in Andijon, government
repression and unfair trials and not the creation of an Islamic state,'' the
report says. It described the crowd as shouting ''Freedom!'' and not ''God is
Great!''

Spokesmen for Uzbekistan's Foreign Ministry did not return several phone calls
on Tuesday.

Mr. Roth said an investigation would be important in part because many details
of the uprising remained unknown, including the number of victims, the
identities of all the armed units present at the crackdown and the nature and
origin of orders given to troops who fired into the crowds.

Human Rights Watch did not estimate the number of dead, and avoided endorsing
opposition accounts of as many as 745 dead civilians, which have not been
independently verified. But it dismissed the official Uzbek claim of 173 dead,
writing that ''hundreds'' were killed on one street alone.

The report also noted Uzbek efforts to restrict the flow of information about
the crackdown, and to intimidate and harass witnesses.

Fears for the safety of witnesses have intensified since a Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty correspondent's report last month of being led by a local
guide to a mass grave outside Andijon; the next day, the radio service said, the
guide was fatally stabbed.

There have also been broader fears about safety for Westerners in the country.
Last week, the American Embassy in Uzbekistan authorized the departure of
nonessential embassy staff and family members, citing new terrorist threats.

On Tuesday, the embassy expanded the warning, advising embassy personnel not to
send their children to school for the rest of the school year.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Uzbek soldiers in Andijon during violence on May 13, which Human
Rights Watch yesterday called a massacre, faulting the government. (Photo by
Efrem Lukatsky/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (87%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (78%); SHOOTINGS (77%);
PUBLIC POLICY (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (75%);
ARRESTS (75%); TERRORISM (73%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY &
ASSOCIATION (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); RIOTS (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%) Freedom and
Human Rights; Demonstrations and Riots; United States International Relations;
Prisons and Prisoners; Military Bases and Installations

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); PEACE CORPS (59%) Red Cross; Peace Corps

PERSON: C J Chivers

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (70%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (70%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Andijon (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Intelligence Nominee Comes Under Renewed Scrutiny on Human Rights

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE; Douglas Jehl contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


Human rights advocates repeated longstanding criticisms on Friday of John D.
Negroponte, President Bush's nominee as director of national intelligence. They
said accusations that he covered up abuses as ambassador to Honduras in the
1980's had a new importance after recent cases of American abuse of detainees.

In Honduras, Mr. Negroponte ''looked the other way'' when evidence of rights
violations came to light, said Reed Brody, counsel to Human Rights Watch.

''Unfortunately,'' Mr. Brody said, ''today the United States is involved in
serious human rights crimes committed in the process of collecting intelligence.
Is he just going to look the other way again?''

Sandra Coliver, executive director of the Center for Justice and Accountability,
a human rights law center in San Francisco that has aided Honduran torture
victims, said the nomination would hurt the United States' image in Central
America.

''In Central America,'' Ms. Coliver said, ''Negroponte is indelibly remembered
for his role in increasing the amount of U.S. aid to the Honduran military at
the very time that the military's role in supporting brutal death squads was
becoming abundantly clear. What kind of a message will this appointment send to
the people of Central America? That the U.S. is willing to overlook massive
human rights atrocities in the name of collecting intelligence in pursuit of
U.S. national interests.''

Mr. Negroponte, 65, now ambassador to Iraq, is a career diplomat who has worked
all over the world in his 40-year career. He has faced repeated scrutiny for his
work as envoy to Honduras from 1981 to 1985, when Honduran military units, some
trained by the Central Intelligence Agency, carried out kidnappings, torture and
killings.

As the first director of national intelligence, Mr. Negroponte would oversee the
C.I.A. and the other 14 agencies that are part of the nation's estimated $40
billion spying enterprise. The post is the centerpiece of intelligence
reorganization undertaken chiefly because of the failure to warn of the Sept.
11, 2001, attacks.

The C.I.A. and military are also under intense scrutiny because of evidence that
detainees in Afghanistan, Iraq and elsewhere have been tortured in questioning
and in a few cases have died in custody. Questions have also been raised about
whether the intelligence agency has handed over prisoners to third countries,
where they might be tortured.

At confirmation hearings for previous posts, Mr. Negroponte has adamantly denied
that he tolerated or covered up any abuses.

He said at a hearing in 2001 that his top priority as envoy to Honduras was
''encouraging Honduras's return to civilian democratic rule, including
protection of human rights.''

Efforts to contact Mr. Negroponte through the State Department were not
successful.

He has won easy confirmations in the past, and the Honduras record is not likely
to be a major obstacle to his confirmation in the new position.

Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, senior Democrat on the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said he was not particularly troubled by Mr.
Negroponte's record there.

''People grow and change over 20 years,'' Mr. Rockefeller said, adding that the
panel would conduct a ''thorough'' review of the nominee.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat who pursued the Honduran
questions in 2001, when Mr. Negroponte was confirmed as delegate to the United
Nations, issued a statement on Thursday praising him and not mentioning
Honduras.

Senator Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the Intelligence
Committee, described Mr. Negroponte in a telephone interview as ''a person who
has a great deal of credibility.'' Jack R. Binns, who preceded Mr. Negroponte as
ambassador to Honduras, said he opposed the confirmation because he believed
that Mr. Negroponte had misled Congress in past testimony and because he might
slant intelligence to suit administration policies.

''Based on his performance in Honduras, there's that possibility,'' said Mr.
Binns, who was ambassador from 1980 to 1991 and is now retired and living in
Arizona.

Oscar Reyes, whom the Honduran military seized in 1982 and tortured along with
his wife, Gloria, said he was dismayed to learn of Mr. Negroponte's nomination.

''He'll say, 'I didn't know,''' said Mr. Reyes, 69, who now publishes a
Spanish-language newspaper in Washington. ''But the U.S. embassy knew everything
that was going on.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); TORTURE (89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); ESPIONAGE (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); GENOCIDE
(74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (70%); TERRORISM (68%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (67%); ARMED FORCES
(66%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (62%) Intelligence Services; Freedom and Human Rights;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (84%) Scott Shane; John D
Negroponte; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (93%); CENTRAL AMERICA (88%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Honduras; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Frees Muslim Woman Days Ahead of Rice's Visit

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY; Steven R. Weisman contributed reporting from Washington
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 17


In steps apparently aimed at improving the diplomatic climate before a visit by
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, China released its most prominent Muslim
political prisoner on Thursday, and the Bush administration said it would not
seek to censure China at the United Nations Human Rights Commission's annual
meeting in Geneva.

The release of the prisoner, Rebiya Kadeer, 58, was praised in Washington by
Adam Ereli, a State Department spokesman, who also listed what he said were
several recent ''improvements'' in China's human rights record.

Ms. Kadeer was freed on a medical parole and was headed to the United States,
according to the Dui Hua Foundation, the San Francisco-based human rights
organization involved in the release.

[Rueters reported that Ms. Kadeer arrived in Chicago late on Thursday and
thanked the United States government for her release.]

The group's executive director, John Kamm, said the Chinese government wanted
the release to be completed by the time of Ms. Rice's visit. She is due to
arrive Sunday.

The United States has treated Ms. Kadeer's case as a priority since she was
sentenced to eight years in prison in March 2000 for ''illegally providing state
intelligence abroad.'' She is a member of the predominantly Muslim Uighur ethnic
group in western Xinjiang Province. Her crime was sending newspaper clippings
about the treatment of Uighurs to her husband in the United States.

The United States and China still have not officially resumed a human rights
dialogue that broke off last year, but the two moves on Thursday reflected what
American officials said was an increased tempo of discussions on the subject.
Last month, the State Department criticized China in its annual review of human
rights. China responded with a critical report about human rights in the United
States.

Mr. Ereli on Thursday cited several ''noteworthy'' steps taken by China to
improve its human rights record. He noted that China had agreed to receive the
special United Nations investigator on torture and to let the International
Committee of the Red Cross open an office in Beijing. He also said China had
agreed to allow political prisoners to have the same rights to parole and
sentence reductions as other prisoners.

Ms. Kadeer is a women's rights activist and a businesswoman who served on the
top advisory board to China's Parliament. In 1997, she founded the Thousand
Mothers' Movement to promote job training for Uighur women.

Chinese security officials singled out Ms. Kadeer because of the political
activism of her husband, who lives in the United States and advocates for
greater freedoms for Uighurs, said Amnesty International. In August 1999, Ms.
Kadeer was arrested as she was traveling to meet a group of American
Congressional staff members. Amnesty International welcomed Ms. Kadeer's release
but said she ''should never have been in prison in the first place.'' Catherine
Baber, the group's deputy Asia director, said in a statement that many other
political prisoners remained jailed in China.

American officials have been pushing for the release of Zhao Yan, a researcher
in the Beijing office of The New York Times, who was detained six months ago on
charges of leaking state secrets. The Times has strongly protested Mr. Zhao's
arrest and said he had not been involved in disseminating state secrets.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rebiya Kadeer, a human rights campaigner in western China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); PAROLE (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); SENTENCING
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); WOMEN (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (74%); ETHNIC GROUPS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (69%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (65%); ARRESTS (65%); ETHNICITY (51%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (92%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (88%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTHWEST CHINA (78%);
XINJIANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); SWITZERLAND (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Reports Thousands of Disappearances in Chechnya

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 21


A prominent human rights organization said in a report released Monday that
kidnappings and extrajudicial detentions had become so rampant in Chechnya that
they amounted to crimes against humanity.

Human Rights Watch, based in New York, reported that an estimated 3,000 to 5,000
civilians from the region had disappeared since Russia's second war in Chechnya
began in 1999, and it linked a majority of the cases to Russian or Chechen
security forces.

Some of those kidnapped or detained in security sweeps have died in custody, and
some have been released after being questioned and in some cases tortured. But
the fate of most remains unknown, the organization said in its report.

''The human rights violations Russian forces have committed there, reinforced by
the climate of impunity the government has created, have not only brought untold
suffering to hundreds of thousands of civilians, but also undermined the goal of
fighting terrorism,'' the report said, disputing Russian claims that its arrests
and raids have focused on insurgents and terrorists.

Officials in Moscow and in Chechnya have dismissed accusations that they were
responsible for disappearances or illegal detentions as exaggerations, and did
so again on Monday. In an interview with foreign reporters last week, however,
the republic's president, Alu Alkhanov, acknowledged that people continued to
disappear.

''Nobody denies the fact that, unfortunately, kidnappings still take place,''
Mr. Alkhanov said in his heavily fortified compound in the capital, Grozny.
''Nobody is making it a secret, but look at the dynamics of the kidnappings and
you will see that these figures are several less than before.''

Human Rights Watch based its findings on materials gathered by the Russian
rights organization Memorial and by two weeks of interviews in Chechnya this
year with relatives of the missing. Its report studied 43 cases of
disappearances last year and called on the Russian authorities to disclose the
fate of those believed to be in official custody.

The most prominent case involved the disappearance in December of eight
relatives of Alsan Maskhadov, the separatist leader who was killed by Russian
forces in the village of Tolstoy-Yurt two weeks ago. The report cited statements
by witnesses that militiamen loyal to Ramzan Kadyrov, the first deputy prime
minister who overseas security forces, seized Mr. Maskhadov's relatives. In an
interview last week, Mr. Kadyrov denied that his forces were involved, blaming
the militant separatist commander, Shamil Basayev. ''We are looking for them,''
he said of Mr. Maskhadov's relatives.

Human Rights Watch called on the United Nations to hold the Russian authorities
accountable for violating international law, but given Russia's veto in the
Security Council, there seems to be little chance of any legally binding
investigation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DEATHS
& OBITUARIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MISSING PERSONS (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(76%); WITNESSES (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); VETO (70%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%) Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) Human Rights Watch;
United Nations

PERSON: Steven Lee Myers

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia); Russia

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Gives America a D

BYLINE: By PETER EDIDIN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Word for Word/Report Card;
Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1144 words


SINCE 1977, the United States State Department has issued an annual global
report card called the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.

The document has long been a thorn in the side of authoritarian governments,
including China's, which responds with a nettled review of its own, called ''The
Human Rights Record of the United States,'' the 2004 version of which was
recently released. (It is available in English at:
english.people.com.cn/200503/03/eng20050303--175406.html.)

China's assessment, unlike the sober State Department tome, is a frank
indictment and draws a picture of America that approaches caricature. But that
doesn't mean it won't buttress the negative image of the United States held by
its critics around the world.

Excerpts follow, with the document's grammatical and other errors intact.
PETER EDIDIN

LIFE, LIBERTY AND SECURITY OF PERSON

 American society is characterized with rampant violent crimes, severe
infringement of people's rights by law enforcement departments and lack of
guarantee for people's rights to life, liberty and security of person.

The United States has the biggest number of gun owners, and gun violence has
affected lots of innocent lives. About 31,000 Americans are killed and 75,000
wounded by firearms each year, which means more than 80 people are shot dead
each day.

The United States characterizes itself as ''a paradise for free people,'' but
the ratio of its citizens deprived of freedom has remained among the highest.

According to statistics from the Department of Justice, the number of inmates in
the United States jumped from 320,000 in 1980 to two million in 2000, a hike by
six times. The number of convicted offenders may total more than six million if
parolees and probationers are also counted.

POLITICAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOM

 The United States claims to be ''a paragon of democracy,'' but American
democracy is manipulated by the rich and malpractices are common. Elections in
the United States are in fact a contest of money. The presidential and
Congressional elections last year cost nearly $4 billion.

Campaign advertisement and political debates were full of distorted facts, false
information and lies.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS

 Poverty, hunger and homelessness have haunted the world richest country.

Upper middle- and upper-class families that constitute the top 10 percent of the
income distribution are prospering while many among the remaining 90 percent
struggle to maintain their standard of living. According to the statistics
released by the United States Census Bureau in 2004, the number of Americans in
poverty has been climbing for three years. It rose by 1.3 million year on year
in 2003 to 35.9 million.

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION

 Racial discrimination has been deeply rooted in the United States, permeating
into every aspects of society. The colored people are generally poor, with
living condition much worse than the white. The death rate of illness, accident
and murder among the black people is twice that of the white. The rate of being
victim of murders for the black people is five times that of the white. The rate
of being affected by AIDS for the black people is ten times that of the whites
while the rate of being diagnosed by diabetes for the black people is twice that
of the whites.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission of the United States received 29,000
complaints in 2003 of racial bias in the workplace

The Declaration of Independence said all men are created equal, so the gap
between black and white people is simply an insult to the founding essence of
the United States.

After the Sept. 11 incident, the United States openly restricts the rights of
citizens under the cloak of homeland security, and uses diverse means including
wire tapping of phone conversations and secret investigations, checks on all
secret files, and monitoring transfers of fund and cash flows to supervise
activities of its citizens, in which, people of ethnic minority groups,
foreigners and immigrants become main victims.

THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

 The situation of American women and children was disturbing. The rates of women
and children physically or sexually victimized were high. According to F.B.I.
Crime Statistics, in 2003 the United States witnessed 93,233 cases of raping.
The statistics also showed that every two minutes one woman was sexually
assaulted and every six minutes one woman was raped.

Children were victims of sex crimes. Every year about 400,000 children in the
U.S. were forced to engage in prostitution or other sexual dealings on the
streets.

In recent years scandals about clergymen molesting children kept breaking out.

It is believed that from 1950 to 2002 more than 10,600 boys and girls were
sexually abused by nearly 4,400 clergymen.

THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF FOREIGN NATIONALS

 In 2004, United States Army service people were reported to have abused and
insulted Iraqi prisoners of war, which stunned the whole world. The United
States forces were blamed for their fierce and dirty treatments for these Iraqi
P.O.W.'s. They made the P.O.W.'s naked by force, masking their heads with
underwear (even women's underwear), locking up their necks with a belt, towing
them over the ground, letting military dogs bite them, beating them with a whip,
shocking them with electric batons, needling them sometimes and putting chemical
fluids containing phosphorus on their wounds.

The United States frequently commits wanton slaughters during external invasions
and military attacks. Spain's Uprising newspaper on May 12, 2004, published a
list of human rights infringement incidents committed by the United States
troops, quoting two bloodthirsty sayings of two American generals, ''The only
good Indians I ever saw were dead'' by Gen. Philip Sheridan, and ''we should
bomb Vietnam back to the Stone Age'' by Air Force Gen. Curtis LeMay.

A survey on Iraqi civilian deaths, based on the natural death rate before the
war, estimates that the United States-led invasion might have led to 100,000
more deaths in the country, with most victims being women and children. In
addition, the United States troops often plunder Iraqi households when tracking
down anti-United States militants since the invasion. The American forces has so
far committed at least thousands of robberies and 90 percent of the Iraqis that
have been rummaged are innocent.

Despite tons of problems in its own human rights, the United States continues to
stick to its belligerent stance, wantonly trample on the sovereignty of other
countries and constantly stage tragedies of human rights infringement in the
world.

Instead of indulging itself in publishing the ''human rights country report'' to
censure other countries unreasonably, the United States should reflect on its
erroneous behavior on human rights and take its own human rights problems
seriously.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sizing up a weapon. China says that America's high level of gun
ownership is linked to violence. (Photo by Shannon Stapleton/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); VIOLENT CRIME (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (84%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); PAROLE (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (77%); INCOME DISTRIBUTION (76%); POOR POPULATION (76%); INDICTMENTS
(74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%);
PRISONS (73%); CENSUS (73%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (71%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (71%);
FIREARMS (71%); POVERTY RATES (69%); STATISTICS (69%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(69%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (68%); FAMILY (68%); PROBATION (67%); POLITICAL
ADVERTISING (67%); UPPER INCOME PERSONS (66%); LIVING STANDARDS (64%); POLITICAL
DEBATES (62%); RACE & RACISM (61%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (61%);
HOMELESSNESS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: UNITED STATES CENSUS BUREAU (58%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8399 SOCIAL SERVICES, NEC (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 29, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arrested Development

BYLINE: By Arlie Hochschild.

Arlie Hochschild is a professor of sociology at the University of California,
Berkeley, and the co-editor of ''Global Woman: Nannies, Maids and Sex Workers in
the New Economy.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, CALIF.


LAST month John Miller, director of the State Department's Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons, said that half the victims of human trafficking
may be children under 18. Children are ''at the center'' of the problem of
trafficking, which, Mr. Miller noted, is one of the great human rights issues of
the 21st century. Yes, children should be at the heart of our concern for human
rights. But that concern should start with the children detained in American
prisons in Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantanamo Bay.

Under international law, the line between childhood and maturity is 18. In
communications with Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, the Pentagon
has lowered the cutoff to 16. For this reason among others, we don't know
exactly how many Iraqi children are in American custody. But before the transfer
of sovereignty from the Coalition Provisional Authority to an Iraqi interim
government a year ago, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported
registering 107 detainees under 18 during visits to six prisons controlled by
coalition troops. Some detainees were as young as 8.

Since that time, Human Rights Watch reports that the number has risen. The
figures from Afghanistan are still more alarming: the journalist Seymour Hersh
wrote last month in the British newspaper The Guardian that a memo addressed to
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld shortly after the 2001 invasion reported
''800-900 Pakistani boys 13-15 years of age in custody.''

Juvenile detainees in American facilities like Abu Ghraib and Bagram Air Base
have been subject to the same mistreatment as adults. The International Red
Cross, Amnesty International and the Pentagon itself have gathered substantial
testimony of torture of children, bolstered by accounts from soldiers who
witnessed or participated in the abuse.

According to Amnesty International, 13-year-old Mohammed Ismail Agha was
arrested in Afghanistan in late 2002 and detained without charge or trial for
over a year, first at Bagram and then at Guantanamo Bay. He was held in solitary
confinement and subjected to sleep deprivation. ''Whenever I started to fall
asleep, they would kick at my door and yell at me to wake up,'' he told an
Amnesty researcher. ''They made me stand partway, with my knees bent, for one or
two hours.''

A Canadian, Omar Khadr, was 15 in 2002 when he was captured in Afghanistan and
interned at Guantanamo. For 2 1/2 years, he was allowed no contact with a lawyer
or with his family. Seventeen-year-old Akhtar Mohammed told Amnesty that he was
kept in solitary confinement in a shipping container for eight days in
Afghanistan in January 2002.

A Pentagon investigation last year by Maj. Gen. George Fay reported that in
January 2004, a leashed but unmuzzled military guard dog was allowed into a cell
holding two children. The intention was for the dog to '''go nuts on the kids,'
barking and scaring them.'' The children were screaming and the smaller one
tried to hide behind the larger, the report said, as a soldier allowed the dog
to get within about one foot of them. A girl named Juda Hafez Ahmad told Amnesty
International that when she was held in Abu Ghraib she ''saw one of the guards
allow his dog to bite a 14-year-old boy on the leg.''

Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, formerly in charge of Abu Ghraib, told Maj. General
Fay about visiting a weeping 11-year-old detainee in the prison's notorious
Cellblock 1B, which housed prisoners designated high risk. ''He told me he was
almost 12,'' General Karpinski recalled, and that ''he really wanted to see his
mother, could he please call his mother.''

Children like this 11 year old held at Abu Ghraib have been denied the right to
see their parents, a lawyer, or anyone else. They were not told why they were
detained, let alone for how long. A Pentagon spokesman told Mr. Hersh that
juveniles received some special care, but added, ''Age is not a determining
factor in detention.'' The United States has found, the spokesman said, that
''age does not necessarily diminish threat potential.''

It's true that some of these children may have picked up a stone or a gun. But
coalition intelligence officers told the Red Cross that 70 percent to 90 percent
of detainees in Iraq are eventually found innocent and released. Many innocent
children are swept up with their parents in chaotic nighttime dragnets based on
tips from unreliable informants. ''We know of children under 15,'' Clarisa
Bencomo of Human Rights Watch told me, '' held for over a year at Guantanamo
Bay, whom the government later said were not security risks.'' Even if a child
is found guilty, he or she should be treated humanely, rather than tortured or
''rendered,'' as the C.I.A. puts it, to third parties that torture.

AMBASSADOR MILLER is right. Children matter. To really place them ''at the
center'' of our human rights concerns, the United States should hasten to ratify
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, from which only we and Somalia
abstain. And if the Pentagon must detain children, it should do so in separate
facilities, with access to family, and under humane conditions that include the
offer of rehabilitation and education.

Finally, the Pentagon should open all prisons to human rights inspectors. By
taking these steps, the United States could begin to reverse some of the
terrible harm that continues to be done to children in our name.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Jillian Tamaki)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%);
EYEWITNESSES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (77%); DOGS
(76%); TORTURE (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); JOURNALISM (72%); ARMED FORCES
(72%); ARRESTS (69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (67%); WRITERS (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%);
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED
CRESCENT MOVEMENT (56%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (77%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (92%); IRAQ (88%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Halts Decades-Old Practice Of Demolishing Militants' Homes

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 17


Israel ordered a halt on Thursday to the policy of demolishing the homes of
Palestinian militants, a step welcomed by Palestinian and human rights groups.

The decision by Israel's defense minister, Shaul Mofaz, suspends a practice that
Israel has employed on and off for decades despite harsh international criticism
of it as collective punishment.

A military statement did not say why the policy was being changed, but the
newspaper Haaretz reported on its Web site that Maj. Gen. Udi Shani, who headed
a committee reviewing the matter, had challenged the existing military position
that demolitions were an effective deterrent. It said he had concluded that the
policy had caused Israel more harm than good by generating hatred among the
Palestinians.

A military official, speaking on condition of anonymity, offered a slightly
different explanation, saying the demolitions were not regarded as necessary
during a period of relative calm.

''House demolitions are just one measure of deterrence, and at present, it
doesn't play the same role that it did previously,'' the military official said.
''It's not something we consider necessary at this time.''

Palestinians and human rights groups hailed the change.

''Finally the Israelis will stop destroying homes; this is good,'' said Dr.
Mustafa Barghouti, a physician and human rights activist who finished second in
last month's election for president of the Palestinian Authority. ''This policy
was counterproductive, and it was innocent people who were most often harmed.''

Since the latest round of Israeli-Palestinian fighting began in September 2000,
Israel has destroyed 675 Palestinian homes as punishment for Palestinian
attacks, leaving 4,239 people homeless, according to the Israeli human rights
group B'Tselem.

Typically, Israel has responded to a major Palestinian terror attack, like a
suicide bombing, by sending armored bulldozers to flatten the house in which the
bomber lived. The relatives of the bomber were sometimes given only a few
minutes notice and would leave the home with only the items they could carry.

As the house demolitions became increasingly common, some Palestinian families,
upon learning that a relative had been involved in a bombing, would not wait for
a warning from the Israelis or the roar of bulldozers. They would begin racing
to remove furniture and other contents from their home in the expectation that
the military would arrive at any moment.

The Israeli move comes in the wake of the truce announced last week by Israel's
prime minister, Ariel Sharon, and the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud
Abbas.

Thursday's decision is in keeping with a series of good-will gestures recently
announced by the two sides. But the Israeli military said the army's chief of
staff, Lt. Gen. Moshe Yaalon, had ordered a military committee to review the
house demolition policy four months ago.

At the committee's recommendation, Israel will ''stop exercising the legal right
to demolish terrorists' houses as a means of deterrence,'' the military said in
a statement.

It added that the decision could be re-examined ''if an extreme change in
circumstances takes place.''

Israeli security officials said there had been cases in which Palestinian
fathers turned in their sons to the Israeli or Palestinian authorities to
prevent the youths from carrying out attacks, which in turn would have resulted
in Israel's demolition of the family home.

By employing a range of tough tactics and by building a security barrier inside
parts of the West Bank, Israel's security forces have greatly reduced the number
of Palestinian suicide bombings and other attacks since they peaked in 2002.

With Palestinians carrying out fewer attacks, Israel has been tearing down fewer
homes in recent months.

Mr. Sharon pledged last week not to carry out military operations in the
Palestinian areas as long as calm prevailed, a promise that might have been
interpreted to include a halt to house demolitions.

Still, the Israeli announcement carries a great deal of symbolism.

Israel has destroyed nearly 2,500 Palestinian homes as punishment and deterrence
since capturing the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war,
according to B'Tselem, the human rights group.

''It's a bittersweet victory, a confirmation of what we've been saying all
along,'' said Rabbi Arik Ascherman, the head of Rabbis for Human Rights,
referring to the report that the army had decided demolitions were ineffective
as deterrents.

''There was never any substantial evidence that house demolitions provided a
deterrent effect,'' he said. ''It also seemed that they actually created more
hatred and perhaps even the next generation of suicide bombers.''

Israel stopped tearing down Palestinian homes as punishment for attacks after
the two sides held peace talks following an interim peace agreement in 1993. But
after the Palestinians launched their uprising in 2000, producing an
unprecedented wave of suicide bombings, Israel resumed the practice.

Thursday's decision did not touch on other types of house demolitions.

In Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip along the border with Egypt, Palestinian
gunmen and Israeli troops have waged almost daily gun battles in recent years.

Israel has torn down homes close to the border that the gunmen were using for
cover, as well as houses that had weapons-smuggling tunnels linked to Egypt.
Some 1,500 homes have been destroyed or rendered uninhabitable in Rafah,
according to a survey conducted last year by Human Rights Watch, a group based
in New York.

Also, Israel often levels Palestinian homes built without permits, which
Palestinians say are extremely difficult, if not impossible, to obtain in places
like East Jerusalem.

Rabbi Ascherman estimated that at least 80 Palestinian homes were torn down in
Jerusalem last year because the builders did not have permits.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Palestinians in the West Bank village of Karawat Beni Zeit
watched in January as Israeli Army soldiers demolished a house where two Hamas
militants who were killed in a gun battle had been hiding. (Photo by Ruth
Fremson/The New York Times)(pg. A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (90%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ARMIES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(70%); PRIME MINISTERS (65%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (65%); WEB SITES
(56%); HOMELESSNESS (50%) Palestinians; Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism; Freedom
and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (59%) Greg Myre; Shaul (Min) Mofaz; Udi (Maj Gen) Shani

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%)

REGION: Israel; Israel; Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peter Benenson, 83, Dies; Founded Amnesty Group

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 853 words


Peter Benenson, a British lawyer whose outrage over the imprisonment of two
Portuguese students for drinking a toast to liberty spawned the human rights
organization Amnesty International in 1961, died Friday in a hospital in Oxford,
England. He was 83.

The cause was pneumonia, said Brendan Paddy, a spokesman for the London-based
organization.

What Mr. Benenson first envisioned as a one-year letter-writing campaign on
behalf of ''prisoners of conscience,'' who were being persecuted for their
beliefs, eventually grew into the world's largest human rights organization,
with 1.8 million members, chapters in 64 countries and a perennially powerful
voice against torture, unjust imprisonment and the death penalty.

Amnesty International, which won the 1977 Nobel Peace Prize for ''defending
human dignity against violence and subjugation,'' has campaigned for decades
against violations of the rights of women, children, political prisoners,
minorities, religious groups, workers and disabled people, among others. Today,
it is fighting the execution of child offenders in Iran, warning of human rights
violations by Nepal and demanding the release of prisoners at the United States
detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

''Peter Benenson's life was a courageous testament to his visionary commitment
to fight injustice around the world,'' the organization's secretary general,
Irene Khan, said in a statement. ''He brought light into the darkness of
prisons, the horror of torture chambers and the tragedy of death camps around
the world.''

Educated at Eton and Oxford, Mr. Benenson was a passionate advocate for human
rights in fascist Spain, British-ruled Cyprus and repressive South Africa. He
was almost 40, a bowler-topped barrister on the London Underground in 1961, when
he read a news item about two Lisbon students sentenced to seven years in prison
for toasting freedom in Portugal, then under the dictatorship of Antonio
Salazar.

In what he called ''The Forgotten Prisoners'' and ''An Appeal for Amnesty,''
which appeared on the front page of The Observer, a British newspaper, he wrote
about the two students and four other people who had been jailed in other
nations because of their beliefs.

''Open your newspaper any day of the week, and you will find a report from
somewhere in the world of someone being imprisoned, tortured or executed because
his opinions or religion are unacceptable to his government,'' he wrote. ''The
reader feels a sickening sense of impotence. Yet if these feelings of disgust
all over the world could be united into common action, something effective could
be done.''

He called for a one-year campaign of letter-writing to repressive authorities,
demanding enforcement of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was
adopted by the United Nations in 1948 but was widely ignored. The result was an
outpouring of letters, telegrams and publicity that swelled into a permanent
campaign and the formation of Amnesty International.

In its early years, Mr. Benenson ran the organization, provided most of the
money, traveled widely to investigate cases and promoted its causes in journals
and newspapers. He stepped down as the leader in 1966 after an independent
investigation did not support his claim that the group was being infiltrated by
British intelligence.

But he continued to have an active interest in the organization's affairs,
helped to found and support similar groups and observed Amnesty International's
25th anniversary by lighting a symbolic candle outside St. Martin-in-the-Fields,
the church off Trafalgar Square where he had first envisioned the organization.
Its logo is a candle wrapped in barbed wire.

Peter Benenson was born in London on July 31, 1921, the son of a British army
colonel. He was tutored privately by the poet W.H. Auden and began his first
campaign at Eton -- for better food. At 16 he organized fund-raising for orphans
of the Spanish Civil War, and later raised money to get two Jews out of Nazi
Germany.

After service with the Ministry of Information in World War II, he became a
lawyer, was an official observer at the trials of trade unionists in Franco's
Spain, advised lawyers for defendants accused of resistance to British rule in
Cyprus and prodded London to send observers to Hungary during the 1956 uprising
and to racially divided South Africa during a treason trial.

For his role in founding Amnesty International, he was recommended for a
knighthood by various prime ministers, but always demurred, responding with a
litany of human rights violations that, he said, needed more urgent attention.
In the 1980's, he became chairman of Association of Christians Against Torture,
and in the 1990's he organized aid for Romanian orphans. He also founded a group
to aid victims of celiac disease -- a faulty absorption of gluten in the
intestines -- which he had.

Mr. Benenson's family issued no statement. Amnesty International, which
announced his death, listed his survivors as his wife, Susan; a son, Joe; a
daughter, Manya Scarffe; and two daughters by a previous marriage, Natasha
Benenson and Jill Ackroyd.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Peter Benenson

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Benenson, a rights advocate. (Photo by European Pressphoto
Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (90%); TORTURE (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); PRISONS (89%); BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS (78%); SENTENCING
(78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (76%); RELIGION (75%); NOBEL PRIZES (74%); WOMEN
(73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (73%); AWARDS & PRIZES (69%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (65%); DISABLED PERSONS (53%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%)

CITY: OXFORD, ENGLAND (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (92%); ENGLAND (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); PORTUGAL (90%); CYPRUS
(79%); SPAIN (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yemeni Held in Guantanamo Was Seized in Cairo, Group Says

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Sometime in September 2002, a Yemeni businessman and intelligence officer was
abducted on a Cairo street, then kept incommunicado for more than a year by
United States authorities, and is now among those imprisoned at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, according to an examination of his case by Human Rights Watch.

The case of Abdul Salam Ali al-Hila is an example of what human rights groups
call ''reverse renditions,'' in which a foreign government assists or cooperates
in seizing someone who is then transferred to United States custody. John
Sifton, the researcher at Human Rights Watch, the advocacy group -- who compiled
information on the Hila case from interviews with the man's family, his letters
from Guantanamo and government statements published in news reports in Arab
countries -- said it was ''another example of the United States stretching the
laws of war and human rights principles to the breaking point.

''You can't just hold people incommunicado indefinitely just by declaring them
enemy combatants,'' he added.

Mr. Sifton and officials from other human rights groups say there are dozens of
such people, defined as those who are picked up far from the battlefield of the
Afghanistan war and then wind up at the detention center at Guantanamo. Once
there, they are considered unlawful combatants.

A Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Michael Shavers, said it was the military's policy
not to discuss the details of specific detainees at Guantanamo.

While much attention has been paid lately to the practice of the United States
sending many prisoners detained as possible terrorists to other countries, the
Hila case is new evidence of the practice in reverse: foreign authorities
picking up suspects in noncombat and nonbattlefield situations, perhaps at the
behest of American authorities, and handing them over to United States custody.

Included in this category, the rights officials say, are six Algerians arrested
in Bosnia and Herzegovina by local authorities. The six men were freed by a
local investigating judge, but were quickly seized by United States authorities
and are now at Guantanamo. In addition, many Pakistanis at Guantanamo assert in
recent court filings challenging their detentions that they were arrested in
Pakistan by Pakistani officials, far from the battlefront in Afghanistan.

Barbara Olshansky, a senior official at the Center for Constitutional Rights,
said there was no way to know how many people fit into this category. She said
she believed the number was in the dozens.

Legal battles on several fronts have challenged whether the orders signed by
President Bush after Sept. 11, 2001, provided the authority to detain people
arrested and taken from any battleground. Lawyers for two of the Algerians have
argued in federal court that the president's order does not provide any
authority over them as they were not involved in any armed conflict against the
United States. The Bush administration has argued that the nature of the
campaign against terrorism is that it is fought throughout the world.

In the case of Mr. Hila, he spoke by telephone daily to his family on the first
days of his September 2002 visit to Egypt. After his disappearance, the family
did not hear from him again until April 2004, Mr. Sifton said.

The Yemeni foreign minister announced at that time that his country's embassy in
Islamabad, Pakistan, had received a letter from Mr. Hila that had been smuggled
out of a prison in Afghanistan. The letter indicated that he was in a cell next
to another Yemeni who had been arrested in Thailand.

Mr. Hila also wrote that he believed he was being held in Afghanistan by the
Central Intelligence Agency. He said C.I.A. officials wanted him to share
knowledge he obtained as a colonel in the Yemeni intelligence service about
Islamists who fought the Soviets in Afghanistan and then migrated to Europe.
C.I.A. officials declined to comment.

Mr. Sifton said people who were seized in places away from the battlefield
represented a ''third slice of the pie,'' along with those who were transferred
by the United States to other countries and those captured in and around
Afghanistan and sent to Guantanamo and other places.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); TERRORISM (86%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); LAW OF WAR (77%); CORRECTIONS
(77%); LAWYERS (73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (73%); NAVIES (73%); LITIGATION
(70%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (61%); JUDGES (61%)
Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Human Rights
Watch

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (55%) John Sifton; Abdul Salam Ali al- Hila; Neil A Lewis

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (95%); PAKISTAN (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Egypt

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawyer Who Told of U.S. Abuses at Afghan Bases Loses U.N. Post

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 29


A United Nations human rights monitor who accused American military forces and
civilian contractors last week of abusing and torturing prisoners in Afghanistan
has been told his job is over.

M. Cherif Bassiouni, a professor of law at DePaul University in Chicago who was
the human rights commission's independent expert for Afghanistan, said Friday
that he had received an e-mail message from a commission official in Geneva a
week ago telling him his mandate had expired.

The day before, he had released a 21-page report saying that Americans running
prisons in Afghanistan had acted above the law ''by engaging in arbitrary
arrests and detentions and committing abusive practices, including torture.''

In an interview from his Chicago office, he said that he had been expecting a
routine two-year renewal but that the United States had lobbied against him
because of his persistent efforts to examine American-supervised prisons and his
disclosure that prisoners were being detained in remote ''fire bases''
constructed for combat operations.

Kurtis Cooper, a State Department spokesman, denied that Mr. Bassiouni's ouster
could be attributed to American pressure. ''This was a decision that was made in
light of the fact that more than three years after the Taliban, the human rights
situation in Afghanistan had evolved to the point where it could be monitored
under the ordinary procedures of the high commissioner for human rights without
the need of an independent expert,'' he said.

Brenden Varma, a spokesman for Secretary General Kofi Annan, who appointed Mr.
Bassiouni to the post, said that he was widely respected for his long human
rights record, but that his tenure was up to the human rights commission, and
''they decided that the situation had improved and that it was time for the
mandate to expire.''

Mr. Bassiouni, born in Cairo, was chairman of the Security Council's commission
to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslavia from 1992 to 1994, and leader
of a program to train 450 judges in Afghanistan in 2003.

He said he had not intended to be confrontational. ''When I went to Afghanistan
last year, in my mind, my role was not to go there and shame them but to help
them,'' he said. ''I didn't see myself as someone going to fix the blame but to
fix the problem.''

He said he was rebuffed repeatedly in his efforts to visit prisons at the United
States bases in Bagram and Kandahar by American officials who told him he was
exceeding his mandate.

He discovered the use of 14 fire bases for detainees, he said, when he spotted
an American military order warning commanders against keeping captives at the
spots for more than two weeks.

Despite the lack of cooperation, he said, he had no trouble learning of rights
violations. ''Arbitrary arrest and detention are common knowledge in Afghanistan
because the coalition forces are known to go to villages and towns and break
down doors and arrest people and take them whenever they want,'' he said.

He said victims' descriptions of their American captors' appearance had struck a
grim note of recognition because of his past experience. ''It was very
reminiscent of what I had seen in the former Yugoslavia, where you would ask
victims of beatings and torture who had abused them and they would say they
couldn't identify them because they wore battle fatigues with no names and no
insignias.''

Asked what he thought would happen to prisons in Afghanistan now, he said, ''My
guess is that torture will go down at the U.S. facilities, but what will go up
is torture at the Afghan facilities. It's the usual shell game. The U.S. feels
the heat, it tries to discontinue the practice itself, but it finds special
forces in the Afghan Army to do its bidding.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); DEFENSE
ORDERS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); LAWYERS (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); APPOINTMENTS (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); LOBBYING (68%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); DEPAUL UNIVERSITY (58%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SWITZERLAND (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights and the U.N.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 316 words


The Bush administration did just the right thing recently when it condemned the
re-election of Zimbabwe to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. No
organization more embodies the U.N. at its worst than this ineffective tool of
cynical politics.

Its rotating members, which meet for six weeks every spring, also included
China, Cuba, Sudan, Nepal, Congo, Guatemala and Saudi Arabia this year. Abusive
states get on the panel so they can block criticism of their policies.

Now, as the United Nations considers reforms suggested by Secretary General Kofi
Annan, starting with different rules for membership, there is a chance to
replace the commission with one that actually helps protect human rights. Today,
regional blocs sponsor virtually any volunteer, even those committing genocide.
Membership allows such countries to stifle criticism of themselves and their
political allies and weaken the response to abuses.

Mr. Annan is proposing a smaller Human Rights Council whose members would be
elected by the General Assembly after campaigning on their records and ideas for
promoting human rights.

A new panel should also meet year-round. The current commission can't address
emergencies unless they occur in March or April and can do little to prevent
abuses. One example is from August 1993, when a special investigator warned,
eight months before it began, that genocide was likely in Rwanda. The warning
was not read until March 1994, then disappeared in the crush of business.
Meeting year-round would allow the council to follow up on such reports with
public pressure and monitoring, to call attention to imminent massacres, or to
ask the Security Council to consider sending peacekeepers.

When world leaders meet at the United Nations in September, they should abandon
the existing commission, a showpiece of dysfunction.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%) Editorials

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (91%) United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 28, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putin Pledges to Improve Russia's Human Rights Record

BYLINE: By C.J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 27


Speaking calmly about a subject that has sometimes drawn his anger, President
Vladimir V. Putin on Friday acknowledged that Russia had lingering problems with
human rights, and said his administration would work actively in the next two
years to make improvements.

Mr. Putin's made his remarks on national television to Alvaro Gil-Robles, the
commissioner for human rights at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, who in April completed a finely detailed report on human rights
conditions in Russia.

The report identified pervasive problems, but in measured language it also noted
that the nation's positive changes since Soviet times had been widespread and
remarkable.

It served in many ways as a fresh and meticulous catalog of civic problems here,
including low salaries for judges, which leaves them vulnerable to corruption,
as well as malnutrition in penal colonies, poor living conditions for millions
of Russians, institutionalized hazing in the military and the intractable war
and patterns of crime in Chechnya.

The report also expressed concern that Russia risked losing momentum in some
important areas of change and backsliding in others -- a refrain often voiced
outside the Kremlin's circle of influence, since Mr. Putin and his clique
tightened control over many aspects of public life.

But Mr. Gil-Robles's message was nuanced. He noted that while many of Russia's
problems were part of an institutional culture and mentality, a result of years
of Soviet rule, others were practical. To recast Russia from its Soviet ruins in
less than 15 years, he suggested, almost everything would have to be done at
once.

Efforts to overhaul the courts, for example, have required rewriting almost
every sector of law, training judges and lawyers to understand and apply the new
body of thought, and educating the public to forgo an enduring Soviet reliance
on redress through other means.

Mr. Putin, who in the past has often rebuffed criticism on human rights, said on
national television on Friday that he had studied the entire Council of Europe
report, and he appeared taken by its depth and even tone. ''According to our
estimate, it is not just a big document, but in some parts it is quite a strict
document, in my view quite objective,'' he said.

His appearance indicated for the moment a distinctly more relaxed posture than
he has shown when the subject has been brought up in the past. But it still
managed to be laden with self-evident inconsistencies, occurring as it did on
the 10th day of the stultifying reading of the verdict against Mikhail B.
Khodorkovsky, once Russia's richest man, who is nearing the end of a fraud and
embezzlement trial widely regarded as Kremlin-rigged.

Mr. Putin also said his administration would carry out the recommendations made
by the report, although he did not publicly specify which ones. How extensively
he can actually follow the recommendations is an open question.

The report is both descriptive and prescriptive, and includes a lengthy list of
proposals for reforms, including improvements of conditions in pretrial
detention centers, combating police violence and corruption, respecting
minorities and asylum seekers, guaranteeing media freedoms and exposing and
prosecuting those responsible for the organized kidnappings and disappearances
in Chechnya.

Human rights groups and Chechen residents say the disappearances there appear to
be the work of Russian security forces and local clans and law enforcement
bodies they work with. This has been widely recognized here for years, but the
Kremlin has been loath to address it.

Still, Ella Pamfilova, head of the president's human rights commission, said on
televised news that the report had been analyzed and its suggestions sent to the
proper ministries to be put in place. ''We will be doing it with great
enthusiasm,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL
CRIME (88%); CORRUPTION (78%); JUDGES (74%); LIVING CONDITIONS (73%); LAWYERS
(70%); EMBEZZLEMENT (68%); CORRECTIONS (68%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (68%); MALNUTRITION
(68%) Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (83%) Council of Europe

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (92%) C J Chivers; Vladimir V (Pres) Putin; Alvaro
Gil-Robles

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); EUROPE (91%)

REGION: Russia

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 7, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Desert Graves Yield Evidence To Try Hussein

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER DREW and TRESHA MABILE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
INVESTIGATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1877 words


A chain of evidence that investigators believe will help convict Saddam Hussein
begins at a windswept grave in the desert near Hatra, in northern Iraq.

The burial site -- a series of deep trenches that held about 2,500 bodies, many
of them women and children -- is one of many mass graves that dot the country.
But it was the first excavated by an American investigative team working with a
special Iraqi tribunal to build cases against Mr. Hussein and others in his
government.

A senior Iraqi court official has said the tribunal is planning to start the
first trial of Mr. Hussein by late summer or early fall in a case that focuses
on the killings of nearly 160 men from Dujail, a Shiite village north of
Baghdad, after the former dictator survived an assassination attempt there.

But American legal advisers say the Hatra grave holds a key to what is likely to
be one of the broadest charges against Mr. Hussein -- that he is responsible for
the killing of as many as 100,000 Iraqi Kurds in the late 1980's, some in
chemical-weapons attacks. They say those charges could be filed later this year,
and Iraqi officials said last weekend that there could be up to 12 separate
cases against Mr. Hussein and others. Each would require a separate trial, and
multiple convictions could mean multiple death sentences for any defendant.

According to Gregory W. Kehoe, the American who set up the investigative team,
what was found at Hatra shows how the Hussein leadership made a ''business of
killing people'' -- the scrape marks from the blade of the bulldozer that shoved
victims into the trench, the point-blank shots to the backs of even the babies'
heads, the withered body of a 3- or 4-year-old boy, still clutching a red and
white ball.

Much rests on the prosecutions of Mr. Hussein and his lieutenants -- for Iraqis
seeking a reckoning and for the Bush administration, which hopes the trials and
the Iraqi-American partnership will help vindicate its involvement in Iraq and
serve as a model of justice and democracy in the Arab world.

Yet in the 18 months since Mr. Hussein's capture, questions have been raised
from several quarters about whether the process can produce a fair trial. Not
only has Mr. Hussein challenged the tribunal's legitimacy, mocking an Iraqi
judge for ''applying the invaders' laws to try me,'' but the United Nations and
most European countries have refused to help, partly out of opposition to the
death penalty. Human-rights advocates have questioned whether the tribunal's
standards for finding guilt will be high enough to justly link Mr. Hussein to
the killings.

In their first extensive interviews, with The New York Times and the Discovery
Times Channel, Mr. Kehoe, the top American adviser to the tribunal from March
2004 until this spring, and several other investigators provided a detailed look
at how the cases are being built.

More than 50 American advisers have been training several hundred Iraqi
investigators and judges, none of whom had experience with human-rights laws or
handling such complex cases. The Americans have provided forensics expertise,
while the Iraqis have fanned out to find witnesses. With American advice, the
Iraqis will decide what charges to bring and will run the trials.

What the investigators are ultimately trying to do, Mr. Kehoe said, is ''connect
the circle'' to prove ''command responsibility'' -- that Mr. Hussein violated
human rights by knowing about indiscriminate killings, before or afterward, and
doing nothing to stop or punish those who carried them out.

The way to do that, said Mr. Kehoe, a former federal prosecutor in Florida who
spent five years investigating Bosnia war crimes, is through basic detective
work, starting with bodies in the ground and tracing the orders up the chain of
command.

The tribunal initially planned to leave Mr. Hussein out of the Dujail case and
charge only five associates, partly to test the new court system. But Gregg
Nivala, now the top American adviser, said yesterday that new evidence found
last month had strengthened the case against him.

Mr. Kehoe and Mr. Nivala said there was enough evidence -- including the
testimony of new witnesses and newly found documents -- to charge Mr. Hussein
and other top officials with crimes against humanity for the Kurdish campaign.

Investigators have also authenticated Iraqi government documents and audiotapes
seized by Kurdish militias in the early 1990's. In a June 1987 document, Ali
Hassan al-Majid, one of Mr. Hussein's cousins and top deputies, commanded Iraqi
troops ''to carry out random bombardments using artillery, helicopters, and
aircraft at all times of the day and night in order to kill the largest number
of persons present'' in areas linked to Kurdish fighters. On an audiotape, Mr.
Majid, who became known as ''Chemical Ali,'' can be heard shouting, at a Baath
Party meeting about Kurdish villagers: ''I will kill them all with chemical
weapons.''

Gregory Paw, who was one of Mr. Kehoe's deputies, said that in a hearing in
December, Mr. Majid, now in American custody, ''was gradually acknowledging more
and more of what took place'' in Kurdistan. Mr. Paw said Mr. Majid was ''looking
for others to cast blame upon.''

Mr. Hussein's lawyers say that he and his former top associates are not guilty,
and that they will counter any charges by attacking the tribunal as a ''kangaroo
court.'' Still, one of the lawyers, Issam Ghazzawi, said, ''We know his chances
are grim and very slim.''

Bodies in the Sand

 The trenches lie hidden in a dip in the sand that for centuries had been an
oasis during spring rains. The ground was hard, and Mr. Kehoe's forensics team,
sweltering in the 110-degree heat, had to dig eight feet to reach anything.

The dig began last September just outside Hatra, about 200 miles north of
Baghdad. What investigators found in the first trench suggested a powerful link
to the campaign to drive the Kurds from their lands. Mr. Kehoe said it was also
the first step in piecing together evidence that Mr. Hussein's government turned
the campaign, code-named ''Anfal,'' or ''the spoils,'' into a killing spree.

Iraqi officials have said their main goal was to root out Kurdish militias
siding with Iran during the Iran-Iraq war. But Human Rights Watch, the New
York-based group, has estimated that up to 100,000 Kurds, mostly civilians, were
killed, and 2,000 villages destroyed, including dozens bombed with chemical
weapons.

Michael K. Trimble, an archaeologist who headed the forensics team, said the
first surprise was that the trench held only women and children -- about 300 in
all. He said two-thirds were children, and most of the skeletons rested inside
several layers of handmade clothing, with bags of pots, pans and toys strewn in
the dirt. He said it quickly became clear that most of the victims had been
carrying -- or wearing -- all their belongings, as if they had been told they
would be resettled.

The bodies were stacked haphazardly in four or five layers. Nearly all had a
single .22-caliber pistol shot behind one ear. Mr. Trimble said it looked as if
the first people had been shot inside the trench, while the others had been
killed at the lip and pushed in by a bulldozer.

A second trench held 150 men, each sprayed with fire from automatic weapons.
Most had been blindfolded and tied together in a chain.

Mr. Kehoe said this suggested that the women and children had been killed by
Iraqi security officers carrying small-caliber arms, while the men had been
killed by a military unit. ''This was a killing field,'' he said, adding that,
''multiple entities knew it was there.''

Mr. Kehoe said the rolling field held up to a dozen other trenches, with at
least 2,000 more bodies. Mr. Nivala said a second grave site, at Samawa in
southern Iraq, yielded similar results; in April, investigators excavated one
trench and found bodies of 114 Kurds, all but 5 women and children. Mr. Nivala
said that field had 18 trenches, and 10 were filled, with at least 1,500 bodies.

At the Hatra grave, there was a break: the investigators found identification
cards tucked inside some of the women's clothes. A few cards turned out to be
for children who escaped when their villages were destroyed. Those cards took
the investigators back to remote mountain areas, where the now-grown children
and others confirmed that the Hatra victims had indeed been seized by Iraqi
forces during the Anfal.

Chemicals in the Air

 The jets buzzed in low, Abdullah Abdulqadr Askary recalled, low enough to see
that most people in the fields near Goktapa were women and children. They
dropped balloons at first, to assess the wind direction. Then came bombs. Mr.
Askary, a chemist, said he knew from the vapor and flowery smell that the bombs
had spewed chemicals.

It was late one afternoon in May 1988, in the middle of the Anfal. Mr. Askary
said nearly 50 of the 150 people who died were his relatives. As he rushed to
help, he came across his mother's body lying by a stream.

''I want to kiss her -- the last kiss,'' he told Mr. Kehoe and others who
visited the town in March. But as he bent down, he said, ''I thought that if I
kiss her, perhaps I will die also.''

Anne Tompkins, a federal prosecutor who worked on the case, said Mr. Askary also
pointed to another village, Jillemort, that was bombed that day. Identification
cards from Jillemort were found at the Hatra grave, Ms. Tompkins said.

In building this case, the investigators are expanding on research done by Human
Rights Watch, which has found that Iraqi forces mounted at least 40 chemical
attacks to kill Kurdish fighters or destroy villages thought to have supported
them.

Mr. Ghazzawi, the lawyer for Mr. Hussein, said the Kurds were traitors, and
''there are always casualties, innocent casualties in every war.'' As for
killing civilians, he said, ''I know for sure that the government under Saddam
Hussein, the president, that they didn't do it.''

But Mr. Kehoe said several documents help carry responsibility for the killings
up the chain of command.

In the June 1987 document seized by the Kurdish fighters, Mr. Majid, the Hussein
deputy, declared that any area linked to the Kurdish fighters was off limits,
and that Iraqi troops could shoot any villagers who did not leave. The document
was issued less than three months after Mr. Hussein put Mr. Majid in charge of
restoring order in Kurdistan. Investigators said that two of Mr. Hussein's
personal secretaries have also helped validate crucial documents in the Anfal
and other cases.

Mr. Nivala said investigators believe they will be able to show that Mr. Hussein
was aware not only of the retribution in Dujail but also of the harsh actions
against the Kurds and Shiites. He said the forensics team had recently begun
excavating a third grave, believed to hold some of the 150,000 Shiites killed in
1991.

Ms. Tompkins said the Iraqis initiated the Dujail case and have also interviewed
hundreds of witnesses about the killings of more than 500 members of a Kurdish
clan that opposed Mr. Hussein. Iraqi officials also are looking into the use of
chemical weapons against the Kurdish town of Halabja and in the Iran-Iraq war,
as well as the executions of 42 Baghdad merchants blamed for rising consumer
prices in 1992.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael K. Trimble, an archaeologist, left, and Gregory W.
Kehoe, an American lawyer working with the Iraqi tribunal investigating abuses
by Saddam Hussein and others, at a grave near Hatra, in northern Iraq. (Pool
photo by Thammasi Cambanis)
Men at a cafe on the Tigris River in Baghdad in July 2004 as a court appearance
by Saddam Hussein played on television. The special tribunal plans to begin the
first trial of Mr. Hussein by late summer or early fall. (Photo by Tyler
Hicks/The New York Times)
 Abdullah Abdulqadr Askary, a chemist, said a May 1988 chemical attack killed 50
of his relatives. (pg. A14)Chart/Maps: ''Attacks on Kurds''In 1987 and 1988, the
Iraqi military mounted at least 40 attacks with mustard and nerve gas against
the Kurds in northern Iraq. The attacks were part of a larger series of
campaigns, known as Anfal, in which as many as 100,000 Kurds were killed. The
graves of some are now being excavated for Saddam Hussein's trial.Attacks Before
the Anfal CampaignFirst and Second AnfalsFebruary to March 1988Third and Fourth
AnfalsMarch to May1988Fifth, Sixth and Seventh AnfalsMay to August 1988Final
AnfalAugust 1988Map of Iraq highlighting area controlled by the Kurdistan
Regional Government.(Source by Human Rights Watch)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EVIDENCE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (83%); CEMETERIES (78%);
SENTENCING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (73%); ARCHAEOLOGY (71%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%);
ASSASSINATION (69%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Biological
and Chemical Warfare; Kurds; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights; Capital Punishment

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) Christopher Drew; tresha mabile; Saddam (Pres)
Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Hatra (Iraq); Iraq; Europe; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogating Ourselves

BYLINE: By Joseph Lelyveld.

Joseph Lelyveld is the author of ''Omaha Blues: A Memory Loop,'' which was
excerpted in the magazine earlier this year. He is a former executive editor of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 8037 words



I. The Silence After Abu Ghraib
In order to get to the nub of the question of what we as citizens really expect
and require of American interrogators facing supposed terrorists -- how far
we're prepared to allow those asking the questions to venture into the dark
realm of brutalization and coercion -- let's for argument's sake put aside the
most horrific, shameful cases, those of detainees who died under interrogation:
that of Manadel al-Jamadi, for instance, whose body was wrapped in plastic and
packed in ice when it was carried out of an Abu Ghraib prison shower room a year
and a half ago, where he'd been handcuffed to a wall; or Abed Hamed Mowhoush,
who, elsewhere in Iraq, appears to have been thrust headfirst into a sleeping
bag, manhandled there and then, finally, suffocated. By anyone's definition of
torture -- even that of the Bush administration, which originally propounded
(and later withdrew) a strikingly narrow definition holding that torture occurs
only when the pain is ''of an intensity akin to that which accompanies serious
physical injury such as death or organ failure'' -- these cases answer the
question of whether torture has been committed by our side in what's called the
global war on terror. No one steps forward to condone what's plainly illegal
under United States and international law. And although we've seen no indication
that blame will attach to any official or command officer at any level for these
killings, there are small signs that conclusions have been drawn somewhere
between the Pentagon and White House, signs of an overdue housecleaning, or
maybe just a tidying up. By the coldest cost-benefit calculation, a dead
detainee is a disaster: he cannot be a source of ''actionable intelligence,''
only fury. So there's now a new policy, ''Procedures for Investigations Into the
Death of Detainees in the Custody of the Armed Forces of the U.S.,'' that was
duly conveyed last month to the Committee Against Torture, a United Nations
body, in a subsection of a longer report. The subsection's heading even carried
a whiff of contrition. It was ''Lessons Learned and Policy Reforms.'' Also, the
Pentagon has let it be known that it's preparing a new manual for interrogators
that prohibits physical and psychological humiliation of detainees. What
interrogation techniques it does allow are listed in a classified annex as,
presumably, are any hints of what can happen when those techniques fail to
produce the desired results. Can the detainee then be handed over to another
agency, like the Central Intelligence Agency, that may not be constrained by the
new directives? Or to units of a foreign government like the counterterrorism
units now being financed and coordinated in Iraq by the United States?

In other words, if there has been a housecleaning, to how much of the shadowy
counterterrorism edifice constructed since Sept. 11 does it now apply? The cases
we know about, after all, are mostly old cases, even if we recently learned
about them. We've been told little about what's now going on in interrogation
rooms at Guantanamo or Abu Ghraib -- what the limits are now supposed to be.
While Defense Department investigators are still kept busy looking into
detainees' complaints of abuse in Iraq, it has to be acknowledged that we've yet
to hear of any fatalities under interrogation in 2004 or 2005.

It has been more than a year now since we (and, of course, the region in which
we presume to be crusading for freedom) were shown a selection of snapshots from
Abu Ghraib with their depraved staging of hooded figures, snarling dogs and
stacked naked bodies. For all the genuine outrage in predictable places over
what was soon being called a ''torture scandal'' -- in legal forums, editorial
pages, letters columns -- the usual democratic cleansing cycle never really got
going. However strong the outcry, it wasn't enough to yield political results in
the form of a determined Congressional investigation, let alone an independent
commission of inquiry; the Pentagon's own inquiries, which exonerated its
civilian and political leadership, told us a good deal more than most Americans,
so it would appear, felt they needed to know. Members of Congress say they
receive a negligible number of letters and calls about the revelations that keep
coming. ''You asked whether they want it clear or want it blurry,'' Senator
Susan Collins, a Maine Republican, said to me about the reaction of her
constituents to the torture allegations that alarm her. ''I think they want it
blurry.''

One result is that we've insulated ourselves from the really pertinent, really
difficult question: How do we feel about coercive techniques that are commonly,
if somewhat cavalierly, held to fall short of torture? These methods are
variously known as C.I.D. (for ''cruel, inhuman and degrading'' treatment) or
H.C.I. (for ''highly coercive interrogation''); or, in blander Pentagon-speak,
''counterresistance strategies'' (ranked in order of severity in two groups,
Class II and Class III); or ''professional interrogation techniques,'' to use
the postmodern gloss recently offered by the director of Central Intelligence,
Porter J. Goss, to describe ''waterboarding'' (a refinement of the ancient
practice of water torture, with which American troops first experimented a
hundred years ago on Philippine insurgents). All these terms are sometimes
loosely subsumed in opinion articles under the heading ''torture lite'' (though
you might wonder what's so ''lite'' about waterboarding). None of them would be
remotely legal in an investigation of an American on American soil.

This broad category of abuse was originally deemed by agile government lawyers
to be just inside the realm of what's legal for foreigners held abroad so long
as there's no intent on the part of interrogators to cause permanent physical or
psychic harm; in other words, if no conspicuous scars are left by techniques
from sleep deprivation to solitary confinement in a filthy windowless cell to
the denial of toilet facilities and medical assistance to the pouring of icy
water on a body that may be naked, hooded or lightly clothed to shackling that
same body in positions of stress -- or, possibly, all of the above, combined in
an atmosphere of general menace, suggesting to the prisoner that, however long
it has lasted, what he has experienced may be only the beginning. How widely
torture lite is practiced now and who authorizes it is a matter of pure
guesswork for anyone who doesn't happen to be an official with a high security
clearance or a ranking member of a Congressional intelligence committee.

Discussion by human rights lawyers tends to assume that nothing has been learned
by policy makers except more effective methods of covering up. On the right,
occasional complaints can now be heard that Donald Rumsfeld's Pentagon has lost
its nerve. (''Red tape now entangles the interrogation process,'' Heather Mac
Donald complained early this year in The City Journal, a publication of the
Manhattan Institute, a conservative policy organization. She went on:
''Interrogation plans have to be triple-checked all the way up through the
Pentagon by officials who have never conducted an interrogation in their
lives.'') Meanwhile, torture lite has been the subject of a little-noticed but
intense debate involving rights groups, law professors, ethicists,
counterterrorism theorists and military lawyers, all vying for the attention of
a tiny minority of the Congress, Republican as well as Democrat -- a minority
that feels frustrated, in some cases even incensed, by the resolute
unwillingness of the majority to probe glaring questions of who really
authorized what once ''the gloves came off'' (to use an oft-repeated phrase) in
the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks. At issue are the questions of whether
torture lite can ever be legal and who, if anyone, reviews the rules a president
makes in secret.

The answer, at present, often seems to be no one. An implicit understanding has
been reached, or so I would argue, between the governed and those who govern:
that the prime task is the prevention of future attacks on our own soil as
opposed to the punishment of past attacks; that extralegal excesses, not
excluding kidnappings and physical abuse, may be necessary in the effort to
suppress terrorists seeking to implant sleeper cells in our midst and equip them
with deathly substances and bombs; that in pursuit of this goal, much can be
forgiven, including big mistakes (the abuse and indefinite detention of innocent
people, the tacit annulment -- for foreigners, anyway -- of legal guarantees,
not to mention a costly war of dubious relation to the larger struggle); and
that the less we know as a people about our secret counterterrorism struggles
and strategies, the less we contemplate the possibly ugly consequences, the
easier it will be for those in authority to get on with the job of protecting
us.

when it comes to imminent threats of terrorism, the democratic process doesn't
demand open debate. I offer that judgment regretfully as an empirical
conclusion, not a moral argument. It's easy to see why the Abu Ghraib scandal
didn't intrude for even a moment on last year's presidential campaign: if John
Kerry had tried to raise it, he not only would have been castigated for calling
our troops torturers, he'd also have invited questions about how far he was
willing to go to resist terror. Politicians, driven by fear, know they're far
more likely to be held accountable after the next catastrophe for what they
didn't do to prevent it than they are to be made to justify their passivity on
detention issues now.

For the same reasons, civil libertarians of all stripes -- those who would
extend constitutional rights and the protections of international law to foreign
detainees wherever they're held -- don't get much traction because they have no
ready answer to the question of how this would make Americans safer.
Specifically, they mostly don't say what kind of interrogation they would
conduct, under what rules, if they were charged with preventing the next
terrorist attack. Would they, for example, give presumed Al Qaeda terrorists
Miranda warnings in Arabic about their rights to a lawyer and to remain silent?

All of which leaves no easily agreed-on answer to the question of where we
should draw the line on the use of coercive force in interrogation. As matters
stand, that's up to an administration that after the Sept. 11 attacks
entertained an argument that any attempt to enforce the United Nations
Convention Against Torture (ratified by the United States, with reservations, in
1994) would be an unconstitutional interference with the powers of the commander
in chief; an administration that says it abhors torture but prefers not to be
pinned down on what it now considers torture to be. That's an issue, we're led
to understand, for private negotiation between the C.I.A. and the attorney
general. The rest of us can be forgiven if we draw the implication that we're
expected to butt out if we can't accept at face value the pious promises of
humane treatment for detainees that are regularly served up by administration
spokesmen. Instead of worrying about what's real but unknowable, we get to watch
the Fox TV counterterrorism serial ''24,'' in which torture is just another tool
the good guys have to wield and clean-cut technicians are always on call to
administer electric shocks to recalcitrant conspirators.

Here I have to admit to what may seem a moral debility. As a journalist who had
reported on torture and torture victims, and who therefore thought he knew
something about the subject, I was surprised that I was finding it harder than
most commentators and most people I knew to take a fixed view of coercive force
in interrogation. I didn't know whether it was effective, whether it had any
potential, as sometimes claimed, to save thousands of lives by preventing a
catastrophic attack. If it did, I wondered if coercive force could be considered
unthinkable. And I wondered whether it was more reprehensible morally than
accepting the ''collateral damage'' in dead and maimed innocents that occurs
when you target a house or cave with a missile or a bunker-buster bomb in order
to extinguish a terrorist. At the same time, I strongly suspected that it wasn't
controllable, that it would have its own collateral damage -- to innocent
people, to the interrogators themselves and to our ideas about the rule of law.
It made me uncomfortable to hear our own leaders telling us what a security
police chief in apartheid-era South Africa long ago said to me -- that we should
''let the experts fight it out with the terrorists in the shadows.'' (''We also
have to work . . . sort of the dark side, if you will,'' Vice President Dick
Cheney said shortly after Sept. 11, 2001. ''We've got to spend time in the
shadows in the intelligence world. A lot of what needs to be done here will have
to be done quietly, without any discussion. . . . '')

Basically, I accepted the point, at least as far as the struggle against Al
Qaeda and its imitators was concerned, but it's striking how often the hard men
who make the hard decisions to fight it out in the shadows snatch the wrong
people, then fail to follow through. Only after a new commanding officer had
arrived and official inquiries had issued their reports did we learn that 40
percent of those penned up at Guantanamo never belonged there in the first
place. At Abu Ghraib in Iraq, the record was even worse: two-thirds of the
detainees were eventually said to have been innocent of terrorist links. At
least when they were picked up. Who knows what leanings they developed or links
they forged during and after their interrogations?

A life spent mostly as a reporter had left me unfit for deep thought of a
sedentary kind. So, uncomfortable with both absolutist positions -- the trusting
''do what you have to do in secret'' carte blanche versus the pure ''no coercive
force ever'' position held by those who are strict constructionists when it
comes to laws against torture lite as well as torture -- and equally dubious
about the feasibility of a decent middle ground, I set out with notebook in hand
several months ago to speak to politicians on Capitol Hill, spymasters,
interrogators and legal experts. My hopes were that their experience and
conclusions would shed light on the ingredients of a successful interrogation,
whether these included coercion and, if so, how much, and whether there was
anything that ordinary citizens could safely be told about what goes on in the
shadows. My itinerary wasn't arduous. It involved traveling to Washington for
conversations on Capitol Hill; then to Cambridge, Mass., to talk to law
professors with a range of strong views on my subject; and finally to Israel, a
country whose Supreme Court had asserted its jurisdiction and declared in 1999
that not only torture but all forms of ''cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment'' -- the term for torture lite used in the Convention Against Torture
-- were illegal under Israeli law. At least there, it seemed, the security
services that conduct interrogations had adapted themselves over many years to
the idea that some legal standards might actually apply on the dark side. That
was more or less the American view until just after 9/11.

II. What the Interrogators Know
When the prisoner is important enough and the interrogator has time to invest in
the subtle task of undermining his resolve, the best practitioners perform like
accomplished actors fully inhabiting their roles. Recounting their successes,
they show some of the same dramatic flair. Chatting in a lounge of a Tel Aviv
hotel, a former chief interrogator of the Israeli security agency, Shin Bet,
briefly acted out his part in order to make the point that violence was seldom
necessary. It can be enough to just lay the latest Amnesty International report
on the table, he said, drumming his fingers in pantomime on the imagined
document. ''Have you read this?'' he said as if speaking to a detainee. ''It
tells the sort of things we can do.'' Dramatic pause. ''And it doesn't include
the answers of those who were afraid to speak to Amnesty International.'' Second
dramatic pause, meaningful stare, husky whisper. ''Or the answers of those who
can no longer speak.''

In the telling of the former chief interrogator -- who insisted that he be
identified only by his initials, H.B.A. -- an interrogation was a contest of
brains, of personalities. An unequal contest, by definition: one party
determines the rules and may change them at any moment -- manipulation in
pursuit of a moral end, saving lives (even if an archly implied threat is,
strictly speaking, illegal under international law that's formally accepted by
both Israel and the United States).

A celebrated former station chief for the C.I.A. reminisced at his Washington
club about a series of interrogations in Khartoum, Sudan, nearly two decades ago
in which a recalcitrant Libyan agent was eventually coaxed into giving up a full
accounting of the apparatus in which he'd worked. All it took was the
painstaking deconstruction, bit by bit, of the prisoner's worldview. This was
done by giving him a peek at unpredictable intervals, as if by accident, at
Arabic newspapers portraying conditions of unrest and then revolt in Tripoli,
leading finally to a front page that bannered the death of Qaddafi and the
collapse of the regime. The prisoner had no way of knowing that the papers had
been specially printed by the agency for his eyes only. So he drew the intended
conclusion that there was no one left to whom he owed allegiance except his
friendly interrogator. Start to finish, I was told, the interrogation took the
better part of a year.

Jack Cloonan, a recently retired F.B.I. agent with a reputation for uncanny
success in conveying a sense of warm, fatherly protectiveness and concern to
suspects he encountered, acted out for me his first moments with Abdel Ghani
Meskini, a young Algerian living in Brooklyn, where he specialized in
credit-card fraud. Meskini had been assigned a role in the so-called millennium
plot to explode a bomb at Los Angeles International Airport on or about Jan. 1,
2000. Cloonan began by asking the man whether he'd had a chance to pray; he then
indicated the direction of Mecca. Next he asked whether the prisoner had been
served halal food. Then the agent inquired softly after his parents and the
concern they must now be feeling for the welfare of their son. Soon Meskini had
relaxed to the point that Cloonan, sliding into the role of surrogate father,
could start guiding him to a conclusion about what his real father would want
him to do in this predicament: help the investigator prevent bloody carnage in
the hope that he could be reunited one day with his family. The would-be
terrorist was not immune to a soft approach. It took just one afternoon for
Meskini to start talking.

So, yes, these impressive veterans of different services had excellent stories
to tell, which, like most stories that are brought back from the dark side, the
hearer has no real way of verifying. Still, I was soon persuaded of the point
they were making with the accounts they offered as parables: that in the best of
cases, violence may sometimes have to be alluded to as a distasteful option but
needn't be used. But what about the everyday cases, where hours of
interrogations yield fragments of information that help fill in the jigsaw
puzzle that analysts are trying to assemble? If I pressed my question about
violence in these and other conversations, the almost invariable answer, as if
learned by rote in the same school, was that too much violence produced
unreliable information because people will say anything, admit to anything, as a
way of gaining surcease from unbearable pain. Torture, in other words, is a
useful tool for gaining confessions when the facts are deemed not to matter. (Or
as a former political prisoner I knew in South Africa said to me, making the
same point as he recounted his own experience of electric-shock torture,
''You'll have to prepare many yeses.'')

Only occasionally did I hear examples cited of what might be termed, if you can
stomach neutral language, the efficacy of torture. There's the case of Abdul
Hakim Murad, an Arab living in Manila who was picked up and reportedly tortured
by Philippine interrogators who, so the story goes, inserted burning cigarettes
into his ears. That, it's sometimes said, led to the foiling of Operation
Bojinka -- a 1995 plot to set off bombs on 11 passenger jets. It also may have
led to the arrest of Ramzi Yousef, the mastermind of the original attempt in
1993 to bomb the World Trade Center. (Actually, others say the key leads came
not from the interrogation but from the painstaking ''mirror imaging'' of
deleted files in what's termed ''slack space'' in the hard drive of a laptop
captured at the Manila apartment.)

Then there was the waterboarding in 2003 of Yousef's uncle, the putative
mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, who's invariably referred to as ''K.S.M.''
rather than his name, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. K.S.M., we're led to believe, was
soon broken and soon talked. However, official sources again differ on a key
point -- whether he talked about the past or future, about the plot he led or
plots that had yet to surface. One former official who had seen the complete
record of the interrogation told me it ''saved thousands of American lives.'' I
found that hard to believe. My own feeling was that my source was getting
carried away either by my promise of anonymity or his wish to demonstrate his
own effectiveness. If a plot on such a scale had been demonstrably foiled, I
can't help believing, we'd have heard of it at some point during the 2004
presidential campaign.

So, on the basis of the scant amount of information available to those of us who
will never be shown interrogation logs, I still think the case for actual
torture remains shaky even by the most amoral and pragmatic standard. What then
of torture lite? What about the crudely brandished threat of unbearable pain or
the carefully calibrated administration of somewhat bearable pain as routine
techniques for shocking and disorienting a prisoner, conveying to him a sense of
hopelessness from which there is only one possible escape? It's a question that
few theorists care to debate openly. How many lives would have to be
demonstrably saved before such intimidation and punishment achieve a kind of
moral sanction? If it could be shown with some certainty that, say, 10,000 lives
would be saved, few purists would argue against the infliction of pain. If the
number was a much smaller multiple of 10 and the degree of uncertainty candidly
acknowledged, the true murkiness of the issue in the real world would have to be
faced.

Agencies that employ interrogators on the counterterrorism front are loath to
say anything in public that might be taken by prospective detainees or their
handlers as suggesting that there could be limits to what they do, boundaries
they won't cross, on the theory that resistance is easier if the prisoner has an
idea of what he will have to withstand. For home consumption, they'd like to
avoid suggesting that there are no limits. That puts a premium on purposeful
ambiguity, on double talk. Commentators and editorial writers who deplore
torture use the ''slippery slope'' argument to avoid facing the issue of lesser
forms of coercion. Any breach in the norms of due process, they contend, is sure
to be taken as license for the grossest abuse. That argument may be true, even
profoundly true, but it's also something of a dodge, for it leaves unanswered
the question of whether coercive interrogation ''works.''

In Israel, I was repeatedly told that coercive interrogation had effectively
thwarted missions of would-be suicide bombers, saving lives. (I also heard that
restrictions on the use of coercive interrogation had cost innocent lives in at
least two cases.) But no one would describe a specific case. Weeks after I left
Jerusalem, I finally received a communication from a high security source
willing to get into particulars. The source made a sweeping claim that
''hundreds of terror attacks . . . intended to cause the deaths of an
inestimable number of innocent civilians'' had been prevented by intelligence
revealed in interrogations. The single example out of these hundreds that I was
given turned out to be the same one that the Israeli Justice Ministry cited in a
letter to Human Rights Watch a couple of months earlier. It was the case of
Nasim Za'atari, a Jerusalem resident who scouted out potential targets for
Hamas, then helped suicide bombers with their disguises and guided them to
targets. Za'atari had already had a hand in two bus bombings -- one of them
killed 23 Israelis on Aug. 19, 2003 -- when he was detained and interrogated the
following month. Before his capture, he'd also agreed to guide three bombers
from Hebron to new targets in Jerusalem. Soon after he was broken in
interrogation, Israeli security forces assassinated the Hamas recruiter who had
prepared the candidates for suicide bombing and seized the bomb belts they would
have worn, which were concealed in an ordinary washing machine that a moving
company had picked up in Hebron. I wasn't explicitly told whether force was
actually used to break Za'atari, only that if it was, it did not ''fall within
the definition of torture in international law.'' Left to draw my own
conclusion, I concluded that force had been deemed essential.

Legal theorists debate the question of what's called the ticking-bomb scenario
and whether it can ever exist in the real world. Here was a concrete Israeli
answer. It was reasonable to imagine that a dozen or maybe several dozen lives
were saved in this instance by the timely use of force. The plain fact seems to
be that, sooner or later, most forms of interrogation work with most prisoners
who have been deprived of comrades, a reliable sense of time, of whether it's
night or day and any external reason for resistance.

''The only difference is the time factor,'' said Danny Rothschild, now a
security consultant in Israel and the United States, formerly a high official in
the Israeli security service, expressing with some distaste the minimal case for
the occasional use of coercion. ''And sometimes time is precious.''

III. Restraining the Leviathan
The premise that coercive force may have its uses in the interrogation of
suspected terrorists was accepted as a given by a task force that gathered at
Harvard last year. Made up largely of lawyers with government experience in key
jobs on the security side, the task force's mission was to address the issues
that are usually ducked in hopes of drawing a plan for balancing security needs
with freedoms we used to take for granted. (The project, sponsored jointly by
the Kennedy School and the Harvard Law School, was underwritten in part by the
Department of Homeland Security.) The lawyers wanted rules on the use of
coercive force, a code with declared limits, a process of oversight and
accountability, none of which clearly exist now in the Bush administration's
approach to interrogations in its so-called global war. In other words, they
were proposing a tightly supervised, highly qualified license for the
application of torture lite.

The final version of the report was written by Prof. Philip B. Heymann of the
law school, a former deputy attorney general, and Juliette N. Kayyem of the
Kennedy School, a former legal adviser to Attorney General Janet Reno. Judge
Michael Chertoff, who has since become secretary of Homeland Security, was among
the participants who didn't dissent from the team's assumption that torture lite
works. (Only one did, a San Francisco lawyer named Michael Traynor, who wrote
that he remained ''highly skeptical that degradation and humiliation of human
beings is an effective means for eliciting truthful information.'') For a brief
time early this year there was a slight hope among the report's adherents that
its approach might be embodied in legislation that could attract bipartisan
support. What it attracted instead was the wrath of human rights groups and the
cold indifference of an administration that had little interest in limiting its
authority or submitting its tactics to review.

So it was just a lifeless concept, a mere pedagogic example by the time Kayyem
visited Prof. Sanford Levinson's course, ''Torture, Law and Lawyers,'' at
Harvard Law School in April. ''You think that if it works and it's something
less than torture, it's O.K.,'' Levinson said, challenging Kayyem to declare the
guiding principle on which the task force would have permitted a limited use of
coercive force in interrogations involving terrorists.

''If it comes with a process,'' she replied, meaning a legal process. ''Cut to
the chase, we were a room full of people who think it works.''

It's worth dwelling on the proposals as they touch on coercive interrogation, if
only because their failure to gain support is a fair index of how much (meaning
how little) concern exists today beyond law schools, human rights groups and the
military's own uniformed lawyers for making our laws consistent with our
practices. The idea was not to remove highly coercive interrogation, or H.C.I.,
from the American counterterrorism arsenal but to set strict legal limits on its
use. Blatant torture would have been absolutely out; ditto forms of torture lite
that ''shock the conscience''; ditto the farming out (in official jargon,
''rendition'') of terrorist suspects to foreign governments that practice
torture, even, presumably, if they were being swapped for intelligence the
United States couldn't otherwise get. The president would have had to sign off
on permitted coercive techniques, on whether they could be combined and for how
long; Congressional committees would have had to be briefed; and before these
techniques were used in any particular case, senior officials would have to make
a determination in writing that there was ''probable cause'' to believe
significant information could be obtained. All of this would be done in secret,
but if these standards were not met, a victim would be able to sue for civil
damages, even a foreigner held outside the United States. So, you see, it would
all have been legal, according to the book.

In exceptional instances under this proposal, where lives were clearly at stake,
only the president could have authorized more extreme methods of coercion,
methods that might ''shock the conscience.'' He would have had to do it in
writing and tell oversight committees ''within a reasonable period.''

One of the main sponsors of last year's Intelligence Reform Act, Representative
Jane Harman, a California Democrat and the ranking minority member on the House
Intelligence Committee, found merit in the Harvard approach. I asked her whether
she thought a line could be drawn distinguishing acceptable forms of coercive
force from unacceptable ones. ''We have to try,'' she said. ''If you're serious
about trying to get information in advance of an attack, interrogation has to be
one of the main tools. It has to be made to work. I'm O.K. with it not being
pretty.'' But when it came to giving legislative sanction for the limited use of
torture lite, there wasn't anything like a consensus among those few in Congress
who had worried aloud about the American way of interrogation.

Senator John McCain has the heavy distinction of being the only member of the
Senate who has ever suffered torture. He says he was ''stunned'' last year when
the White House resisted an amendment he helped sponsor to the Intelligence
Reform Act that declared simply that the C.I.A. was obliged to respect all laws
and international treaties against cruel and inhuman interrogation practices and
torture. McCain seems to find it impossible, however, to speak of his own trauma
when addressing the issue. So he won't be drawn into a comparison of the Hanoi
Hilton with Guantanamo or Abu Ghraib. Plainly this is a matter of intense
personal resistance rather than political calculation, a refusal to revisit his
darkest memories merely to score a debating point. Asked about the use of force
in interrogation, he avoids eye contact and stares at the wall. Fidgeting with
his pen, he finally speaks in a constricted voice, as if he's not getting enough
air, saying he couldn't support any provision in law for an approved list of
coercive techniques.

''You don't need to get into questions of whether its O.K. to break someone's
right arm but not his left foot,'' he says, his voice trailing off. That morning
I'd read the pages in McCain's autobiography about the savage beatings to which
he'd been subjected in Hanoi. I knew that his right arm had been broken.

IV. The Prohibition Experiment
The Israeli Supreme Court's landmark decision didn't attempt to weigh broken
arms against broken feet, sleep deprivation against stress positions, torture
lite against torture heavy. It declared categorically that no form of highly
coercive interrogation is authorized by Israeli law, that all forms were illegal
under international covenants Israel had signed. ''Human dignity,'' wrote Aharon
Barak, the president of the court, ''also includes the dignity of the suspect
being interrogated. . . . Violence directed at a suspect's body or spirit does
not constitute a reasonable investigation practice.'' What's illegal in a police
station in an ordinary criminal case, the ruling said plainly, is illegal in one
of the security service's interrogation rooms in a case of terrorism.

Barak's court didn't lightly or swiftly come to this conclusion in 1999. The
issue of torture lite had been put squarely on the table as early as 1987 by a
commission headed by Moshe Landau, one of Barak's predecessors as head of the
highest court and the judge who 26 years earlier had presided over the Eichmann
trial. Landau found that the agents of the security service had routinely
perjured themselves in court on issues of abuse and coercion and that they were
behaving outside the law. Landau was merely saying out loud what was already
widely known. ''Everyone knew -- they knew we were lying,'' said Ami Ayalon, who
was head of the General Security Service (another name for Shin Bet) when the
Supreme Court finally rendered its 1999 decision. ''Members of the Knesset knew,
ministers all knew, the judges knew.''

Yet Landau's commission frankly acknowledged that ''moderate physical pressure''
-- yet another way of describing torture lite -- might sometimes be necessary as
an interrogation tool. His report came, or so it's widely believed, with a
secret annex specifying which coercive techniques might be permissible. For more
than a decade -- the decade that saw the first intifada and the start of the
Oslo peace process -- ''moderate physical pressure'' became an elastic byword in
Israeli interrogation rooms. Landau had inadvertently given the interrogators a
provisional license for a list of humiliating and brutal coercive techniques
like violent shaking, in which the detainee would be grabbed by his shirt front
and jerked back and forth with his head bobbing spasmodically (a method that
proved to be lethal in at least one case). ''Moderate physical pressure'' also
came to cover the introduction of the notorious shabach position, in which the
detainee was hooded and placed on a low chair with a seat tilting down, pitching
him forward while his arms were tightly handcuffed behind him in an unnatural,
contorted way so that they had to support his weight, for two or three hours at
a stretch. This could be augmented by other stressful standing and squatting
positions including the qambaz, or frog position, or accompanied by loud music
and verbal abuse full of crude sexual innuendos about the prisoner's mother,
sister or wife. The combination of all these methods over prolonged periods
produced a regime sometimes known as shabeh.

The respected Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem contended that the
combination was nothing less than torture. In 1998, in a relatively quiet
period, more than two years before the start of the second intifada, B'Tselem
estimated that at least 850 Palestinians and possibly more than 1,200 were being
tortured annually. According to its figures, this was about 85 percent of all
Palestinians in interrogation. The figures were not seriously challenged.
Finally, in 1999, the court said this was all illegal.

Israel is a small country in constant conversation with itself at all levels of
society, including the upper echelons of government, on the subject of its
perpetual security crisis. Ami Ayalon, the security chief, said he was privately
in touch with Barak before the decision and even invited him to speak to his
agents on issues of international law. Not surprised when the decision was
finally handed down, the security chief promptly announced that his
interrogators would obey the court.

That may sound like a happy ending, a triumph for the rule of law. But what
actually changed? Not as much as the sweeping judicial edict seemed to promise,
according to the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel, a human rights
group that seeks to monitor what happens to detained Palestinians. The committee
maintains that Ayalon's pledge to abide by the Supreme Court's decision was
never wholly enforced and seriously broke down after the outbreak of the second
intifada. Torture remains routine in Israeli detention centers, the committee
contended, offering affidavits taken within the last year from prisoners like
Bahij Mahmoud Bader, who, in a statement summarized by the group, said that
after his arrest last July, his interrogators actually ''put before him a list
of the methods of torture that they later used.'' Then they worked down the
list, forcing him to stand facing a wall with his hands tied behind his back and
his knees bent for hours at a time; blindfolding him and slapping him; seating
him backwards on a chair with his hands and feet bound in a painful position
while two interrogators, one behind and one in front, shoved his upper torso
back and forth as if playing catch with a medicine ball. As usual, curses,
threats and denial of sleep were all chapters in his story. Later, so he
testified, he was informed that his wife and mother had been arrested and that
his family home might be demolished if he failed to cooperate.

The committee had a batch of affidavits taken within the last year that describe
coercive interrogations. I was told it could easily gather more if it had enough
lawyers to interview prisoners.

The human rights group B'Tselem takes a different view. It asserts that the
number of Palestinian prisoners subjected to what are sometimes now called
''special methods'' or ''military interrogation'' remained comparatively low,
measured by the dozens rather than the hundreds over the course of a year, and
that the actual methods used are now somewhat less severe than in the past. (The
chairs to which detainees are shackled are usually normal chairs, not the
special short stools with a forward tilt that the Supreme Court proscribed. The
suffocating hoods have mostly been replaced by blackened goggles. Suspects may
be shoved back and forth, but they're not routinely subjected to the
bone-rattling shakings that were part of the old drill.) Bassem Eid of the
Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group, which focuses on abuses in the
territories under the Palestinian Authority, agreed. He said in an interview in
Jericho that no one in his right mind would prefer a Palestinian jail to an
Israeli one. During the first intifada, he noted, 20 Palestinians died in
Israeli prisons; during the second, none did. Over the whole period, there were
more deaths in detention in the jails of the Palestinian Authority than in
Israeli jails.

''Here Israel has a very important lesson to teach the United States,'' said
Jessica Montell, the American-born executive director of B'Tselem. She was
making a point diametrically opposed to a contention that turns up regularly in
Arab media and on the Internet without much evidence to support it, that the
Pentagon has schooled itself on Israeli interrogation methods and manuals. She
was not speaking as an apologist for present practices; she was acknowledging a
new restraint in Israel since the Supreme Court's ruling.

A new generation of Israeli interrogators has been trained. Discipline in the
ranks and close monitoring of detailed interrogation plans -- characteristics
already attributed to the security service -- became even stricter. Most, if not
all, interrogations are now videotaped and subject to review. Interrogators
always have partners; they are seldom left alone with prisoners. And, of course,
they all speak Arabic. The great majority of Palestinians passing through
Israeli interrogation rooms may still be subjected to dire threats of actual
physical abuse. The ordinary prisoner might still be isolated, deprived of
sleep, chilled or stifled by a drastic temperature change in a windowless cell
until thoroughly disoriented. But then after some days, he's likely to be put in
a cleaner cell with fellow Palestinians. They may tell him they don't trust him,
that they're afraid he's an Israeli spy. Actually they're the asafeer, or
''birds,'' the stool pigeons who will coax him into talking. He may suspect as
much, but he's so glad to be speaking softly with fellow Palestinians after the
shouting, curses and crude sexual innuendoes to which the interrogators
frequently resort, he usually talks. The cell, of course, is bugged. No one has
touched him. This sort of approach, I was told, is just as effective as the old
stress positions, which are meant to be reserved now for extraordinary cases.

''You know what?'' asked Danny Rothschild, the security veteran. ''The results
are the same. Which shows you could have done without brutal interrogation.''

Nowadays no interrogator can resort to physical means without approval from on
high. Theoretically, this comes only in ''ticking bomb'' situations, in which
there's a chance of forestalling an actual plot. If it comes, the permissible
duration for the application of the designated coercive technique will be
clearly indicated; time logs are then kept, hour by dreary hour, and regularly
reviewed. ''It's frightening the way everything is done and reported,'' said Lea
Tsemel, a Jewish defense lawyer who specializes in Palestinian political cases.
''It's very professional now.''

Such approval from the security chief for the use of ''special methods'' is a
matter of administrative discipline. It has no standing in law. The Supreme
Court said so explicitly. Still, the security chief continues to give his
approval in important cases, and six years after the court declared itself, no
one has brought a case alleging ''cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment'' back
to the Supreme Court. The court broadly hinted that its prohibition on coercive
methods could be waived in an extreme circumstance if a case were brought after
the abuse had occurred. It suggested that an interrogator might then be able to
avail himself of the old common-law defense of ''necessity'' -- in essence, that
he acted to avert a greater evil. Without any cases, the defense has yet to be
tested.

Hannah Friedman, executive director of the Public Committee Against Torture in
Israel, explained why her group had yet to bring such a case to the Supreme
Court. She had been warned that if the committee brought a new case alleging
torture at a time when suicide bombings had aroused public opinion, it might
provoke a decision that would weaken the legal standard that had just been
raised. Under those circumstances, even the committee against torture must have
felt it had to be realistic. If the present lull in the conflict continues, she
said, the committee may yet bring a case.

V. Candor and Complicity
Viewed through an Israeli prism, the United States still has a lot to learn
about the uses and consequences of coercive force, of torture lite, in
interrogations. A lot to learn as practitioners: Israeli security specialists
are amazed by the multiplicity of commands engaged in the American interrogation
scramble, by the short tours of duty and high turnover of interrogators, by the
reliance on interpreters and outsourcing to contractors and foreign governments.
''Unprofessional'' is the mildest word they use.

And a lot to learn on the judicial side where, it might be said, we're a decade
or more behind the Israeli experience. Cases that may lead our courts to
confront the issue and decide whether they have jurisdiction are still only in
preparation. If eventually some federal court asserts its authority, the
government can be expected to appeal. It could be years before such a case made
its way to our Supreme Court. Israel, by contrast, upholds a clear legal
standard, which it makes some effort to observe, at least more than it did in
the past. Is this really a difference? Perhaps only to the degree that the
Israeli service is now looking over its shoulder at the court, knowing that
recourse to the judges is readily available.

Had my journey then taught me anything?

It taught me that democracies are more than likely to evade the basic question
of whether torture lite can ever truly be justified for as long as they feel
threatened. So they shrink from authorizing it by law, as Professor Heymann's
Harvard group proposed that Congress do and as the Supreme Court in Israel
invited the Knesset to do. Democracies' self-regard as communities that are
supposed to be on the side of human rights inhibits the candor such statutes
would require. Even if the intent is actually to limit the use of coercive
techniques, what government wants to be the first since the Enlightenment to
proclaim such a draconian code? And what politician wants to shed his carefully
maintained ''deniability'' in order to secure the antagonistic value of
accountability? By definition, that could be personally costly.

Still, it seemed to me that the idea of legislating standards for the
application of torture lite is one of the two available positions that meet any
test of intellectual honesty. It offered a form of due process for torture lite
(the lawyerly prescription, it might be said, of people out of power brooding on
the authoritarian temptation facing people now in power). But if intellectual
honesty were the only test, the more satisfying position would be an insistence
on obeying existing legal standards of due process, an absolutist refusal to
stretch the law in order to legitimize torture lite. Any time the authorities
then felt that a compelling national interest left them no choice but to
sanction the use of force in an interrogation, they'd know they were breaking
the law and could conceivably be prosecuted. Very rarely, upholders of this
position conceded, breaking the law could be the right thing to do. The Israeli
example can be taken to show that the threat of prosecution would then be
largely theoretical.

I found myself bouncing back and forth between the two positions -- the
unattainable ideal that brooked no compromise of the law and the unattainable
compromise. Since both were unattainable, it didn't seem to matter where I came
out. I preferred the ideal, but if coercive force was inevitable under both
regimes, I had to admit, not being a lawyer, to a sneaking regard for the one
that acknowledged as much. But, of course, the position that rules doesn't get
hung up on intellectual tests. It says we'll do what we have to do: don't ask,
don't tell. Even when clear evidence of the effectiveness of torture lite is
hard to come by, democracies threatened by terrorism shrink from laying down the
weapon. Should the threat ever pass, we can be expected to repress any memory of
its use as we now try to do in daily life while it persists. Then we'll discover
how much gratitude or resentment has accrued to us in the places where we've
operated, among the descendants of those we've detained.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Photographs by Andres Serrano for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); WAR ON
TERROR (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (72%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(71%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (66%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (60%) Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

PERSON: Joseph Lelyveld

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Meat Means

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 517 words


Most Americans do not want to know how the meat they eat is produced, if only so
they can continue to eat it. Nearly every aspect of meat production in America
is disturbing, from the way animals are raised, to inadequate inspection of the
final product. When it comes to what happens in the slaughterhouse, most of us
mentally avert our eyes. Yet in the past decade, the handling of livestock on
their way to the killing floor has actually been one of the parts of the
business that has improved most significantly. What is most alarming at the
slaughterhouse is not what happens to the animals -- they have already met their
fate. It is what happens to the humans who work there.

A large slaughterhouse is the truly industrial end of industrial farming. It is
a factory for disassembly. Its high line speeds place enormous pressure on the
workers hired to take apart the carcasses coming down the line. And because the
basic job of the line is cutting flesh -- hard, manual labor -- the dangers are
very high for meat workers, whose flesh is every bit as vulnerable as that of
the pork or beef or chicken passing by.

The problem of worker safety is compounded by the fact that meatpackers, driven
by the brutal economics of the industry, always try to hire the cheapest labor
they can find. That increasingly means immigrants whose language difficulties
compound the risks of the job. The result, according to a new report by Human
Rights Watch, is ''extraordinarily high rates of injury'' in conditions that
systematically violate human rights.

In fact, the report finds, some major players in the American meat industry prey
upon a large population of immigrant workers who are either ignorant of their
fundamental rights or are undocumented aliens who are afraid of calling
attention to themselves. As a result, those workers often receive little or no
compensation for injuries, and any attempt to organize is met with hostility.

The industry has little incentive to improve conditions on its own, except a
decent regard for human rights. The only reasonable prospect of improvement
depends on the enforcement of federal and state law. Unfortunately, those laws
at present are too weak and too riddled with loopholes to provide the
regulations needed to increase worker safety and improve workers' rights. A
systematic regulatory look at the meat industry, with an eye to toughening
standards, is desperately needed.

In recent years, Americans have had the habit of thinking of wide-scale
workplace abuses as foreign affairs -- the kind of thing that turns up in
Southeast Asia, for instance. And, in a sense, the abuses found in American
slaughterhouses are international matters, because so many of the workers are
actually citizens of other countries. But in this case, the abuses are taking
place right at home, and as part of our food chain. In a carb-conscious era, the
meat processing industry should be a place of opportunity for workers who put
all that protein on your plate. Right now, that is hardly the case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POULTRY PROCESSING (90%); ANIMAL SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); BEEF (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); MEAT
PROCESSING & PRODUCTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%); MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (78%); MEATS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (74%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%);
FACTORY FARMS (72%); DEREGULATION (72%); REFUGEES (71%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
(64%) Meat; Editorials; Accidents and Safety; Labor; Immigration and Refugees;
Freedom and Human Rights; Regulation and Deregulation of Industry; Industrial
and Occupational Hazards

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%) Human Rights Watch

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Looking the Other Way

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 542 words


The Bush administration enthusiastically congratulated itself this week for
including abuses by Iraqi authorities in its annual report on human rights
violations. One State Department official called it proof that ''we don't look
the other way.'' But the report did look away -- from American involvement in
the mistreatment it decried. In the end it was another sad reminder of the heavy
price the nation has paid for ignoring fundamental human rights in Iraq,
Afghanistan and Guantanamo; in the secret cells where the C.I.A. holds its
unaccounted-for prisoners; and at home, where President Bush continues to claim
the power to hold Americans in jail indefinitely without the right to trial.

The administration's refusal to remedy these abuses -- or even acknowledge most
of them -- leaves the 2004 human rights report heavy with irony and saps its
authority. Not only did the report fail to mention that the Iraqi government it
criticized was appointed and controlled by the United States, but it also
chastised the local security forces for the same kinds of arbitrary detentions,
abusive treatment and torture that have been widespread in American military and
intelligence prison camps. Indeed, some of the practices the report labeled as
torture when employed by foreign governments were approved at one point for
American detention centers by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.

The horrible abuses at Abu Ghraib and other American prison camps badly damaged
the nation's image as a defender of human rights. The administration then
worsened the damage by refusing to deal with the issue openly and forcefully.
Just yesterday, Douglas Jehl of The Times reported that the Senate Intelligence
Committee's Republican chairman, Pat Roberts of Kansas, is blocking a serious
inquiry into the C.I.A.'s abuse of prisoners.

Meanwhile, on the same day the State Department issued its human rights report,
the administration said it would fight a third federal court order to end the
illegal detention of Jose Padilla, an American citizen who has been held for
nearly three years without charges because Mr. Bush has declared him an ''enemy
combatant.''

A district court judge in South Carolina, Henry Floyd, who was appointed by Mr.
Bush in 2003, said the president's claim that he could order such detentions was
''deeply troubling.'' He said endorsing that view ''would totally eviscerate the
limits placed on presidential authority to protect the citizenry's individual
liberties.'' His ruling echoed earlier decisions by federal courts in New York,
which were mooted when the Supreme Court said Mr. Padilla's case should have
been heard in South Carolina, where he is held in a Navy brig. Now that has
happened, and still Attorney General Alberto Gonzales says the administration
will not accept the decision.

Mr. Gonzales continues to cling to the fiction that combating terrorism somehow
gives Mr. Bush the power to violate Americans' constitutional rights. The
administration's appeal will needlessly further delay Mr. Padilla's day in
court. But we hope it will finally lead to a Supreme Court ruling against the
White House's abuse of power. That would be a good step toward restoring
America's moral authority on the rule of law and human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PRISONS
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ANNUAL
REPORTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (87%); TERRORISM (86%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (85%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%);
APPOINTMENTS (76%); SUPREME COURTS (74%); APPROVALS (73%); NAVIES (72%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); MILITARY BASES (71%); JUDGES
(69%) Terrorism; Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); PAT ROBERTS (58%) George W
(Pres) Bush; Alberto R (Atty Gen) Gonzales

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Struggle With Memories of Torture Down the Street

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Buenos Aires Journal; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, March 7


The Naval Mechanics' School stands as a silent rebuke along one of the main
boulevards of this sophisticated capital, a permanent blot on Argentina's
conscience. For many years the embodiment of fear, where political prisoners
were taken and never seen again, it is today a symbol of shame, though most
Argentines even now prefer to avoid or ignore it.

On Friday, however, the gates of ESMA, the acronym by which the school was
known, opened so that Argentine human rights advocates could give a tour of the
site to a group of their American counterparts. The government had invited the
Americans to take part in a seminar on ''Memory, Truth and Justice,'' and a
visit to ESMA, now shuttered and quiet, was deemed a necessary prelude.

During the military dictatorship in power here from March 24, 1976, until the
end of 1983, 340 places were used as detention centers, according to the
calculations of Open Memory, a human rights group that documents the abuses of
that time.

But the Naval Mechanics' School was the largest and most notorious of the
clandestine prisons where as many as 30,000 people, some armed insurgents,
others just critics of military rule, were tortured and killed after being
abducted by government security forces.

''This is an emblematic place,'' Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, Argentina's
first lady and a senator, told the American visitors during this rare tour. ''It
has a story to tell.''

The building where most of the torture took place was originally the officers'
casino, and still shows traces of its original elegance. Prisoners were brought
in the main entrance and then taken to the basement and marched down a corridor
called Happiness Avenue to the torture rooms.

The visitors on Friday were also shown a room used as a maternity ward for
pregnant prisoners, whose babies were taken from them and given to military
families. Up in the attic they saw The Little Hood, where some of the worst
tortures were inflicted and a prominent leader of the Montoneros, a leftist
guerrilla group, was chained to a wall and killed by lethal injection.

''The striking thing about a place like this is how ordinary it all looks,''
Michael Posner, executive director of Human Rights First, said midway through
the tour. ''If you didn't know what went on here, you would think it was just
another building.''

Another surprise was how close together the prisoners and their tormenters
lived. Guards' quarters were just a few feet from the cells where prisoners were
kept in squalid conditions, and detainees going up the stairs to torture
sessions would sometimes pass navy officers on their way to lunch.

Ms. Kirchner told the visitors that some female prisoners married officers they
met here. ''It is the Stockholm syndrome taken to an extreme,'' she said, ''an
example of human condition that doesn't have an explanation.''

All told, about 5,000 people passed through the ESMA complex, which occupies a
leafy, 42-acre campus. Among them was Ricardo Coqueto, 52, a carpenter and
former guerrilla who was among the fewer than 200 prisoners who survived. He
summoned the courage to join the tour on Friday.

He said he believed that he was spared because he ''acquired special skills.''
He was put to work in the print shop, where the navy fabricated bogus passports,
national identification cards and police credentials, and even counterfeited
foreign currency for their secret agents: ''I can remember making British
sterling notes,'' he said.

He brought along two of his stepchildren, Maria Lucia Onofre, 30, and Luis
Onofre, 28. They spent several weeks in detention here as infants with their
mother, Ana Maria Soffiantini, whom Mr. Coqueto met while both were being held
in 1977 and 1978 and later married.

His stepdaughter, who said she had vague memories of the detention center, where
her biological father was killed in 1976, broke into tears during the visit.
Luis was quiet, but said that he, too, was overcome with emotion. ''Now, I
finally feel like I am also a part of this,'' he said.

The military dictatorship tried to hide what went on at ESMA. When a delegation
from the Organization of American States came in 1979, prisoners were removed to
an island, known as the Silence, which was owned by the Roman Catholic Church.

The school continued to be used as a military training center until a year ago,
when the government designated the site a ''space for memory.'' In Room 23,
someone, presumably the last resident, left this message written in pencil
inside a closet door: ''We had nothing to do with what happened, but even so, I
ask your forgiveness.''

Now that the site is theirs to manage, though, Argentina's main human rights
groups have been unable to agree on the best use for it. Some want a small and
simple museum and memorial, others a larger complex that would include a
documentation center and human rights academy. Others would like to see the
compound razed and replaced with a park, or left as a kind of sacred site.

The arrival of the Americans, especially Sara J. Bloomfield, director of the
American Holocaust Memorial Museum, seemed to rekindle that debate.

As the group toured the site, a representative of the Mothers of the Plaza de
Mayo -- the mothers of those who disappeared, who continue their work to focus
attention on the era -- could be heard asking an interpreter to remind the
Americans that ''this is the real place, not some kind of mock-up or model.''

During the visit, Ms. Bloomfield floated some ideas, like bringing to the site
one of the airplanes used to dump the drugged bodies of prisoners into the sea,
known in the navy's parlance as transferral. But she was careful to keep her
comments general.

''They have an enormous opportunity and advantage here, because this is a
genuine site,'' she said, not a re-creation. ''Memory is a process, so you want
something that is emotionally and intellectually engaging and a moral challenge
to people.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At ESMA, a former Argentine Navy school in Buenos Aires that
became a torture center in the ''Dirty War'' of the 1970's and 1980's, an
outline of a human figure is a tribute to those once held prisoner there. (Photo
by Nicolas Goldberg for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); CHILDREN (78%); NAVIES (78%); LIBERALISM (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY RULE (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%);
ARMED FORCES (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%); MILITARY DEPENDENTS (68%);
EXECUTIVES (64%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (62%); FAMILY (62%) Freedom and Human
Rights; Political Prisoners

PERSON: CRISTINA FERNANDEZ DE KIRCHNER (89%) Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (91%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Argentina; Buenos Aires (Argentina)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is No One Accountable?

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 732 words


The Bush administration is desperately trying to keep the full story from
emerging. But there is no longer any doubt that prisoners seized by the U.S. in
Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere have been killed, tortured, sexually humiliated
and otherwise grotesquely abused.

These atrocities have been carried out in an atmosphere in which administration
officials have routinely behaved as though they were above the law, and thus
accountable to no one. People have been rounded up, stripped, shackled, beaten,
incarcerated and in some cases killed, without being offered even the semblance
of due process. No charges. No lawyers. No appeals.

Arkan Mohammed Ali is a 26-year-old Iraqi who was detained by the U.S. military
for nearly a year at various locations, including the infamous Abu Ghraib
prison. According to a lawsuit filed against Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld,
Mr. Ali was at times beaten into unconsciousness during interrogations. He was
stabbed, shocked with an electrical device, urinated on and kept locked --
hooded and naked -- in a wooden, coffinlike box. He said he was told by his
captors that soldiers could kill detainees with impunity.

(This was not a boast from the blue. On Saturday, for example, The Times
reported that the Army would not prosecute 17 American soldiers implicated in
the deaths of three prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan.)

Mr. Ali's story is depressingly similar to other accounts pouring in from
detainees, human rights groups, intelligence sources and U.S. government
investigators. If you pay close attention to what is already known about the
sadistic and barbaric treatment of prisoners by the U.S., you can begin to
wonder how far we've come from the Middle Ages. The alleged heretics hauled
before the Inquisition were not permitted to face their accusers or mount a
defense. Innocence was irrelevant. Torture was the preferred method of obtaining
confessions.

No charges were ever filed against Mr. Ali, and he was eventually released. But
what should be of paramount concern to Americans is this country's precipitous
and frightening descent into the hellish zone of lawlessness that the Bush
administration, on the one hand, is trying to conceal and, on the other, is
defending as absolutely essential to its fight against terror.

The lawsuit against Mr. Rumsfeld was filed by the American Civil Liberties Union
and Human Rights First, a New York-based group, on behalf of Mr. Ali and seven
other former detainees from Iraq and Afghanistan who claim to have been tortured
by U.S. personnel.

The suit charges that Mr. Rumsfeld personally authorized unlawful interrogation
techniques and abdicated his responsibility to stop the torture and other abuses
of prisoners in U.S. custody. It contends that the abuse of detainees was
widespread and that Mr. Rumsfeld and other top administration officials were
well aware of it.

According to the suit, it is unreasonable to believe that Mr. Rumsfeld could
have remained in the dark about the rampant mistreatment of prisoners in U.S.
custody. It cites a wealth of evidence readily available to the secretary,
including the scandalous eruptions at Abu Ghraib prison, the reports of detainee
abuse at Guantanamo Bay, myriad newspaper and magazine articles, internal U.S.
government reports, and concerns expressed by such reputable groups as the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

(The committee has noted, among other things, that military intelligence
estimates suggest that 70 percent to 90 percent of the people detained in Iraq
had been seized by mistake.)

Whether this suit will ultimately be successful in holding Mr. Rumsfeld
personally accountable is questionable. But if it is thoroughly argued in the
courts, it will raise yet another curtain on the stomach-turning practices that
have shamed the United States in the eyes of the world.

The primary aim of the lawsuit is quite simply to re-establish the rule of law.
''It's that fundamental idea that nobody is above the law,'' said Michael
Posner, executive director of Human Rights First. ''The violations here were
created by policies that deliberately undermined the rule of law. That needs to
be challenged.''

Lawlessness should never be an option for the United States. Once the rule of
law has been extinguished, you're left with an environment in which moral
degeneracy can flourish and a great nation can lose its soul.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); PRISONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); DUE PROCESS (76%);
ARMIES (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (74%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (74%); NAVIES (69%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%) Terrorism; Suits and
Litigation; Freedom and Human Rights; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Terrorism; Prisoners of War; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%); AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION (59%) American Civil Liberties Union; Human Rights First (Orgn)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Monitor of Afghan Rights Accuses U.S. on Detentions

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 22


A United Nations human rights monitor has accused American military forces and
contractors in Afghanistan of acting above the law ''by engaging in arbitrary
arrests and detentions and committing abusive practices, including torture.'' In
a report released Thursday, the Afghan police and security forces were also
criticized for similar actions.

Cherif Bassiouni, an Egyptian who was appointed as an independent human rights
monitor for Afghanistan by Secretary General Kofi Annan in April 2004, called
for American troops to set an example for Afghan forces by showing
accountability for actions toward prisoners. In particular, he raised concern
about the cases of eight prisoners who died while in American custody in
Afghanistan, and said the cases should be immediately investigated.

Only two American soldiers, Pfc. Willie V. Brand and Sgt. James P. Boland, are
known to have faced military tribunals in the deaths of Afghan prisoners, in a
case in which two Afghans were abused until they died in December 2002 at Bagram
Air Base. Neither case has been publicly decided. A contract interrogator for
the C.I.A., David A. Passaro, is to go to trial in May in the beating of an
Afghan prisoner in June 2003.

Mr. Bassiouni's report covered all aspects of human rights violations in
Afghanistan, detailing concerns about inequities against women, abduction and
trafficking of children, illegal seizure of property, lack of due process and
social and economic abuses against minorities, displaced people, the poor and
the disabled. There has been some progress, he said, specifically in the
democratic process and reconstruction.

But he found ''pressing human issues'' stemming from the actions of factional
warlords, Afghan police and security forces, and American-led alliance forces
and private security contractors. He said he had communicated his concerns to
American and Afghan government officials.

During two visits to Afghanistan over the last year, he said, he received
reports of ''serious violations by coalition forces'' from Afghans who said they
had been victimized and from human rights and nongovernmental organizations.
About 18,000 foreign troops are in Afghanistan, including 17,000 Americans,
though only American troops run military detention centers there.

The reported violations included arrest and detentions of nationals and
foreigners without legal authority or judicial review, and a list of abusive
acts on detainees from forced nudity, hooding and sensory deprivation, to
''sexual abuse, beatings, torture and use of force resulting in death.''

Detention conditions were reported as below human rights standards set by the
Geneva Conventions and the United Nations, he said, although he was not allowed
access to the facilities. He called for human rights organizations and the
United Nations to be allowed access to detention facilities run by the United
States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); ASSET FORFEITURE (78%);
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); SEX OFFENSES (73%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
INVESTIGATION & SECURITY SERVICES (72%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (70%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (51%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (97%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror Suspects Sent to Egypt By the Dozens, Panel Reports

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


The United States and other countries have forcibly sent dozens of terror
suspects to Egypt, according to a report released Wednesday by Human Rights
Watch. The rights group and the State Department have both said Egypt regularly
uses extreme interrogation methods on detainees.

The group said it had documented 63 cases since 1994 in which suspected Islamic
militants were sent to Egypt for detention and interrogation. The figures do not
include people seized after the attacks of September 2001 who were sent mainly
by Middle East countries and American intelligence authorities.

The report said the total number sent to Egypt since the Sept. 11 attacks could
be as high as 200 people. American officials have not disputed that people have
been sent to countries where detainees are subjected to extreme interrogation
tactics but have denied that anyone had been sent to another country for the
purpose of torture. Among other countries to which the United States has sent
detainees are Jordan, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Syria.

Joe Stork, deputy Middle East director at Human Rights Watch, said sending
someone to a country where he was likely to be tortured was banned under
international law. ''Egypt's terrible record of torturing prisoners means that
no country should forcibly send a suspect there,'' he said.

The United States began sending terror suspects to Egypt in the mid-1990's when
the practice, known formally as rendition, began to play a larger role in
counterterrorism, according to officials from the Clinton administration.

But since September 2001, the transfers have accelerated in part because Egypt
has been willing to accept the detainees as part of its effort to root out
Islamic militants inside Egypt, a campaign that has extended to countries where
extremists have taken refuge. Almost all those sent to Egypt are Egyptian
citizens or were born there, the report said.

Although torture is forbidden under Egyptian law, the country has long been
criticized by the State Department for a poor human rights record, most recently
in a Feb. 28 annual report by the agency that concluded, ''Torture and abuse of
detainees by police, security forces and prison guards remained common and
persistent.''

Human rights groups have been even harsher. The Egyptian Organization for Human
Rights, a nongovernmental group, reported in May 2004 that it had uncovered 292
cases of torture between 1993 and 2003, of which 120 led to death.

President Bush said in March that the government demanded assurances that
suspects would not be tortured before they were sent to other countries. Porter
J. Goss, the director of central intelligence, testified on March 17 that more
safeguards were now in effect than existed before Sept. 11, 2001.

Other Clinton and Bush administration officials have said concerns about Cairo's
methods were balanced by the reality that for some detainees, there were no
options.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (72%); RELIGION (71%); CORRECTIONS (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); JORDAN (79%);
MOROCCO (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. Is Accused of Ignoring Abuse of 2 Americans in Pakistan

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD and SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, May 24


American F.B.I. agents repeatedly interrogated two United States citizens who
were illegally detained for eight months and did nothing to stop them from being
tortured by Pakistani authorities, a human rights group said Tuesday.

The brothers, Zain and Kashan Afzal, ages 23 and 25, respectively, both
Americans of Pakistani descent, were arrested at their Karachi home last August
and kept in secret Pakistani detention facilities for eight months until their
release on April 22. No charges were ever filed, and for many months their
family did not know where they were, according to a report by the group, Human
Rights Watch.

''What crime did we commit?'' a distraught Zain Afzal said in a brief telephone
interview from Karachi. ''If we did something wrong, would they let us go? It
was an illegal detention.''

The Afzal brothers' claims suggest a close collaboration of American and
Pakistani intelligence officials in vetting terror suspects, and they raise
questions about the responsibilities that the United States has for its own
citizens abroad.

In a written statement, the F.B.I. denied the allegations: ''Any assertion that
the F.B.I. condoned or directed torture is false. Longstanding policy of the
F.B.I. does not permit any such interview tactic, nor does the F.B.I. condone,
direct or support the use of torture.''

The American Embassy in Islamabad said it could not comment on the F.B.I.'s role
in the interrogations, but it said consular officials in Karachi learned of the
brothers' detention last October and contacted their family.

Zain Afzal said in the interview on Tuesday that he and his brother had trained
in 1999 to fight for Pakistan's interests in the guerrilla war with India over
Kashmir. But he said neither of them had joined the fighting.

The two told Human Rights Watch that they had been interrogated six times over
the eight months by F.B.I. agents and had been repeatedly questioned by American
and Pakistani intelligence officials about their role in Al Qaeda -- a role they
denied having -- and were threatened with detention at the American base at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Human Rights Watch said in a statement on Tuesday that the F.B.I. agents did not
intervene to end torture, insist that the Pakistani government comply with a
Pakistani court order to produce the men in court or provide consular services
normally offered to detained Americans.

''Instead,'' the group said, ''they threatened the men with being sent to the
U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay if they did not confess to involvement
in terrorism.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two American citizens, Kashan, left, and Zain Afzal, with their
mother, Nuzhat, in Karachi, Pakistan. The brothers were held for eight months.
(Photo by Shakil Adil/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); INTERVIEWS
(88%); LITIGATION (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); ARRESTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%)
Terrorism; Terrorism; Pakistani-Americans

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AL-QAEDA (59%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Federal Bureau of Investigation; Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group);
Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Zain Afzal; Kashan Afzal; Salman Masood; Somini Sengupta

CITY: KARACHI,PAKISTAN (94%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (92%)

STATE: KASHMIR (92%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (94%); CUBA (93%); ASIA (92%); INDIA
(79%)

REGION: Pakistan; Kashmir and Jammu; India

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Answers Bush

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 235 words



To the Editor:

President Bush's characterization of Amnesty International's criticisms of
United States human rights abuses as ''absurd'' is ironic (news article, June
1).

If our reports are so ''absurd,'' why did the administration repeatedly cite our
findings about Saddam Hussein before the Iraq war? Why does it welcome our
criticisms of Cuba, China and North Korea? And why does it cite our research in
its own annual human rights reports?

No amount of spin can erase the myriad human rights abuses committed by United
States officials in the ''war on terror.'' The United States cannot
simultaneously claim that it ''promotes freedom around the world'' while
detaining tens of thousands at Guantanamo Bay, Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan
and in Iraq and other locations without charge or trial and allowing those
civilian and military officials responsible for orchestrating a systematic
policy of torture to escape accountability.

Instead of attacking us, President Bush should insist upon a truly thorough,
independent investigation of those who tried to circumvent global prohibitions
on torture, and he should open all detention centers to scrutiny by independent
human rights groups.

Only then will the world be able to judge whether it is Amnesty International or
the president whose perspective deserves to be called ''absurd.''

William F. Schulz
Exec. Dir., Amnesty International
New York, June 1, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); IRAQ
WAR (76%); TERRORISM (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POLITICS (73%) United
States Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%) Amnesty International

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) William F Schulz; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (93%); IRAQ (93%); CHINA (92%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Uzbek Ministries in Crackdown Received U.S. Aid

BYLINE: By C.J. CHIVERS and THOM SHANKER; Mr. Chivers reported from Moscow and
Kyrgyzstan for this article, and Mr. Shanker from Washington. Additional
reporting was contributed by Ethan Wilensky-Lanford in Kyrgyzstan and Tashkent,
and Alain Delaqueriere in New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1582 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 17


Uzbek law enforcement and security ministries implicated by witnesses in the
deadly crackdown in the city of Andijon last month have for years received
training and equipment from counterterrorism programs run by the United States,
according to American officials and Congressional records.

The security aid, provided by several United States agencies, has been intended
in part to improve the abilities of soldiers and law enforcement officers from
the Uzbek intelligence service, military and Ministry of Internal Affairs, the
national law enforcement service. Besides equipment aid, at least hundreds of
special forces soldiers and security officers, many of whom fight terrorism,
have received training.

Witnesses and American officials say the Uzbek Army, law enforcement and
intelligence service were all present at the crackdown. Among them was a special
Internal Affairs counterterrorism unit known as Bars, which has two or three
members who trained in a course sponsored by the State Department for
crisis-response commanders in Louisiana in 2004, according to the State
Department.

It is not clear whether these specific officers were present in Andijon,
although their unit was. Several United States officials said they had no
evidence that any of the hundreds of individual troops or security officers with
American training took part in the violence. At the same time, however, they
said they were not certain that no American-trained personnel were present.

The uncertainty, officials said, is one reason an independent investigation of
the violence is necessary. ''Until Uzbek authorities allow an independent and
credible investigation to occur, we cannot know who was responsible or was
involved,'' said Tom Casey, a State Department spokesman.

The participation of ministries that have received American aid underscores the
implicit gamble in giving security help to a repressive state.

The United States has worked closely with Uzbekistan, a corrupt and autocratic
state with a chilling human rights record, in the fight against international
terrorism. It has also tried to professionalize the Uzbek military, improve its
border security and help secure materials that could be used in nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons -- areas of engagement that American officials
say are of clear national interest.

But such policies can backfire, improving the martial abilities of units that
commit crimes against Uzbek citizens, and associating the United States with
repression in the eyes of Uzbek people and the Islamic world. Uzbekistan is an
overwhelmingly Muslim country with severe restrictions on freedoms of worship
and expression.

Hundreds of civilians were killed when Uzbek forces fired into dense crowds on
May 13, according to survivors and human rights organizations. The crackdown,
which the Uzbek government has described as a counterterrorism operation,
crushed an antigovernment rally that was prompted by an armed uprising and a
prison break.

As Western nations renew calls for an independent investigation, witnesses and
American officials say one focus is on the actions of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs.

Survivors, diplomats and American officials have said in interviews that the
ministry, run by Col. Gen. Zakirdzhon Almatov, provided principal units involved
in the crackdown.

General Almatov was present in Andijon on May 13, and he negotiated by telephone
with Abdulzhon Parpiev, a leader of the uprising, according to a survivor who
witnessed the conversations and a senior diplomat in Tashkent, the Uzbek
capital.

The diplomat, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of his posting in the
repressive state, said General Almatov and President Islam A. Karimov
coordinated the actions of Uzbek forces that day.

Among forces under General Almatov's command were two special counterterrorism
units, Bars and Skorpion, according to survivors, a relative of one of Bars
members, a Bars driver and several Uzbeks familiar with the crackdown, all of
whom spoke on condition of anonymity out of fear for their safety. American
military officials say they have information that those units were present.

Bars, which survivors said was particularly active, is thought to have at least
300 members. It has previously worked in the Fergana Valley, a region that
guerrillas from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, a group with links to Al
Qaeda, have raided in the past.

Much else about the crackdown remains unknown. The full list of units present
and names of their commanders have not been made public. Nor have the nature of
orders and roles of specific units in the worst hours of violence and roundups.
It is not publicly known whether the most lethal shooting was deliberate or the
result of poor discipline, or both.

But an examination of elements of the security aid by The New York Times has
found that the United States has provided extensive aid to the ministries, and
the types of units, that took part in the crackdown. The aid was not limited to
the Pentagon's widely publicized assistance to the Uzbek military.

William C. Lambert, a retired Army officer who was the Central Asia desk officer
for the United States Central Command in the late 1990's through 2000, before
moving to Tashkent to manage a border security program with Uzbek forces, said
there were many other means of providing aid, including aid to special interior
ministry troops.

''A myriad of other programs were authorized to work with them,'' he said. Mr.
Lambert is now an assistant professor at the Army Command and General Staff
College in Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

State Department reports to Congress show that under a program managed by the
department known as Anti-Terrorism Assistance, 18 Uzbek security officers flew
to Louisiana last year to attend a Crisis Response Team-Tactical Commander
course. Such classes typically train officers in techniques for confronting
terrorist actions; among them were the two or three members of Bars.

An additional 12 Uzbek security officers, from the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and the general prosecutor's office received ''antiterrorism instructor
training'' in 2003 in New Mexico. Such training typically prepares officers with
tactics and techniques they then teach units at home.

The officers who attended were part of the 150 Uzbek security officers trained
that year, during which the United States' Anti-Terrorism Assistance program
provided $2.2 million to Uzbekistan.

''We provide antiterrorism assistance in Uzbekistan and elsewhere to help
foreign police better address terrorist threats, and not for other purposes,''
Mr. Casey said. He noted that there were reliable accounts of the shooting of
hundreds of people in Andijon. ''There can be no excuse for this grave violation
of the human rights of so many innocent Uzbek citizens,'' he said.

Since at least the mid-1990's, the Pentagon, the State Department, the Drug
Enforcement Agency, the Central Intelligence Agency and other American
government agencies have provided training or nonlethal equipment to Uzbekistan.

The equipment has included Humvees, jeeps, trucks, patrol boats, night-vision
goggles, binoculars, two-way radios with encryption abilities, flak jackets,
helmets, portable radiation detectors and more.

The Pentagon has also sent Navy SEAL teams and Special Forces to Uzbekistan to
train its military in tactics, marksmanship and patrolling, as well as in human
rights and laws of war. Participants are vetted to ensure they have no history
of human rights violations, the Pentagon said. A senior Defense Department
official said the training had included an Uzbek special forces battalion.

The Pentagon, which uses an Uzbek air base to support operations in Afghanistan,
has conducted an initial review of units present in Andijon, and said it had no
information that personnel it trained had taken part in the crackdown. It also
said it had not trained personnel of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The Drug Enforcement Agency has also been active, establishing an elite
25-member ''sensitive investigation unit'' in the ministry in 2003. There has
been no public allegation that this unit was involved in the crackdown; the
agency did not answer written questions about its cooperation with the ministry.

Another American official said the Central Intelligence Agency had trained Uzbek
intelligence service personnel, but not Internal Affairs Ministry security
officers, including members of Bars or Skorpion.

In addition to the presence of Bars, which has American-trained personnel, there
are other potential routes by which American-trained soldiers or law enforcement
officers might have been involved.

Pentagon officials acknowledge that there is personnel movement between the
Uzbek Internal Affairs and Defense Ministries, and it is possible that Uzbeks
who received American training in one unit could have taken part in the
crackdown as member of other units or agencies.

''You can't vet for life,'' a Pentagon official said. ''We can only know these
people up until the point at which they finish their training and move on, if
they leave units that are part of our mil-to-mil cooperation.''

Uzbekistan has resisted calls for an independent international investigation;
its Internal Affairs and Defense Ministries did not reply to written requests
for interviews about their actions in Andijon and relationships with the United
States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%);
WITNESSES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERNAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (77%); POLITICAL
PROTESTS (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BORDER CONTROL (73%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (71%); CORRUPTION (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
RIOTS (66%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (64%); RELIGION (64%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(62%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (62%); INTERVIEWS (60%) United States International
Relations; Demonstrations and Riots; Politics and Government; Terrorism; Freedom
and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: State Department

PERSON: C J Chivers; Thom Shanker

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UZBEKISTAN (96%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Andijon (Uzbekistan); Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Commissioner Urges U.N. to Act Quickly on Darfur

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 16


The United Nations' top human rights official said Wednesday that any delay in
prosecuting war crimes from the conflicted Darfur region of Sudan would risk
lives and end the hope of forging eventual peace, a statement that intensified
pressure on the United States to put aside its opposition to the International
Criminal Court.

Louise Arbour, the high commissioner for human rights, told the Security Council
that a United Nations commission report last month on mass violence in Darfur
had made a ''very compelling case'' for referral of atrocities there to the
international court in The Hague. She urged the Council to act speedily.

''There is no hope for sustainable peace in Darfur without immediate access to
justice,'' Ms. Arbour said.

She was briefing the Council on the commission's report, which found that mass
killings and forced displacement of villagers did not legally constitute
genocide but did amount to crimes against humanity.

In calling for the crimes to be referred to the court in The Hague, the
commission gave Secretary General Kofi Annan a list of 51 names of suspects and
evidence against them.

Ms. Arbour told reporters that the list probably included members of the
Sudanese government, anti-government rebels and Arab militiamen equipped by the
government and responsible for a campaign of killing, raping and destruction
that has left up to two million black African villagers homeless and cost the
lives of an estimated 300,000 more.

''The imperative is to act very quickly,'' she said, ''because crimes continue
to be perpetrated as we speak. This is a case where to indict and arrest certain
persons could actually prevent the commission of crimes and actually save lives
and protect victims.''

The United States circulated a draft resolution on Monday that would send
peacekeepers into the region and impose an arms embargo, an asset freeze and
restrictions on offensive military flights. But the proposal would put off until
a second resolution any decision on where to try Darfur war crimes.

The Bush administration has been in the forefront of recommending tough action
on Sudan, but it opposes the court in The Hague, which it believes could bring
political prosecutions against Americans abroad. It has been lobbying instead
for a new court for Sudan atrocities to be convened in Arusha, Tanzania.

Ms. Arbour said the commission had explicitly ruled out such a tribunal as
''unduly time-consuming and expensive.''

''With an already existing set of well-defined rules of procedure and
evidence,'' she said, ''the court is the best-suited institution for ensuring
speedy investigations leading to arrests and demonstrably fair trials.''

The United States left a specific judicial proposal out of its draft after
finding scant enthusiasm for the Arusha option among the 15 Council members, at
least 9 of which are strong backers of the international court. Mr. Annan also
favors the court and told the Council on Wednesday that ''it is vital that these
crimes are not left unpunished.''

In an interview about the continuing violence in Darfur, Jan Egeland, the United
Nations emergency relief coordinator, said the failure to establish security was
preventing relief workers from reaching nearly a million people who were without
food, water or sanitation and would starve unless help arrived. ''The situation
is catastrophically bad at the moment, and it is going to get much worse unless
action is taken,'' he said. Despite the presence of 9,000 Sudanese and foreign
relief workers, he said, the needy are out of reach because of road closings,
attacks on supply helicopters and looting of vehicles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (76%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (73%); CRIME PREVENTION (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); ARMS EMBARGOES (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%) United Nations; United Nations Commission on Human Rights;
International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Louise Arbour; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); NETHERLANDS (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

With the Gloves Off

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 742 words


A photo of President Bush gingerly holding a month-old baby was on the front
page of yesterday's New York Times. Mr. Bush is in the habit of telling us how
precious he thinks life is, all life.

The story was about legislation concerning embryonic stem cell research, and it
included a comment from Tom DeLay urging Americans to reject ''the treacherous
notion that while all human lives are sacred, some are more sacred than
others.''

Ahh, pretty words. Now I wonder when Mr. Bush and Mr. DeLay will find the time
to address -- or rather, to denounce -- the depraved ways in which the United
States has dealt with so many of the thousands of people (many of them
completely innocent) who have been swept up in the so-called war on terror.

People have been murdered, tortured, rendered to foreign countries to be
tortured at a distance, sexually violated, imprisoned without trial or in some
cases simply made to ''disappear'' in an all-American version of a practice
previously associated with brutal Latin American dictatorships. All of this has
been done, of course, in the name of freedom.

The government would prefer to keep these matters secret, but we're living in a
digital age of near-instantaneous communication. Evidence of atrocities tend to
emerge sooner rather than later, frequently illustrated with color photos or
videos.

A recent report from Physicians for Human Rights is the first to comprehensively
examine the use of psychological torture by Americans against detainees in Iraq,
Afghanistan and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The employment of psychological
torture, the report says, was a direct result of decisions developed by civilian
and military leaders to ''take the gloves off'' during interrogations and
''break'' prisoners through the use of techniques like ''sensory deprivation,
isolation, sleep deprivation, forced nudity, the use of military working dogs to
instill fear, cultural and sexual humiliation, mock executions, and the threat
of violence or death toward detainees or their loved ones.''

''Although the evidence is far from complete,'' the report says, ''what is known
warrants the inference that psychological torture was central to the
interrogation process and reinforced through conditions of confinement.''

In other words, this insidious and deeply inhumane practice was not the work of
a few bad apples. As we have seen from many other investigations, the abuses
flowed inexorably from policies promulgated at the highest levels of government.

Warfare, when absolutely unavoidable, is one thing. But it's a little difficult
to understand how these kinds of profoundly dehumanizing practices -- not to
mention the physical torture we've heard so much about -- could be
enthusiastically embraced by a government headed by men who think all life is
sacred. Either I'm missing something, or President Bush, Tom DeLay and their ilk
are fashioning whole new zones of hypocrisy for Americans to inhabit.

There's nothing benign about psychological torture. The personality of the
victim can disintegrate entirely. Common effects include memory impairment,
nightmares, hallucinations, acute stress disorder and severe depression with
vegetative symptoms. The damage can last for many years.

Torturing prisoners, rather than making the U.S. safer, puts us all in greater
danger. The abuses of detainees at places like Guantanamo and the Abu Ghraib
prison in Iraq have come to define the United States in the minds of many
Muslims and others around the world. And the world has caught on that large
percentages of the people swept up and incarcerated as terrorists by the U.S.
were in fact innocent of wrongdoing and had no connection to terrorism at all.

Bitterness against the U.S. has increased exponentially since the initial
disclosures about the abuse of detainees. What's the upside of policies that
demean the U.S. in the eyes of the world while at the same time making us less
rather than more secure?

The government, like an addict in denial, will not even admit that we have a
problem.

''We're in this Orwellian situation,'' said Leonard Rubenstein, the executive
director of Physicians for Human Rights, ''where the statements by the
administration, by the president, are unequivocal: that the United States does
not participate in, or condone, torture. And yet it has engaged in legal
interpretations and interrogation policies that undermine that absolutist
stance.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); BIOETHICS (77%); WAR ON TERROR (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); CORRECTIONS (72%); STEM
CELL RESEARCH (72%); TERRORISM (68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(68%); NAVIES (68%); GENOCIDE (67%); DOGS (67%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE
(57%); MURDER (53%) Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)
Physicians for Human Rights

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Bob Herbert

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (93%); IRAQ (93%); LATIN
AMERICA (72%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Bagram (Afghanistan); Iraq; Afghanistan; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Groups Charge Abuse of Witness Law

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


Two leading civil rights groups charge in a new study that the Bush
administration has twisted the American system of due process ''beyond
recognition'' in jailing at least 70 terror suspects as ''material witnesses''
since the Sept. 11 attacks, and the groups are calling on Congress to impose
tougher safeguards.

The report, which is to be released on Monday by the groups, Human Rights Watch
and the American Civil Liberties Union, found that the 70 suspects, about a
quarter of them American citizens and all but one Muslim men, were jailed --
often for weeks or months -- in American facilities without being charged with a
crime. Ultimately, only seven men were formally accused of supporting terrorism,
the report said.

The report, paid for in part by the Open Society Institute, founded by the
financier George Soros, charges that many of the men held as material witnesses
were ''thrust into a Kafkaesque world of indefinite detention without charges,
secret evidence and baseless accusations.''

With Congress locked in a dispute over the government's powers under the
antiterrorism law known as the USA Patriot Act, the report reflects an effort by
civil rights groups to expand the debate to other legal tools the Bush
administration is using against terrorism. The groups recommended a number of
new restrictions on the law's use, and aides to Senator Patrick J. Leahy of
Vermont, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said he would
introduce legislation to limit the government's ability to detain a material
witness indefinitely.

The material witness law, enacted in 1984, allows federal authorities to hold a
person indefinitely if they suspect that the person has information about a
crime and might flee or be unwilling to cooperate.

The law has been used for many years to compel the testimony of thousands of
illegal immigrants in smuggling investigations and other cases. But since the
Sept. 11 attacks, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has significantly expanded
the use of the law in terrorism inquiries.

Justice Department officials have defended their view of the law in interviews
and Congressional testimony, saying they have sought to use it sparingly and
have tried to follow legal safeguards, including allowing those who are jailed
to contact lawyers and challenge their detention.

The only appellate court to rule on the law since the Sept. 11 attacks upheld
its use in the case of a permanent resident from Jordan who had contact with a
Sept. 11 hijacker while a student in San Diego.

''Critics of law enforcement fail to recognize that material witness statutes
are designed with judicial oversight safeguards and are critical to aiding
criminal investigations ranging from organized crime rackets to human
trafficking,'' said Kevin Madden, a spokesman for the Justice Department.

But in the new report, Human Rights Watch and the A.C.L.U. charge that the
Justice Department has abused the law to detain people whom it does not have
enough evidence to charge with terrorism.

''The Justice Department has essentially succeeded in setting a precedent for
lowering the standard they have to meet to jail someone,'' said Anjana Malhotra,
the author of the report.

The department has not given a public accounting of jailed material witnesses
since early 2003, when it told Congress that it had detained fewer than 50
people.

The new study sought to catalog and quantify the treatment of the witnesses, and
it found that a third of them were jailed for at least two months. The study
found that there might have been more than 70 material witnesses, but secrecy
provisions prevented a definitive tally.

Of the 70 who were identified, the report found that 42 were released without
charges being filed; 20 were charged with offenses unrelated to terrorism, like
bank or credit card fraud; 4 were convicted of supporting terrorism; and 3
others are awaiting trial on terrorism charges. The report did not account for
the remaining one. More than a third were ultimately deported, and none are
known to still be held as witnesses.

Few of the material witnesses made national headlines. Among the notable
exceptions were Zacarias Moussaoui, who recently pleaded guilty to terrorism
charges in connection with the Sept. 11 attacks; Jose Padilla, who was later
declared an enemy combatant after the authorities accused him of plotting to
build a nuclear ''dirty bomb''; and Brandon Mayfield, a Muslim lawyer in
Portland, Ore., who was jailed in connection with the Madrid train bombings of
2004 after the F.B.I. mistakenly matched a fingerprint of his to the scene.

Government officials apologized to Mr. Mayfield and at least a dozen other
material witnesses who they admitted were wrongfully detained, the report said.
''But,'' it added, ''apologies are poor compensation for loss of liberty, as
well as the emotional toll that incarceration has had on the detainees and their
families.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); DUE PROCESS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (88%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); LEGISLATION (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); RELIGION (75%); ORGANIZED CRIME (74%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); SMUGGLING
(73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); HIJACKING (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (69%); INTERVIEWS (69%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (67%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); APPEALS
COURTS (50%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (50%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Islam; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%);
ACLU FOUNDATION (57%); OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (56%) Human Rights Watch; American
Civil Liberties Union; Justice Department

PERSON: GEORGE SOROS (70%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) Eric Lichtblau; George W (Pres)
Bush

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 2, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese TV Director Sued by Falun Gong Claims Free Speech Protection in the U.S.

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1045 words


Zhao Zhizhen, the director of a local television station in Wuhan, China, was in
New Haven last summer, spending time with his daughter after seeing her graduate
from Yale. Followers of Falun Gong, a spiritual practice banned in China, found
him there and served him with a federal lawsuit. His station's programs, they
said, had incited violence against them in China.

Suits against Chinese officials by the movement's adherents in courts around the
world are not unusual, and the officials typically ignore them.

But Mr. Zhao, who says the suit challenges his honor as an independent and
objective journalist, has taken a different approach. In a filing on Thursday in
the Federal District Court in New Haven, he said American free speech principles
should protect him.

The case tests the bounds of the Alien Tort Statute, a 215-year-old law that
allows foreigners to sue in federal court over serious human rights violations
anywhere in the world. In June, the United States Supreme Court, in a separate
case, upheld the law but said lower courts should apply it cautiously.

The case against Mr. Zhao also pits a growing international hostility to
statements disparaging ethnic and religious groups against the American singular
tolerance for such speech.

The plaintiffs in the case, a class action, said in their court papers that the
broadcasts Mr. Zhao produced and supervised were propaganda ''reminiscent of
Nazi stereotypes of Jews and Ku Klux Klan stereotypes of African Americans.''

Mr. Zhao, who has returned to China, responded that his programs were little
different from ''60 Minutes,'' ''20/20'' and ''Nova.'' They cast, he said in a
sworn statement, a skeptical eye on the unusual claims made for the movement's
practices.

Falun Gong is a form of qigong, an ancient Chinese practice of yogalike
breathing exercises. ''It is seen by supporters as a spiritual group dedicated
to inner serenity,'' Mr. Zhao's court papers say, ''and by critics as a
mind-control cult led by Li Hongzhi, a charlatan who claims supernatural
powers.''

The Chinese government outlawed Falun Gong in 1999. Members of the movement say
they have been sent to prisons, labor camps and mental hospitals and that they
have been tortured with electric shocks and nerve-damaging drugs.

Independent human rights groups have confirmed many of the charges. The State
Department, too, most recently in a September report on religious freedom in
China, said that ''there have been credible reports of deaths due to torture and
abuse.''

Bruce S. Rosen, Mr. Zhao's lawyer, said his client was not aware of such abuses.

''If someone has been tortured or mistreated in the way it's described in the
complaint,'' Mr. Rosen said, referring to the lawsuit, ''it's not something he
would support.''

The central question in the suit, Mr. Rosen said, is whether an American court
should entertain an objection to Chinese journalism. ''The plaintiffs are
attempting to use a U.S. law to punish him for his speech,'' Mr. Rosen said.

Terri E. Marsh, a lawyer representing the plaintiffs in the Connecticut suit,
disagreed. ''It's not a free speech case,'' she said. ''It's a torture case.''

At least a half-dozen suits by followers of Falun Gong have been filed against
Chinese officials in the United States. The suits are the source of considerable
diplomatic friction, and the State Department has filed papers in several cases
urging courts not to hear them.

Mr. Zhao is apparently proceeding without official support. ''I do not know of
any connection between the Chinese government and this litigation,'' Mr. Rosen
said.

It is difficult to reconcile Mr. Zhao's description of his work with the
plaintiffs' version.

''I have tremendous autonomy,'' he told the court in his statement, ''just as
Western journalists do.''

''This type of reporting,'' he added, ''is no different than reports by United
States news outlets reporting on various cults, from David Koresh to Sun Myung
Moon to Scientology.''

Mr. Zhao provided the court with an English translation of the transcript of one
program cited by the plaintiffs, a profile of Mr. Li that was broadcast in 1999.
It was, according to the transcript, largely a series of interviews with people
who had become disillusioned with Falun Gong. It was framed by not especially
fiery socialist rhetoric, and it contained no explicit calls to violence.

The plaintiffs say other programs were uglier. ''The tactics deployed in these
media reports and TV shows are virtually identical to those used in Rwanda
during the genocide of the Tutsi by the Hutu,'' they said in their papers.

A year ago, the international war crimes tribunal in Tanzania convicted three
men for using a radio station and newspaper to incite genocide in Rwanda. The
tribunal suggested that American law, which it called ''the most speech
protective'' in the world, might have called for a different result.

American tolerance for hate speech is indeed extreme by international standards.
In 1969, the United States Supreme Court said a speech by a Ku Klux Klan leader
that urged followers to ''send the Jews back to Israel'' and to ''bury'' blacks
was lawful. The only exception under the First Amendment, the court said, was
for advocacy ''directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action.''

Morton Sklar, the executive director of World Organization for Human Rights USA,
a nongovernmental organization that works to stop torture, said the Connecticut
court should rule against Mr. Zhao under principles of international law.

''Certain kinds of speech do not qualify for protection as free speech,'' Mr.
Sklar said. ''When someone promotes the use of torture and promotes genocide or
promotes the extermination of a group for its spiritual beliefs, that line has
been crossed.''

Peter J. Spiro, a specialist in international law at the University of Georgia
School of Law in Athens, said the case against Mr. Zhao ''is not completely
without foundation'' in light of the Rwanda judgment.

''But that case,'' he said, ''involved broadcasters who in effect were directing
traffic for the Rwanda massacres -- telling persecutors where to find their
victims and the like. In that case direct complicity with the genocidal activity
was clear. Not so in the case against Zhao.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Falun Gong followers filed a federal suit against Zhao Zhizhen
(shown with his mother in Wuhan), director of a TV station in China, while he
was in New Haven. They said his station incited violence against them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF SPEECH (91%); LITIGATION (91%); CULTS & SECTS (90%); LOCAL
TELEVISION STATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (90%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); JOURNALISM (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); CLASS
ACTIONS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); EVIDENCE (76%); SUPREME COURTS (76%); FREEDOM
OF EXPRESSION (74%); LAWYERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); FREEDOM OF
RELIGION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TORTS (72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (71%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (69%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE (67%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (66%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (50%) Freedom of Speech and
Expression; Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and Litigation; Television; Politics
and Government; Law and Legislation; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (55%) Falun Gong (Spiritual
Movement)

PERSON: Adam Liptak; Zhao Zhizhen

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (90%)

STATE: CENTRAL CHINA (93%); CONNECTICUT, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: China; United States; China

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

County Examines Ban of Gay Group

BYLINE: By JENNIFER MEDINA

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 613 words


PROTESTING New York Medical College's decision to ban a gay student group on
campus, Joshua Lipsman, the Westchester County Health commissioner, has resigned
from a voluntary teaching position at the school in Valhalla.

The county's Human Rights Commission is also beginning an investigation to
determine whether the administration's decision to ban the group violates county
human rights laws. If the school is found in violation of the laws, the
commission could fine the university or recommend that the county sever its
relationships, such as internships and joint studies, with the school.

College officials have said the school is affiliated with the Archdiocese of New
York, but does not receive financing from the Roman Catholic Church.

Dr. Lipsman is the former executive director of the Gay Men's Health Crisis in
New York City and has been a vocal advocate for gay and lesbian health education
programs in Westchester.

Joshua Sahara, a second-year medical student, applied for financing for a group
called Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender People in Medicine in the spring
2004 semester and learned of the school's decision late last fall. The college
told the group, which has about 15 members, that it would not receive financing,
and that they could not hold meetings on campus as a student group. Last month,
school administrators said the group ''would advocate and promote behaviors
inconsistent with the values of N.Y.M.C.''

Since then, school officials have refused to discuss the matter further with Mr.
Sahara, he said.

County Executive Andrew J. Spano also criticized the school's actions last week.

''This is an injustice to students and a blatant violation of the county's
anti-discrimination policy,'' he said in a statement. ''Students, whether gay or
straight, should have a forum to discuss issues that affect them and that will
help them improve the delivery of health care services to gay, lesbian and
transgender patients.''

The investigation is the first the Human Rights Commission has begun without
receiving a formal complaint from an individual, said Alison E. Greene,
executive director of the commission. The investigation will likely be completed
within two months, she said. Donna Moriarty, a spokeswoman for medical school,
said it would comply with the county's investigation.

''We do not discriminate in any way in admissions, academic programs,
graduation, faculty and staff appointments or promotions on the basis of sexual
orientation,'' the school said in a statement. ''Our curriculum and academic
programs ensure students learn about health care issues of people of different
sexual orientations, yet the college upholds the right of students, faculty and
employees to preserve their privacy in strictly personal areas, including their
sexuality.''

County officials say the nature of the college's relationship to the Catholic
Church is unclear. Several other Catholic colleges and universities in the
country have gay student groups similar to the organization Mr. Sahara was
leading.

Despite the support from county officials, Mr. Sahara said he was worried the
medical school was effectively silencing other students who are involved in the
group. Several have said they were concerned school officials would negatively
affect their internship and residency placements.

''There are some more radical points of view that think we just should be
pushing forward and doing things anyway,'' Mr. Sahara said. ''But what it really
comes down to is that the actual work of hanging a poster has to be done by a
student. It's asking a lot to have someone take that risk.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (93%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (90%); EXTRA CURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES (90%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (90%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (90%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); STUDENT
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (89%); HEALTH CARE
(89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); COUNTIES (89%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (89%);
RELIGION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%);
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (89%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); APPRENTICESHIPS & INTERNSHIPS (78%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (78%);
PERSONNEL CHANGES (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (78%); GENDER &
SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (78%);
CURRICULA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); EXECUTIVES (74%); MEN (73%); MEN'S HEALTH (73%) Homosexuality;
Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: GAY MEN'S HEALTH CRISIS (56%) New York Medical College (Valhalla,
NY)

PERSON: Joshua (Comr) Lipsman; Jennifer Medina

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Westchester County (NY)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Group Says Pentagon's Plan Would Expand Its Enemy List

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


Pentagon planners are proposing that military commanders be authorized to
declare someone an enemy combatant and detain him if he belongs to any of
hundreds of suspected terrorist organizations, a human rights group said on
Thursday.

The extensive list of groups suspected of terrorism is part of a 142-page draft
proposal to the Joint Chiefs of Staff that is intended to provide an
all-inclusive guide for military commanders on their obligations and authority
for detaining people.

John Sifton, a senior official of Human Rights Watch who provided the document,
said it was a radical departure for the government to assert that membership in
such a broad range of groups could qualify a person to be deemed an enemy
combatant, a term that has previously been used mostly for members of Al Qaeda
and the Taliban.

The government has used the term ''enemy combatant'' for detainees who are not
covered by the protections of the Geneva Conventions. The Bush administration
has argued that such detainees may be held indefinitely, unlike prisoners of
war, who must be released when combat ends.

The precise reach of the term, however, has never been explicit.

The draft report also contains instructions to military commanders to heed both
domestic and international law against abusing detainees. A Defense Department
spokesman said Thursday night that the document was still being reviewed.

''The development of this document shows the steps taken to help insure our
service members understand the fundamentals of detention operations and the
detainee safeguards necessary for successful detention operations,'' the
spokesman said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%);
LAW OF WAR (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); POWS & MIAS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); TALIBAN
(73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) Terrorism; United States
Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); AL-QAEDA (56%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
(58%); PRISONERS OF WAR (55%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Neil A Lewis

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Cites Rumsfeld And Tenet in Report on Abuse

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


A human rights group issued a report on Saturday calling for a special
prosecutor to examine the conduct of Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld and
the former director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, in issues related
to the abuse of detainees.

Drawing largely on news reports and publicly available military reviews, the
group, Human Rights Watch, concluded that there was ''overwhelming evidence that
U.S. mistreatment and torture of Muslim prisoners took place not merely at Abu
Ghraib, but at facilities throughout Afghanistan and Iraq as well as at
Guantanamo and at 'secret locations' around the world in violation of the Geneva
Convention and the laws against torture.''

The report found no indication that Mr. Rumsfeld warned those under his command
to halt abusive treatment of detainees and said that he should be investigated
for abuses under a doctrine of ''command responsibility.'' Mr. Rumsfeld has said
he made it clear to subordinates that he did not condone mistreatment.

The report found that Mr. Tenet had been responsible for policies that sent
detainees to countries where they were tortured, which made him potentially
liable as an accomplice to torture. Mr. Tenet has not addressed the issue
publicly, but C.I.A. officials have long said that Mr. Tenet insisted that
agency personnel carefully follow the law.

A special prosecutor was needed to investigate these matters, the report said,
because Alberto R. Gonzales, the attorney general, had a conflict of interest
because he ''was himself deeply involved in the policies leading to these
alleged crimes.''

The report said that of seven investigations by the Pentagon, none had
critically examined the role of the civilian leaders with ultimate authority
over detainee policy. Investigations into case-by-case abuses have largely
focused on lower-level personnel. Bush administration officials have repeatedly
said that the government's policies prohibit civilian and military personnel
from engaging in torture and that anyone found to have used abusive procedures
would be held accountable and would face possible prosecution.

So far, the government has shown no interest in an independent inquiry.
Republicans in Congress have blocked requests by Democrats to examine
allegations of detainee abuse. At the same time, the Justice Department has
ignored requests to appoint a special prosecutor.

An Army investigation has cleared all but one of the five most senior Army
officers who were responsible for detainee policies in Iraq, according to news
reports on Saturday.

The Central Intelligence Agency has begun internal inquiries into specific
instances of abuse by intelligence officers, but the report noted that none of
those inquiries or their conclusions had been made public.

''This pattern of abuse across several countries did not result from the acts of
individual soldiers who broke the rules,'' said a statement by Reed Brody,
special counsel for Human Rights Watch. ''It resulted from decisions made by
senior U.S. officials to bend, ignore or cast the rules aside.''

Last week, the vice chairman of the senate intelligence committee, John D.
Rockefeller, Democrat of West Virginia, said that Congress had ''largely ignored
the issue'' and offered an amendment to an appropriations bill that would
require an inquiry into the treatment of detainees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
ARMIES (89%); CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%);
INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(55%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (58%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Often Shunted Into Special Schools, Gypsies Fight Back

BYLINE: By DINAH A. SPRITZER

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Education Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: OSTRAVA, Czech Republic


Iveta Bihariova recalls how she nervously watched her 9-year-old son, Ivan,
while a psychiatrist in a white lab coat threw colored candies on the floor.

''I rushed to pick up the candy because I didn't know that it was a test,'' said
Mrs. Bihariova, taking a break from picking up garbage strewn across a Roma, or
Gypsy, housing project in the Czech city of Ostrava, close to the Polish border.

''After that, the psychiatrist told me that since Ivan didn't pick up the candy,
he was too slow and should go to a special school.''

Czech Republic officials estimate that up to 75 percent of the Roma children in
the country are like Ivan -- attending schools intended for the mentally
disabled and receiving what human rights groups contend is a substandard
education that can lead to a lifetime of unemployment, dependence on welfare and
even crime. Now, advocates for Roma rights have begun legal action to change the
situation.

The country's 120 ''special'' schools, the term traditionally used to describe
the combined elementary and middle schools for the mentally disabled in the
Czech Republic, were created by the Communist government in the 1960's. Their
graduates are largely ineligible to apply to college or to obtain a job beyond
the most basic manual labor.

According to the State Department's annual human rights report issued in March,
90 percent of the children in Czech special schools are Roma. Critics of the
government's education policy charge that this is the result of bias, and
lawyers representing Roma children have filed the first systematic legal
challenge against school discrimination in Europe.

The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, is considering whether
to hear the case of 18 teenagers from Ostrava who argue that their placement in
special schools in the late 1990's violated their right to protection against
discrimination granted under Czech and European law.

Their lawyer, James A. Goldston, senior counsel for the European Roma Rights
Center in Budapest, compared the Ostrava case to Brown v. Board of Education,
the landmark 1954 United States Supreme Court decision that moved a nation
toward desegregation.

''What you have in the Czech Republic, and to some extent Eastern Europe, is de
facto segregation. The majority of Roma children in the Czech Republic get a
second-class education and never get past the eighth grade, by the Czech
government's own admission,'' Mr. Goldston said.

Jiri Pilar, director of the Department of Special Needs Education for the Czech
Republic, denies any systematic discrimination against Roma and, instead, blames
parents for their children's poor educational results.

''We simply have not been successful in getting Roma parents to take sufficient
interest in their children's education,'' he said. ''I worked in a diagnostic
institute for 15 years, and even in the case where a Roma child could
potentially make it in a normal school, the parents simply didn't care enough.
They didn't push.''

A panel of judges at the Strasbourg court held preliminary hearings in March. A
court decision on whether to accept the case is due within a few weeks. If the
Ostrava plaintiffs win, experts say, the case could have consequences across
Europe, particularly in countries like Bulgaria, Romania and Slovakia.

''As Europe continues to grow increasingly diverse, this case is of great
significance for all minorities because it makes clear that racial
discrimination has no place in Europe,'' said Rachel Denber, director of the
Europe and Central Asia division at Human Rights Watch.

The Roma, dark in complexion, are thought to have migrated to Europe from India
centuries ago. Their nomadic life set them apart from other groups, and their
history has been one of poverty and persecution. They are the poorest and
largest minority group in Europe, with large numbers concentrated in former
Communist countries.

Under communism, they received generous state subsidies; today, both Roma and
government representatives say that assistance has led to a cycle of dependence.

Making up about 2.5 percent of the Czech population, the country's 300,000 Roma
have a 70 percent unemployment rate. They also have significantly higher crime
rates than the non-Roma population, Roma leaders concede. Few Roma finish high
school.

''We have to convince the Roma that to live like regular decent people, if I can
put it like that, is a lot better for them than to live from hand to mouth on
the edge of society just because they don't want to go to school and work,'' Mr.
Pilar said.

Kumar Vishwanathan, an Ostrava activist and a teacher from India credited with
first exposing the inequity in Roma education, argued that the cultural bias of
Czech officials relegates Roma children to the special schools, a path that
continues the cycle of dependency and social pathology.

''First, the tests that evaluate mental ability and determine what school these
kids were sent to were always in Czech,'' he said. ''Roma kids speak a Roma
dialect or ghetto Czech, so they were doomed to fail.''

But Mr. Vishwanathan acknowledged that Roma parents, who must approve their
children's placement, often want the youngsters to be in special schools because
they are more comfortable there.

Ms. Bihariova, mother of Ivan, now 14, said he is faring well in special school.
''It's easier for him; the teachers are nicer to Roma there,'' she said. Jan
Ziga, a Roma teenager who is also from Ostrava, said he sought a transfer to a
special school ''because the teachers in the normal school called Roma nasty
names.''

The government has taken several steps to improve Roma education.

Tests were standardized in 1998, based on a British model that Mr. Pilar said
removed cultural bias. Children attending special schools were given the chance
to take an extra year of coursework and apply to regular high schools, although
only a tiny percentage have done so.

The state is also continuing to increase the number of Roma teaching assistants,
who have proven successful in bridging the gap between Roma students and
teachers in regular classrooms. A new education law that went into effect in
January requires standard schools to accommodate children with behavioral or
learning problems. Officials say they hope this change will mean more Roma
children will attend regular schools.

The effort may come too late for Katrin Dzurkova, one of the 18 teenagers in the
Ostrava lawsuit.

Now 13, she was 6 when she was told that she belonged in a special school,
although she has not given up hope.

After hesitating and then fighting embarrassment, she explained in an almost
inaudible voice why she is going to court.

''I want a better education; I want a job. I want to be normal,'' she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At top, Monica Dzurkova, left, with her daughter Katrin in
Ostrava, Czech Republic. Above, students during a break at a ''special'' school.
Ninety percent of the children in Czech special schools are Gypsies.
(Photographs by Pavel Horejsi for The New York Times)Map of Czech Republic shows
the location of Ostrava: A lawsuit has been filed on behalf of 18 teenagers from
Ostrava.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); CHILDREN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (89%); LITIGATION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(88%); LAWYERS (87%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (76%); SPECIAL EDUCATION (76%); MIDDLE
& JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (74%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (74%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); DISABLED PERSONS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY
(70%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (64%); SETTLEMENTS
& DECISIONS (64%); SUPREME COURTS (63%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (63%); APPEALS
(50%) Education and Schools; Gypsies  ; Special Education (Handicapped);
Discrimination

PERSON: Dinah A Spritzer

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: CZECH REPUBLIC (96%); EUROPE (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%); FRANCE (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (79%); HUNGARY (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Czech Republic

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Tells U.N. That It Continues To Oppose Torture in Any Situation

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


The United States told the United Nations on Friday that despite the abuse of
Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib prison, it continued to oppose torture.

''The United States is unequivocally opposed to the use and practice of
torture,'' the Bush administration declared in a report to the United Nations
Committee Against Torture, adding that ''no circumstance whatsoever, including
war, the threat of war, internal political stability'' or any other dire
situation can justify torture, the report said.

But while the United States vowed to continue investigating suspected abuses at
Abu Ghraib, as well as complaints about the treatment of detainees at the
American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, it fell short, in the view of
critics.

Elisa Massimino, the Washington director of Human Rights First, formerly the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, said the report failed to address ''ghost
detainees,'' people held incommunicado by the C.I.A. and kept isolated.

''I don't know how the United States expects to explain its torture-prevention
policy without mentioning its ghost-detainee problem,'' she said.

The report was prepared by the Department of State in connection with the
Departments of Justice, Defense and Homeland Security and submitted to the
United Nations committee in Geneva. Under a 1994 treaty condemning torture, the
United States and about 140 nations report to the United Nations every four
years.

Critics have asserted that President Bush and his top aides created an
atmosphere that, intentionally or otherwise, led to the abuse of prisoners at
Abu Ghraib and elsewhere and allowed high officials to escape punishment for
wrongs committed by subordinates.

But the report, whose thrust was reported in The Wall Street Journal on
Thursday, sought to dispel those suspicions. ''When allegations of abuses arise,
they in all cases will be investigated and, if substantiated, prosecuted,'' the
document said.

The World Organization for Human Rights U.S.A. also said the report fell short.
It condemned the practice of sending suspected terrorists to countries where
they are questioned under rough circumstances.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); NAVIES (71%); TERRORISM (65%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Torture; Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR
(59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) David Stout; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (90%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 8, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By Joseph P. Fried

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; FOLLOWING UP; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 689 words



Still Working to Free A New Yorker in Peru

 Rhoda Berenson was speaking by phone from her Manhattan apartment recently,
just hours after returning from her latest bittersweet trip to Peru.

Most of the four-and-a-half-day journey had been spent in transit, but she had
two days with her daughter Lori, above, in one of the several coveted visits
that Mrs. Berenson and her husband, Mark, alternately have with Lori each year.

But as with all the visits, it ended with Mrs. Berenson wishing vainly that Lori
could leave with her from the place where they had all too briefly been
together.

Lori Berenson is the former New York resident who is halfway through a 20-year
prison sentence in Peru after being convicted of collaborating with Marxist
revolutionaries in a foiled plot to take the Peruvian Congress hostage in 1995.

That conviction was her second in the case. Originally, she had been found
guilty of treason and sentenced to life in prison by a military judge who was
concealed behind a partition in a trial that was closed to the public and in
which her lawyers were not allowed to cross-examine witnesses. But a vigorous
campaign led by her parents, and pressure from the United States government,
resulted in a retrial in a civilian court, which ended in the collaboration
verdict and the 20-year term.

In December, the Costa Rica-based Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Latin
America's top human rights court, rejected arguments that Ms. Berenson, 35,
should be freed or given a new trial because her second trial also violated her
rights. She says that she did not collaborate in terrorist activities. Some
legal experts said the Inter-American Court had been her last hope for gaining
release before the scheduled expiration of her sentence in 2015.

But her parents, in remarks after Mrs. Berenson's recent trip to Peru, said
that, like their daughter, they had not given up on the possibility of an
earlier release.

''Things change in Peru,'' said Rhoda Berenson, a high school physics teacher.
''They have been giving parole to other political prisoners.''

Mark Berenson, a professor at the Montclair State University School of Business
in New Jersey, said he was considering taking the case to the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights. He called the Inter-American Court's decision
''devastating.''

Mr. Berenson said that conditions in Lori's current prison, in Cajamarca in
northern Peru, were much better than those in her first prison, which was high
up in the Andes and had no glass in the windows to block the frigid mountain
winds.

Mrs. Berenson said that no matter how much longer her daughter remained in
prison, ''she's hoping to have a productive life.''

Two Worker Deaths, With One Prosecution

 In accidents three weeks apart last year, two construction workers were killed
in New York City, and the authorities said the deaths had highlighted the perils
that immigrant construction workers face on day jobs with low pay, no benefits
and inadequate safeguards.

In the first accident, one worker, Angel Segovia, from Ecuador, was killed and
two other workers were seriously injured when a balcony collapsed on a building
under construction in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, sending them plunging 35 feet to the
ground.

Last month, the project's general contractor, Kang Yeon Lee, pleaded guilty to
causing the death and the injuries by failing to provide the men with required
equipment, like harnesses, to prevent falls, according to Roslynn R. Mauskopf,
above, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, whose office prosecuted the case.

Mr. Lee could face up to 16 months in prison for that crime and for his guilty
plea to wage-related fraud on another project. He is also to pay a total of $1
million to Mr. Segovia's family and the injured men.

In the second accident, Jian Guo Shen, an immigrant from China, died and two
other workers were injured when an inadequately braced concrete wall at a home
construction site in Elmhurst, Queens, collapsed on them. The Queens district
attorney's office said last week that it had not decided whether to bring
criminal charges against the builder in that project.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); VERDICTS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); IMMIGRATION (74%); PAROLE (74%); TREASON (74%); TERRORISM
(73%); TESTIMONY (73%); REFUGEES (71%); LAWYERS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); JUDGES (69%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (68%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS
(67%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); POLITICS (60%); HIGH SCHOOLS (60%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (60%); WORKPLACE
HEALTH & SAFETY (60%) Sentences (Criminal); Politics and Government; Political
Prisoners; Prisons and Prisoners; Building (Construction); Labor; Immigration
and Refugees; Accidents and Safety; Housing; Industrial and Occupational Hazards

ORGANIZATION: Inter-American Court of Human Rights

PERSON: Joseph P Fried; Lori Berenson; Jian Guo Shen; Kang Yeon Lee; Angel
Segovia

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); ANDES (78%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); COSTA RICA (79%)

REGION: Peru; Peru; New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

European Court Urges Turkey to Grant Kurdish Leader a New Trial

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH and SEBNEM ARSU; Craig S. Smith reported from Paris
for this article, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 12


Turkey may be forced to order a new trial for a Kurdish separatist leader,
Abdullah Ocalan, after the European Human Rights Court on Thursday upheld an
earlier decision that his 1999 trial was unfair and called on Turkey to reopen
the case.

Turkey is seeking to join the European Union and could jeopardize its
application if it refuses to revisit the case.

''This file can be reopened, but it has been long closed in the people's
conscience,'' said Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is in Hungary on an
official visit. He said the Turkish judicial system would decide whether to
order a retrial after evaluating the European court's decision.

The court, which is based in Strasbourg, France, is not a European Union body,
but defying its wishes could put Turkey in breach of the European Convention on
Human Rights, to which all European Union members must belong.

The European Union will begin formal negotiations over Turkey's application to
join in October.

Many people in Turkey worry that reopening Mr. Ocalan's case could reignite the
fires of Kurdish nationalism, the suppression of which in the 1990's cost more
than 30,000 lives. It could also rekindle a sense of Turkish nationalism, which
could further complicate Turkey's efforts to join the European Union.

''A retrial could reactivate nationalist feelings that can be manipulated by the
anti-E.U. front,'' said Umit Cizre, a political science professor at Bilkent
University. He called the ruling by the European court ''scary'' and urged the
government to explain the reasons behind it to the public.

Mr. Ocalan, who headed the Kurdish Workers' Party, was captured in Kenya in 1999
and extradited to Turkey for trial. After his conviction, he received a death
sentence for treason, but that sentence was later commuted to life in prison
when Turkey abolished capital punishment to comply with European Union
membership requirements.

The European court first ruled in 2003 that Mr. Ocalan had not received a fair
trial and the court's highest authority, the Grand Chamber, upheld that decision
on Thursday.

The reasons for the latest ruling focused on the extended period of time that
Mr. Ocalan was held before standing trial and the limited time allowed for him
to prepare a defense.

Mr. Ocalan is currently the sole inmate of a fortresslike prison on the western
Turkish island of Imrali. He is still regarded by Kurdish rebels operating in
eastern Turkey as their leader.

Gen. Yasar Buyukanit, the head of Turkey's land forces, called the court ruling
''a totally political decision.'' He added, ''Something's wrong when you give a
political decision about a legal matter.''

But Turgut Okyay, the judge who presided over Mr. Ocalan's 1999 trial, told
Turkish state television that he was confident a retrial would result in another
guilty verdict with another life sentence.

President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, arriving back in Turkey from an official visit to
Portugal, suggested that a retrial would not happen soon because reopening Mr.
Ocalan's case would require changes to the country's recently adopted penal
code.

''It is impossible to accept this request given the present legal structuring,''
Mr. Sezer said, adding that it was up to Turkey's Parliament to make the
required changes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION (92%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
ACCESSION (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); POLITICS (75%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(64%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (64%); ISLANDS & REEFS (64%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (63%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Kurds;
Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%)
European Union; European Human Rights Court

PERSON: RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (59%) Craig S Smith; Sebnem Arsu; Abdullah Ocalan

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (99%); TURKEY (97%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); FRANCE
(79%); KENYA (79%); HUNGARY (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Lift Ban On Military Aid To Guatemala

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, March 24


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld announced Thursday that the United States
would lift its ban on military aid to Guatemala, whose government has embarked
on a major effort to change a military accused of kidnappings and massacres
during more than 30 years of civil war.

''I've been impressed by the reforms that have been undertaken in the armed
forces,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said at a joint news conference with President Oscar
Berger of Guatemala. ''I know it is a difficult thing to do but it's been done
with professionalism and transparency.''

Since taking office last year, President Berger has cut the military's troop
strength by close to half, to 15,000 soldiers from 27,000. And he closed several
bases that had been used to stage attacks against an armed insurgency.

Human rights investigations into the violence uncovered significant military
atrocities, conducted under so-called scorched-earth policies. Some 200,000
people were killed or went missing in Guatemala from 1960 to 1996, mostly Mayan
Indian civilians. A United Nations-backed truth commission found that 90 percent
of those deaths were caused by the military.

The United States withdrew aid from Guatemala's military in 1990 after it was
learned that soldiers were involved in the killing of an American named Michael
Devine.

In the joint news conference in Guatemala City on Thursday, Mr. Berger assured
Mr. Rumsfeld that such abuses had ended. ''The shadow that was above our army
has disappeared,'' he said. ''Today we have a transparent army with half the
personnel.''

Human rights organizations denounced the move. Displaced soldiers, they said,
had joined powerful criminal organizations that smuggle drugs and weapons
through Guatemala.

Adriana Beltran, an expert on Guatemala with the Washington Office on Latin
America, a research institution, said Mr. Berger's government had done very
little to stop private groups of gunmen from intimidating and killing people who
were working to uncover past and present human rights abuses in Guatemala.
Rewarding the government with arms sends the wrong message, she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); ARMIES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%);
SMUGGLING (63%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; United States
International Relations; Foreign Aid; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; United
States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: Ginger Thompson; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Oscar (Pres) Berger

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%); MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (98%); UNITED STATES (96%); MEXICO (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

REGION: Guatemala; Guatemala

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Changes at the U.N.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 191 words



To the Editor:

Secretary General Kofi Annan gave a courageous speech on March 21, acknowledging
valid criticisms of the United Nations and calling for profound changes. ''Annan
to Offer Plans for Change in U.N. Structure'' (front page, March 21) was right
to highlight the proposal to replace the Commission on Human Rights with a
smaller Human Rights Council, which would consistently monitor and evaluate
abuses around the world, especially in areas of instability.

But there is a vital corollary: the secretary general also called for the United
Nations to embrace the ''responsibility to protect'' in cases of genocide,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. When a state fails to protect its
own people -- or worse, assaults them -- the international community has an
obligation to act, even intervene.

A Human Rights Council would give us better information about atrocities under
way, an early-warning sign for crises in development. But knowledge of gross
abuses is only part of the equation: it must be matched by the will to stop
them.

Jonathan F. Fanton
President
John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation
Chicago, March 24, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (54%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); JOHN D & CATHERINE T MACARTHUR FOUNDATION
(54%)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cables Show Central Negroponte Role in 80's Covert War Against Nicaragua

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 12


Hundreds of newly released cables that John D. Negroponte sent to Washington
while serving as ambassador to Honduras in the 1980's show that he played a more
central and assertive role than previously known in managing the United States'
covert war against Nicaragua's leftist government, which he called ''our special
project.''

The cables show that Mr. Negroponte worked closely with William J. Casey, then
director of central intelligence, on the Reagan administration's anti-Communist
offensive in Central America. He helped word a secret 1983 presidential
''finding'' authorizing support for the contras, as the Nicaraguan rebels were
known, and met regularly with Honduran military officials to win and retain
their backing for the covert action, the documents show.

The cables add details to the public picture of Mr. Negroponte, President Bush's
nominee to be the first director of national intelligence, as a tough cold
warrior who enthusiastically carried out President Ronald Reagan's strategy.
They show he sent admiring reports to Washington about the Honduran military
chief, who was blamed for human rights violations, warned that peace talks with
the Nicaraguan regime might be a dangerous ''Trojan horse'' and pleaded with
officials in Washington to impose greater secrecy on the Honduran role in aiding
the contras.

The documents, part of Mr. Negroponte's State Department file, were declassified
at Mr. Negroponte's request in 1998 and made public as a result of a Freedom of
Information Act request from The Washington Post, which reported on them
Tuesday. They were posted by the National Security Archive, a private research
group at George Washington University, on its Web site a few hours before Mr.
Negroponte's Senate confirmation hearing Tuesday.

The documents appear to lend some support to the contention of Mr. Negroponte's
critics that he did little to protest human rights abuses by Honduran military
units blamed for abductions, torture and murder. Mr. Negroponte and some of his
fellow diplomats have maintained that he worked behind the scenes against such
abuses, but the cables make few references to the issue.

In fact, after a meeting in October 1983 with the head of the Honduran military,
Gen. Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, who was widely held responsible for human rights
abuses at the time, Mr. Negroponte reported to Washington that General Alvarez
was misunderstood.

Remarks General Alvarez made to him during a plane ride were ''reflective of his
commitment to constitutional government,'' Mr. Negroponte reported. The
general's critics, he wrote, were misled by ''a stereotype'' or ''sheer
ignorance.'' About six months later General Alvarez was forcibly removed from
power by other military officers who accused him of dictatorial tendencies, a
move that took American officials by surprise.

At Mr. Negroponte's confirmation hearing Tuesday, Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of
Oregon, said that even though the events in Honduras took place more than 20
years ago, Mr. Negroponte's record there raised questions about his suitability
for the new job.

Mr. Wyden said Mr. Negroponte's failure to highlight human rights abuses
suggested a tendency to shade his reporting to suit presidential policies.

''It looks like to me you saw things through an administration-colored lens,''
Mr. Wyden said. ''I hope you can convince me that when you brief the president,
the president is going to get all the facts.''

Mr. Negroponte vigorously defended his record in Honduras. ''I certainly believe
that my comportment was always absolutely legal and entirely professional,'' he
said.

Senator Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, dismissed the questions about Honduras as ''an issue of
25 years ago'' with little relevance to the intelligence job.

Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, noted that Mr. Negroponte and his
wife adopted five Honduran children, which he said showed his ''compassion'' for
the Honduran people.

Peter Kornbluh, a Latin America specialist at the National Security Archive who
edited the documents for the Web and wrote accompanying comments, said he
believes the documents show Mr. Negroponte was ''not an honest broker'' in
reporting on Honduras.

''This is a truly see-no-evil, hear-no-evil attitude,'' Mr. Kornbluh said.

The cables suggest that on occasion, Mr. Negroponte's brazenness in pursuing
what was supposed to be a covert action raised eyebrows among his diplomatic
colleagues.

In one message to Mr. Negroponte, the American ambassador to Nicaragua, Anthony
Quainton, gently scolded him for playing host to Adolfo Calero, political leader
of the contras, at a dinner in Tegucigalpa, the Honduran capital.

Mr. Quainton wrote, ''I have my doubts about a dinner at the residence for a man
who is in the business of overthrowing a neighboring government.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); LIBERALISM (77%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%);
TORTURE (71%); ARMED FORCES (69%); PEACE PROCESS (68%); WEB SITES (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (54%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (54%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (54%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (54%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (54%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (54%)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (91%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); RON
WYDEN (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); HONDURAS (95%); NICARAGUA (95%); CENTRAL AMERICA
(73%)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 11, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congress Adopts Restriction On Treatment of Detainees

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


Congress barred the government on Tuesday from using any money in a newly passed
emergency spending bill to subject anyone in American custody to torture or
''cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment'' that is forbidden by the Constitution.

Proponents said the little-noticed provision, in an $82 billion bill devoted
mostly to financing military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, amounted to a
significant strengthening of current policies and practices in the treatment of
prisoners.

Drafted since the disclosure of abuses in Afghanistan and Iraq and at Guantanamo
Bay in Cuba, it lays out a definition of illegal treatment that human rights
groups say is broader than the Bush administration's current interpretation, and
links the ban directly to military spending.

''This sends a clear message to our own government that certain conduct is
simply unacceptable,'' Senator Richard J. Durbin, the Illinois Democrat who
sponsored the provision, said in an interview. ''And it reminds the world that
what happened at the Abu Ghraib prison is not American policy and is not
tolerated.''

The administration, which helped defeat efforts to include antitorture
restrictions in legislation last year, said it did not oppose the provision in
the new military operations bill. The Senate passed that bill on Tuesday by a
vote of 100 to 0, after approval by the House last week, and the administration
indicated that President Bush would sign it into law.

''If the Congress wants to use the appropriation process to dictate government
action, that's within their power, and the Department of Justice did not oppose
it,'' said Kevin Madden, spokesman for the department.

Trent Duffy, a spokesman for the White House, declined to address the merits of
the antitorture provision but said that the White House was aware of it and that
Mr. Bush wanted to sign the bill quickly.

''The president has made clear that this administration does not condone
torture,'' Mr. Duffy said. ''That is administration policy, and that still
stands.''

In opposing antitorture measures last year, the White House said they were
unnecessary and would provide expanded legal rights to which foreign prisoners
were not entitled. One such measure would have specifically subjected American
intelligence officers at the C.I.A. and elsewhere to new restrictions, with
implications for the agency's overseas interrogation of senior leaders of Al
Qaeda.

The provision approved Tuesday does not include any specific references to
intelligence officers. Instead, it says that no money appropriated in the bill
can be used ''to subject any person in the custody or under the physical control
of the United States to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment that is prohibited by the Constitution, laws or treaties of the
United States.''

Human rights advocates said it was unclear whether the prohibition would
restrict the ability of the C.I.A. or other government agencies to conduct
so-called renditions -- that is, to send terrorism suspects to be interrogated
in other countries, even those that are known to engage in abusive treatment of
prisoners.

Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who sponsored a
version of the provision in the House, said that in his view the measure
effectively banned renditions if military financing provided by the bill was
involved. Other officials said the issue was not so clear-cut.

Elisa Massimino, the Washington director of Human Rights First, formerly the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, said the Congressional ban served to remove
an important exemption claimed by the administration in its treatment of foreign
prisoners.

At hearings on his confirmation as attorney general, Alberto R. Gonzales said
the administration, backed by the courts, held that foreign prisoners ''enjoy no
substantive rights'' under the Constitution or the Convention Against Torture, a
United Nations agreement.

But the measure approved Tuesday drew no distinction between American citizens
and foreign prisoners in forbidding cruel, unusual or inhuman treatment that is
prohibited by the 5th, 8th and 14th amendments to the Constitution.

Ms. Massimino said the exemption cited by Mr. Gonzales was ''a pretty big
loophole, and this measure in Congress is a step toward herding the
administration back toward the rule of law.''

Anthony Romero, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said
the passage of the antitorture provision ''clearly shows that there's growing
traction on this issue in Congress, when you have even Republicans willing to
break ranks and raise concerns'' about the treatment of prisoners.

''This,'' Mr. Romero said, ''is a bullet the administration hasn't been able to
dodge.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SUPPLEMENTAL
APPROPRIATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(90%); TORTURE (90%); APPROPRIATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (79%); DEFENSE SPENDING (78%);
APPROVALS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); BUDGETS (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING
(78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); PRISONS (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (75%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); NAVIES (71%)
United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Torture; Finances; Budgets
and Budgeting; United States International Relations; Law and Legislation

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); RICHARD DURBIN (59%) Eric Lichtblau; George W
(Pres) Bush

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States;
Iraq; United States

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo Comes to Define U.S. to Muslims

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA and SALMAN MASOOD; Reporting for this article was
contributed by Craig S. Smith and Ariane Bernard in Paris; Alan Cowell in
London; Hassan Fattah in Amman, Jordan; Carlotta Gall in Kabul, Afghanistan;
Salman Masood in Islamabad, Pakistan; and Somini Sengupta in New Delhi.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1609 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 20


In one of Pakistan's most exclusive private schools for boys, the annual play
this year was ''Guantanamo,'' a docudrama based on testimonies of prisoners in
Guantanamo Bay, the United States naval base in Cuba.

The cast was made up of students between 16 and 18 years old, each playing the
role of a prisoner being held on suspicion of terrorism. To deepen their
understanding of their characters, the boys pored through articles in Pakistani
newspapers, studied the international press and surfed Web sites, including one
that described itself as a nonsectarian Islamic human rights portal and is
called cageprisoners.com.

It didn't matter that the boys at the Lahore Grammar School, an elite academy
that has sent many of its graduates to study in American universities, lived in
a world quite removed from that known by most prisoners at Guantanamo Bay. The
more they explored, the more the play resonated, the director of the school's
production, Omair Rana, recalled Friday in a telephone interview. The detainees
were Muslim, many were Pakistani and one had been arrested in Islamabad, the
country's capital.

''It was something we all could relate to,'' Mr. Rana said of ''Guantanamo,'' a
play created ''from spoken evidence'' by Victoria Brittain and Gillian Slovo, a
Briton and a South African, that was staged in London and in New York last year.
''All that seemed very relevant, very nearby -- in fact, too close for
comfort.''

Accounts of abuses at the actual American detention center at Guantanamo Bay,
including Newsweek magazine's now-retracted article on the desecration of the
Koran, ricochet around the world, instilling ideas about American power and
justice, and sowing distrust of the United States. Even more than the written
accounts are the images that flash on television screens throughout the Muslim
world: caged men, in orange prison jumpsuits, on their knees. On Al Jazeera and
Al Arabiya, two satellite networks, images of the prisoners appear in station
promos.

For many Muslims, Guantanamo stands as a confirmation of the low regard in which
they believe the United States holds them. For many non-Muslims, regardless of
their feelings toward the United States, it has emerged as a symbol of American
hypocrisy.

''The cages, the orange suits, the shackles -- it's as if they're dealing with
something that's like a germ they don't want to touch,'' said Daoud Kuttab,
director of the Institute of Modern Media at Al Quds University in Ramallah, in
the West Bank. ''That's the nastiness of it.''

The Bush administration's response to the Newsweek article -- a general
condemnation of prison abuses, coupled with an attack on the magazine --
apparently did little to allay the concerns of many Muslims. Then on Thursday,
the International Committee of the Red Cross issued a report detailing the many
complaints from detainees at Guantanamo about desecrations of the Koran between
early 2002 and mid-2003.

In India, a secular country by law whose people and government are growing
increasingly close to the United States, a cartoon appeared in Midday, an
afternoon tabloid, on Friday showing a panic-stricken Uncle Sam flushing copies
of Newsweek magazine down a toilet.

To the cartoonist, Hemant Morparia, it appeared as though the Bush
administration's answer to the problem was to bury the truth.

''People suspect American intentions,'' Mr. Morparia, a Mumbai-based radiologist
who doubles as a cartoonist, said. ''It has nothing to do with being Muslim.''

From Mumbai, India, to Amman, Jordan, to London, Guantanamo is a continuing
subject for discussion, from television talk shows to sermons to everyday
conversations. In countries like Afghanistan, Britain and Pakistan, released
detainees often return home and relate their experiences on television news
programs. Accusations of egregious abuse sometimes prompt violence, as in last
week's demonstrations in Afghanistan.

Guantanamo provides rhetorical fodder for politicians seeking to bring down
United States-allied rulers in their own countries, and it offers a ready
rallying point against American dominance, even in countries whose own police
and military have been known for severe violations of human rights.

''Even illiterate people pronounce it in a perfect manner, which surprises me a
bit, quite frankly,'' said Irfan Siddiqui, a columnist for Pakistan's popular
Urdu-language daily, Nawa-i-Waqt. ''But it shows the significance this issue has
attained.''

In Europe, accusations of abuse at Guantanamo, as much as the war in Iraq, have
become a symbol of what many see as America's dangerous drift away from the
ideals that made it a moral beacon in the post-World War II era. There is a
persistent and uneasy sense that the United States fundamentally changed after
September 11, and not for the better.

''The simple truth is that America's leaders have constructed at Guantanamo Bay
a legal monster,'' the French daily, Le Monde, said in a January editorial.

The United States opened the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, on the eastern end of
Cuba, two years ago as a detention center for suspected terrorists from the
Taliban and Al Qaeda. It houses about 680 prisoners, mostly from Afghanistan and
Pakistan, but also some from Britain.

On many Arab streets, there was as much conspiracy seen in the retraction of the
Newsweek story as in the story itself.

''People already expect the U.S. to deny it, because it already has no
credibility in the region,'' said Mustafa al-Ani, director of the Security and
Terrorism Studies Program at the Gulf Research Center in Dubai. ''So the initial
story will have an impact, and the response simply will not.''

Or as a Jordanian pharmacist, Farouk Shoubaki, said of the original report, ''It
is something the Americans would do.''

As Mr. Shoubaki's remark reflects, Guantanamo offers disconcerting testimony
that for many Muslims, the America they used to admire has sunk to the level of
their own repressive governments.

Najam Sethi, editor of The Daily Times, an English-language newspaper in
Pakistan, said the Guantanamo accusations were seen in his country as ''further
proof'' of hypocrisy and anti-Islamic sentiment in the government of the United
States. To many, he said, it was taken ''as evidence of how America and the West
makes the war against terrorism synonymous with the war against Islam.''

''Everyone is focused on the desecration of the Koran and attempts to hurt the
feelings of Muslims,'' he said. ''The tenor of the debate is acquiring
'civilizational' dimensions.''

Afghans, who have the largest number of citizens held at Guantanamo, with as
many as 300 at its height, share the general dislike of the prison, but are
generally practical and philosophical about it. They say they are used to people
being thrown into prison, being tortured there and even dying.

But public anger has grown at the reports of sexual abuse and desecration of the
Koran. Even a former Afghan commander, Abdul Khaliq, who said he was happy to
see captured Taliban members sent to Guantanamo, is now upset by the stories of
sexual abuse and insults to Islam reportedly perpetrated there.

''The Americans were good people before,'' said Mr. Khaliq, who now works on a
road construction project. ''Definitely, people are changing their minds towards
the Americans.''

In a country like Pakistan, the issue is especially vivid because Guantanamo
prisoners who have been released are often interviewed by a local news
organizations.

As far back as November 2003, a television talk show, modeled after ''The
O'Reilly Factor,'' featured an interview with Mohammad Sagheer, the first
Pakistani to be released from Guantanamo. And as recently as Friday, an
Urdu-language television talk show taped interviews with two ex-prisoners who
said they witnessed the desecration of the Koran there.

The latest issue of Newsline, a Karachi-based magazine, featured a story titled,
''Back from Camp,'' which chronicled the story of a former prisoner, Abdul Rahim
Muslim Dost, a poet who pleaded for the Americans to return his writing.

''These are issues that sink into people's minds,'' said Samina Ahmed, the
Pakistani representative of the Brussels-based research and advocacy
organization, International Crisis Group. ''Their religion is being demeaned in
the context of the war on terror. That's an issue the U.S. is going to have to
address.''

In Britain, Guantanamo has entered the political lexicon along with Bagram Air
Base in Afghanistan and Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad as an emblem of American
injustice and abuse. During the London marathon in April this year, David
Nicholl, a neurologist, ran the race in an orange jumpsuit to protest the
detention of five former British residents at Guantanamo.

''We are all against terrorism but we are not obliged to close our eyes to the
excesses of our allies,'' Chris Mullin, a former British Foreign Office minister
told Parliament on Wednesday.

In India, one human rights advocate who routinely takes the Indian military to
task for its alleged abuses against insurgents in Kashmir and the northeast,
said the United States stance on things like torture and interrogation of
suspects at Guantanamo signaled what he called ''a human rights disaster'' for
everyone.

On Friday afternoon in an Islamabad bookshop, Maheen Asif, 33, leafed through a
women's magazine, and paused for only a moment when asked for her impression of
Guantanamo Bay.

''Torture,'' she said, as her daughters, 8 and 5, scampered through the stalls.
''The first word that comes to my mind is 'torture' -- a place where Americans
lock up and torture Muslims in the name of terrorism.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 24, 2005



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Saturday about
the view of many Muslims that the Guantanamo naval base has become a symbol of
American abuse and disrespect misstated the year the base was opened to house
prisoners taken in the American-led invasion of Afghanistan. It was in 2002, not
2003.


GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iranian held aloft a tiny Koran at a protest at Tehran
University over reports that the Islamic holy book had been desecrated at
Guantanamo. (Photo by Atta Kenare/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
 Accusations of abuses at the American detention camp at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba
permeate the news media in various countries, often sowing distrust of the
United States. A cartoon in an Indian tabloid newspaper lampooned Newsweek's
retraction of a report that the Koran was flushed down a toilet, and an image of
a detainee was televised yesterday on a program on Al Jazeera that focused on
the camp. (Photo by Dana Smilie/Polaris, for The New York Times)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); NAVIES (90%); PRISONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%);
TALIBAN (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (75%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); GENOCIDE (75%); WEB SITES & PORTALS (75%); INTERVIEWS
(75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (67%); ARRESTS (67%); SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY (50%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); Islam; Koran; Terrorism

COMPANY: NEWSWEEK INC (53%); INSTITUTE OF MODERN PROCEDURES INC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Newsweek (Magazine);
Taliban (Afghan Group); Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

INDUSTRY: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%);
SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (51%)

PERSON: Somini Sengupta; Salman Masood

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (59%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (59%); LONDON, ENGLAND (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (91%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); IRAN (59%); INDIA (59%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

3 U.S. Senators Seek Inquiry Into Killings in Uzbekistan

BYLINE: By C.J. CHIVERS; Yola Monakhov contributed reporting for this article
from Andijon and Tashkent, Uzbekistan, and Ethan Wilensky-Lanford from
Kyrgyzstan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1123 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 29


In the strongest statement by American officials since Uzbekistan carried out a
bloody crackdown this month against a revolt and demonstration in the city of
Andijon, three United States senators on Sunday called for an international
investigation into the violence. They also issued a stern rebuke to Uzbekistan's
authoritarian government.

The statement by the three Republican senators, John McCain of Arizona, Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina and John Sununu of New Hampshire, came amid new details
of the conduct of the Uzbek security forces during and after the violence,
including claims that injured victims have disappeared from hospitals and that
troops had fired on a civilian ambulance during the crackdown, killing three
medical workers inside.

The accounts further undermine the insistence of Islam A. Karimov, Uzbekistan's
president and an American ally in counterterrorism efforts, that his troops
operated with precision, and that armed men behind the revolt were responsible
for the civilians deaths.

Uzbekistan now says 173 people, including 36 government troops, died in the
uprising and crackdown on May 13. The government attributed the increase from
the previous count of 169 to the deaths of 4 more soldiers from injuries
suffered that day.

Human rights groups, opposition parties, survivors and relatives of the dead
have said at least several hundred civilians were killed by troops who fired
rifles and machine guns into dense crowds.

Speaking in Tashkent, Uzbekistan's capital, where the senators met with members
of four opposition parties, the delegation called the crackdown ''a tragedy,''
and suggested that given Uzbekistan's long record of repression and human rights
abuses, the bloodshed was not surprising.

''History shows that continued repression of human rights leads to tragedies
such as the one that just took place,'' Senator McCain said. He later added,
''When governments repress or oppress their people, sooner or later, if they
have no avenue of expressing their desire for freedom, violence takes place.''

The statement, made in the presence of the American ambassador to Uzbekistan,
was a significant shift in tone. The three senators, all supporters of the Bush
administration's antiterrorism efforts, did not characterize the gunmen or
escaped prisoners who initiated the revolt as militants or terrorists, as some
American officials have.

Uzbekistan has repeatedly described the men it fought as international Islamic
terrorists, a characterization rejected by witnesses, who said the gunmen were
local men who had been pushed to violence by the unrelenting repression and
corruption of Mr. Karimov's government.

Mr. McCain said the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a
security organization with 55 member nations, including Uzbekistan, should
conduct an independent review. The European Union, the United Nations, NATO and
several Western governments have also called for an outside review, a proposal
Mr. Karimov has rebuffed.

The United States, balancing its interests in the region with accounts of an
ally's indiscriminate use of force, has been gentler, saying any investigation
should be transparent and have international participation, but also making it
clear that it intended to continue cooperating with Uzbekistan on
counterterrorism.

The reception of the senators was chilly; neither Mr. Karimov nor members of his
government met the group.

The senators suggested that the attitude was unwise. ''We recognize that this is
a difficult time for the Uzbek government, but this kind of isolation and
refusal to interact with a visiting delegation, I think, is counterproductive,''
Mr. Sununu said. ''It certainly places a strain on the Uzbek-U.S.
relationship.''

Uzbekistan has said that it will conduct its own parliamentary investigation,
but that the investigation will work from the premise that the uprising was ''a
planned and well-prepared terrorist act organized by international
radical-extremist groups,'' according to statement released by the Uzbek
consulate general in New York.

As the senators increased the American pressure for a more open-minded
investigation, more details of the violence emerged.

A photographer working independently for The New York Times met with relatives
of two men, a doctor and an ambulance driver, who they said were killed in their
ambulance by Uzbek troops as the vehicle neared a checkpoint on May 13.

The accounts gave a measure of support to similar accounts from survivors in a
refugee camp in Kyrgyzstan, who have insisted that injured people were killed by
troops and that medical care was severely limited.

Among the three who died in the ambulance, relatives said, was Dr. Odiljon
Ahmedov, 42. Two of his brothers said they had been told by the ambulance office
that he had been killed when troops fired on the vehicle. ''This is a crime,''
said one of his brothers, Arip Ahmedov.

Dr. Ahmedov's remains were accompanied by a certificate, numbered 22, his
brothers said. The photographer had seen certificates that accompanied bodies,
bearing numbers as high as 378, suggesting that the death count is higher than
Uzbekistan says.

The ambulance driver and a nurse were also killed, according to the driver's
nephew, who said the fire was so intense that the driver's remains were almost
unrecognizable.

''We could not even follow our Islamic customs of burial because he wouldn't
stop bleeding,'' he said. ''We had to wrap him first in plastic bags and then
wrapped him in the proper white sheet.''

Several families in Andijon said victims who made it to hospitals on May 13 had
since vanished, apparently into custody. Members of one family said their
relative, whom they called Ibadulo, has been missing for a week. They had
brought him food at the regional hospital, but they have now been told he is no
longer on the list of those registered there.

Two days ago, his wife spent a day waiting for information on his whereabouts,
but received no news. ''We wait,'' she said. ''That is all.''

In Kyrgyzstan, where more than 500 survivors of the crackdown crossed the
Karadariya River on May 14, Kyrgyz officials and the United Nations were
preparing to create a safer and more sanitary refugee camp.

The status of the refugees remained uncertain. On Friday, Kyrgyzstan's deputy
prime minister, Adakham Madumarov, said the survivors would be allowed to stay.
But other officials have sent mixed signals, and at least one has proposed
repatriation.

Uzbekistan has made it clear that it would like to prosecute the refugees,
noting in the statement from the consulate in New York, for instance, that among
those who crossed the river were ''more than 400 were males who took part in
unlawful activities.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arip Ahmedov, left, and Alijon Ahmedov lost a brother, Dr.
Odiljon Ahmedov, killed by gunfire while working in an ambulance, they said.
(Photo by Yola Monakhov for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); CORRUPTION (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); POLITICS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (75%);
RIOTS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(69%); RELIGION (69%); EUROPEAN UNION (69%) United States International
Relations; Demonstrations and Riots

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (89%); JOHN SUNUNU (79%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (77%) C J Chivers;
John (Sen) Mccain; Lindsey (Sen) Graham; John E (Sen) Sununu

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (58%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (78%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Andijon (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

6 Senators Urge Reassessment of Ties With Uzbekistan Ruler

BYLINE: By C.J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: KIEV, Ukraine, June 8


Six United States senators urged the Bush administration on Wednesday to
reconsider its relationship with the authoritarian government in Uzbekistan,
saying close association with a nation whose troops fired on demonstrators last
month risked undermining the security of the United States.

The senators -- four Republicans and two Democrats -- also asked if the
administration knew whether American-trained troops or American military
equipment were used in the deadly crackdown, in Andijon, in northeastern
Uzbekistan.

The senators' statement, in a letter sent to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, exposed growing unease about ties
between the United States' military and Uzbekistan's president, Islam A.
Karimov, who emerged in 2001 as an important ally in the fight against Islamic
terrorists. Copies were obtained by The New York Times from the staffs of two of
the senators who signed the letter.

Mr. Karimov's government has long been criticized by the State Department,
private aid organizations and the United Nations for its poor human rights
record, repression of political opponents and use of torture. Yet it has managed
to maintain strong ties with Washington, in part by granting the Pentagon access
to an airbase near the Afghan border.

Uzbek troops used rifle and machine-gun fire to crush a prison break and mass
protest in Andijon. Uzbekistan has not yet cooperated in calls for an
independent international investigation of the episode, which left at least 173
people dead.

An investigation released Tuesday by Human Rights Watch labeled the crackdown a
massacre and said the death toll was in the hundreds -- much higher than the
official tally. It also noted that witnesses and journalists were being
intimidated and in some cases arrested in the aftermath.

The United States has been slowly increasing its pressure on Uzbekistan in
recent weeks; the senators' letter circulated on a day when that pressure moved
up another notch. Speaking to reporters in Washington, Sean McCormack, a State
Department spokesman, made clear that American officials believe more people
were killed than the Uzbeks have admitted.

''I think our position would be that there have been many reliable eyewitness
accounts to shooting by Uzbek forces of civilians,'' he said. ''And I think what
we know now is that hundreds of innocent civilians were killed.''

''We support an international investigation into this incident,'' he added.

The senators posed several pointed questions to the administration, including
what actions it would take if Uzbekistan continued to intimidate witnesses and
block an investigation, and whether it was exploring ''alternative basing
arrangements.''

They also cautioned against entering a long-term base deal, asking ''What would
be the likely fallout from America's deepening relationship with a government
that brutally represses its people?'' They concluded: ''America's relationship
with Uzbekistan cannot remain unchanged.''

The letter was organized by Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, two
Senate staff members said, and was signed by three other Republicans -- Mike
DeWine of Ohio, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and John E. Sununu of New
Hampshire -- and two Democrats -- Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and Patrick
Leahy of Vermont.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); SHOOTINGS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); MILITARY BASES (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); RIOTS (72%); TORTURE (72%); TERRORISM
(69%); RELIGION (69%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); WITNESSES (69%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); TESTIMONY (63%); WRITERS (63%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Demonstrations and
Riots; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (88%) Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld;
George W (Pres) Bush; C J Chivers; John S (Sen) Mccain; Mike (Sen) Dewine;
Lindsey (Sen) Graham; John E (Sen) Sununu; Joseph R Jr (Sen) Biden; Patrick J
(Sen) Leahy

CITY: KIYEV, UKRAINE (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UZBEKISTAN (95%); UKRAINE (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

When Large Events Are Writ Small, but Deep

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S CHOICE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 677 words


Nothing casts a sharper focus on the human cost of terrorism than an examination
of its impact on a single family. In Pete Travis's film ''Omagh,'' the
Gallaghers, who live in the Northern Ireland town of Omagh, are devastated when
a car bomb explodes in August 1998 in the center of town killing more than two
dozen people, including their son, Aiden.

The docudrama, which opens the 16th annual Human Rights Watch International Film
Festival at the Walter Reade Theater this evening, is so skillfully assembled
and powerfully acted that fiction merges with reality.

Responsibility for the bombing was claimed by dissident Irish Republican Army
members, who call themselves the Real I.R.A. They were determined to disrupt the
peace process that began four months earlier with the signing of the Good Friday
peace accords.

Weeks after the bombing, Aiden's father, Michael (Gerard McSorley), a
mild-mannered auto mechanic, becomes chairman of a support group for the
victims' families. As he presses for an investigation and prosecution of the
perpetrators, he is awakened to the painful realities of police incompetence,
foot-dragging, coverups, and poor communication between investigative agencies.
The resemblance between these events and the revelations of the mistakes and
confusion surrounding 9/11 are inescapable.

''Omagh'' exemplifies a principle guiding the selection of films in the
festival, which is showing 26 movies from 20 countries through June 13. Most of
these films view the struggles of ordinary people waging uphill battles against
social, political and economic forces beyond their control from a ground-level
perspective. The individual counts.

David Redmon's punchy documentary critique of globalization, ''Mardi Gras: Made
in China,'' looks at the conditions in a factory in the Chinese city of Fuzhou
where young workers, mostly women, are paid $1.20 a day to work 14-to-20-hour
shifts in enforced silence making the beads showered onto revelers in New
Orleans in exchange for baring their breasts at Mardi Gras.

The Chinese factory owner, who sees himself as a good guy and model manager,
boasts of the punishments he exacts in wages from the workers toiling in
sweatshop conditions when they don't meet their quotas. In a nifty turnabout,
the filmmaker asks the revelers if they know where the beads come from. They
don't, of course, and even when told, few seem to care. When he also shows the
Chinese workers pictures of how the beads are used, they giggle in
embarrassment.

The 15-year-old subject of the documentary ''The Education of Shelby Knox'' is a
brave, smart, independent high-school-age crusader for sex education in Lubbock,
Tex., a city that has one of the highest rates of sexually transmitted diseases
among teenagers in the country. Because the local high schools teach abstinence
as the only safe sex, Shelby's efforts are tolerated only to a point by the
city's conservative, Christian political establishment. The movie, which has its
premiere on June 21 on the PBS documentary series ''POV,'' is a pungent civics
lesson on what can and cannot be accomplished by one plucky, idealistic girl.

Margaret Loescher's ''Pulled From the Rubble,'' filmed and narrated by its
creator, is an intimate, inspiring portrait of courage and resilience. On Aug.
19, 2003, her father, Gil Loescher, an expert on refugee issues, was attending a
meeting at United Nations headquarters in Baghdad when a truck packed with
explosives destroyed the building and killed everyone at the meeting but him.
The movie is his daughter's journal of his recovery after losing both legs above
the knee and much of his right hand. He subsequently learned to walk with
prosthetic legs; he has said that the explosion was the beginning, not the end
of his life.

That spirit, challenged but undefeated, goes to the essence of the Human Rights
Watch Festival. At a moment in film history when documentaries and docudramas
have shown signs of moving closer to the forefront of international cinema, this
invaluable festival is helping show the way.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Pete Travis's ''Omagh,'' a Northern Irish family faces loss.
From left, Fiona Glascott, Michele Forbes, Pauline Hutton and Gerard McSorley.
(Photo by Portman Film)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); FILM
(90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%); FESTIVALS (90%); MARDI GRAS (89%);
MOVIE INDUSTRY (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS (83%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DRAMA FILMS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY
EDUCATION (78%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (78%); FAMILY (78%); GLOBALIZATION (76%);
GARMENT WORKERS (76%); SWEATSHOPS (76%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (76%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); EASTER SEASON (75%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (73%);
VISUAL ARTISTS (73%); ADOLESCENTS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); NIGHT & SHIFT WORK
(67%); WAGES & SALARIES (67%); SEX EDUCATION (62%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (61%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%); SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE (50%) Motion Pictures;
Reviews; Human Rights Watch International Film Festival

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (57%)

PERSON: Stephen Holden

CITY: LUBBOCK, TX, USA (79%); NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%); LOUISIANA, USA (79%); SOUTH CHINA (77%)

COUNTRY: NORTHERN IRELAND (93%); CHINA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Panel's Report, Faulting U.N., Urges Reforms

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; AN EVALUATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1355 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 12


A Congressionally mandated panel will report this week that the United Nations
suffers from poor management, ''dismal'' staff morale and lack of accountability
and professional ethics but will acknowledge the broad changes proposed for the
organization by Secretary General Kofi Annan and urge the United States to
support them.

Among its recommendations, the panel says the United Nations should put in place
corporate style oversight bodies and personnel standards to improve performance.
It also calls on the United Nations to create a rapid reaction capability from
its member states' armed forces to prevent genocide, mass killing and sustained
major human rights violations before they occur.

Newt Gingrich, a Republican former speaker of the House of Representatives, and
George J. Mitchell, a Democratic former majority Senate leader, are co-chairmen
of the bipartisan task force. It includes former diplomats, military and
intelligence officials and leaders of conservative and liberal political
institutes.

It was created by Congress in December to suggest measures to make the United
Nations more effective and ways in which the United States can spur needed
changes. The United States is the biggest donor to the United Nations,
contributing 22 percent of the regular operating budget and nearly 27 percent of
the peacekeeping budget.

The Task Force on the United Nations made a copy of its 174-page report
available to The New York Times on Sunday. The report is scheduled to be made
public in Washington on Wednesday.

The task force, in wresting a consensus from members that include some of the
institution's harshest critics, ended up producing a report that notably struck
a more sympathetic tone in discussing the United Nations' failures than have its
vocal detractors on Capitol Hill. Members of the panel will be discussing the
conclusions at a hearing in Washington on June 22.

In judging the United Nations and its lapses, the task force said it had focused
on the responsibilities of the states making up the institution rather than just
the institution itself.

''On stopping genocide,'' the report said, ''too often 'the United Nations
failed' should actually read 'members of the United Nations blocked or
undermined action by the United Nations.'''

In a foreword to the report, Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Mitchell said they were
''struck by the United Nations' own receptivity to needed reforms'' but added
that the changes ''must be real and must be undertaken promptly.''

The Gingrich-Mitchell task force is one of six investigations of the United
Nations initiated in Washington and a seventh in New York. Five Congressional
committees and the Justice Department are conducting inquiries into the United
Nations' oil-for-food program, created to allow Iraq to sell oil to meet the
needs of its civilian population. An independent panel headed by Paul A.
Volcker, the former Federal Reserve chairman, is scheduled to deliver its third
and final report on the subject next month.

A number of American congressmen have called on Mr. Annan to step down because
of the scandals in the oil-for-food program. Last week, Representative Henry J.
Hyde, an Illinois Republican who is the chairman of the House International
Relations Committee, introduced legislation that would withhold half of the
United States' dues to the United Nations unless it met specified requirements
for change and would turn a number of automatically funded programs into
programs funded only voluntarily.

While the report noted the damage caused by the scandals, it stressed that one
of the consequences was that the United Nations' top leadership realized the
need to make fundamental changes. ''Real change may now be possible without
resorting to the stick of U.S. financial withholding,'' the report said.

In its only reference to Mr. Annan's term in office, it said that a
''fundamental criterion'' in selecting his successor when his term is completed
at the end of 2006 should be ''management capability.''

The report said that the institution's current problems stemmed from the
politicization and bureaucratic unwieldiness of decision-making in the General
Assembly and Security Council and ''absurd level of member state
micromanagement'' as much as they do from failures in Mr. Annan's leadership.

While crediting Mr. Annan with proposing changes, the report faulted him for
lack of follow-through. ''The secretary general has often put forward
good-sounding reform proposals then failed to push hard against predictable
resistance from staff and member states,'' it says.

Mr. Annan has proposed a sweeping set of changes and made them the centerpiece
of a meeting of more than 170 heads of government scheduled to be held at United
Nations headquarters this fall that he is touting as the largest gathering of
world leaders in history.

The proposals include an expansion of the membership of the Security Council,
the creation of a peace-building commission to restore postwar societies, an
effort to define terrorism as a crime that cannot be justified as an act of
freedom fighting or political resistance and the replacement of the discredited
Human Rights Commission with a smaller and more powerful Human Rights Council
that would effectively deny membership to notorious rights violators.

The panel took no position on Security Council expansion, but in addition to
endorsing Mr. Annan's call for a new Human Rights Council, it said that its
members be ''ideally composed from democracies.''

It also urged the creation of a new position of ambassadorial rank in the United
States mission with the responsibility of helping to organize a caucus of
democracies within the United Nations and of promoting the extension of
democratic rights throughout the member states.

In calling for rapid deployment capability, the panel stressed it was not
endorsing a standing United Nations military force. Its proposal, it said, was
that ''member states must substantially increase the availability of capable,
designated forces, properly trained and equipped, for rapid deployment to peace
operations on a voluntary basis.''

More than 80 governments participate now in a loose standby arrangement where
they acknowledge their willingness to contribute to peacekeeping operations, but
the task force said most of them are in no position to move quickly enough.

It urged the creation of a United Nations office to monitor potentially
genocidal developments and issue warnings to governments involved.

To improve United Nations management, the panel called for a new independent
oversight board similar to a corporate audit committee to deter corruption and
insure efficient use of resources.

It said that many jobs and functions at the United Nations continued in place
even though they had outlived their time. ''Programs and activities, once
mandated by the General Assembly, face little scrutiny and can live on forever
without having to justify their existence,'' the report said. ''We discerned no
sustained, large-scale effort by the Secretariat to identify which activities
should be discontinued.''

It said it backed Mr. Annan's request for a large buyout of staff, saying, ''For
too many of the member states, the United Nations is seen as a job placement
bureau.''

The report also recommended a ''far more robust policy'' of protecting
whistle-blowers, results-based budgeting and a new chief operating officer in
the Secretariat who would be in charge of daily operations.

Citing a United Nations-commissioned poll that showed ''a high level of
discontent, distrust and pessimism among staff concerning the integrity of the
organization,'' it said it had found that ''morale is dismal.''

It credited the United Nations with stepping up activity to combat the global
threat of terror but warned of the consequences of obstructionism or neglect.
''If the members fail to work together effectively, the pressures on the United
States and other responsible governments to protect themselves by acting
independently of the United Nations will become enormous,'' it said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (90%); BUSINESS ETHICS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); WORKPLACE
MORALE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%);
LIBERALISM (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%);
WAR CRIMES (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (72%); BUDGETS (66%) Ethics; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations; United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE J MITCHELL (88%); NEWT GINGRICH (88%) Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen)
Annan; Newt Gingrich; George J Mitchell

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Wise Prescriptions

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Dr. Gingrich and Mr. Hyde; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 523 words


A bipartisan, Congressionally mandated task force headed by Newt Gingrich, the
former House speaker, and George Mitchell, the former Senate majority leader,
has presented a clear statement of America's national interest in a revived and
effective United Nations. Their balanced and thoughtful report, prepared over
six months, features an unsparing analysis of the U.N.'s current problems and
weaknesses. It also offers constructive recommendations on mobilizing
Washington's powerful influence to promote urgent and necessary reforms,
including some already proposed by the U.N. itself.

Lawmakers should take the time to at least thumb through this report, especially
those who have been demanding Secretary General Kofi Annan's resignation,
supporting the ill-conceived nomination of John Bolton as the United States
ambassador to the United Nations and backing the latest benighted attempt to
withhold America's legally obligated dues.

The task force report offers useful proposals on restraining nuclear and other
weapons proliferation, and on peacekeeping and peace-building, human rights,
economic development, and strengthening the U.N.'s badly discredited management
systems. It offers more than 100 specific recommendations, and while we do not
agree with every one, we can readily endorse most of them.

The most important include the creation of an independent audit and oversight
board, more militarily robust peacekeeping operations, strengthened access and
inspections rules for the International Atomic Energy Agency and other
international bodies monitoring the proliferation of unconventional weapons, and
stronger cooperation between the United Nations and the World Bank.

It also usefully calls for stronger measures to prevent and punish sexual abuse
by peacekeepers; enhanced protection for whistle-blowers; American leadership in
preventing genocide, starting with Darfur; and United States support for
regional war crimes tribunals and truth commissions.

Along with its deserved criticism of U.N. problems, the Gingrich-Mitchell report
refreshingly notes that many of the charges commonly leveled against the United
Nations -- for example, its failure to halt genocide and other threats to
humanity and peace -- should more properly be directed against those member
states that blocked or undermined effective international action.

It also takes note of the ambitious reform agenda proposed earlier this year by
Mr. Annan and specifically embraces some of its ideas, like replacing the
morally bankrupt Human Rights Commission with a more credible Human Rights
Council and creating a new peace-building commission to follow up on the work of
peacekeeping missions.

When a United Nations summit meeting convenes in New York this summer to discuss
and build on the secretary general's proposals, the United States should take a
leading role. As the Gingrich-Mitchell report correctly notes, the goals and
principles of the charter ''embody and reflect'' American interests today as
much as they did when the United States played the leading role in founding the
United Nations 60 years ago.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); NEW
CONSTRUCTION (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); WAR CRIMES (72%); AUDITS (72%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); WHISTLEBLOWER
PROTECTION (67%); ECONOMIC NEWS (67%); SEX OFFENSES (64%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (64%)
Editorials; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (54%)
United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE J MITCHELL (89%); NEWT GINGRICH (89%) Newt Gingrich; George J
Mitchell

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Role in Visit of Sudan Intelligence Chief Causes Dispute Within
Administration

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


A decision by the Central Intelligence Agency to fly Sudan's intelligence chief
to Washington in a C.I.A. jet in April set off a dispute inside the Bush
administration, with some officials arguing that such recognition for a
government accused of genocide and ties to terrorism sent a regrettable signal,
administration officials said on Friday.

The visit by Salah Abdallah Gosh for consultations with the Central Intelligence
Agency this year was intended by American intelligence officials to reward
Sudan's cooperation since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, in detaining suspected
terrorists and providing information on Al Qaeda.

But some officials in the State Department and the Justice Department objected,
arguing that the trip would send a misleading message both to the government of
Sudan and to other countries about American priorities, officials said. Mr.
Gosh's trip was first reported April 29 in The Los Angeles Times, which reported
on the controversy within the administration in an additional article on
Thursday.

The visit has provoked criticism from members of Congress and human rights
groups, who say that Mr. Gosh has played a role in the government's
collaboration with militias that have displaced millions of people and killed
tens of thousands in the Darfur region. The United States has condemned Sudan
for committing genocide in Darfur. A United Nations inquiry this spring referred
a sealed list of names of 51 people suspected of committing crimes in Darfur to
the International Criminal Court, which announced on June 6 that it had opened
an investigation.

''We're very uncomfortable and unhappy with his coming to the U.S.,'' said
Jemera Rone, a Sudan researcher at Human Rights Watch. ''From the human rights
point of view, it sends the worst possible message.''

Members of the Congressional Black Caucus protested the visit in a meeting this
week with Condoleezza Rice, the secretary of state, said Representative Donald
M. Payne, a New Jersey Democrat who has made several trips to Sudan.

''When I heard Gosh came over here, I said this is absolutely unconscionable,''
Mr. Payne said. ''I liken it to some Nazi SS official coming to the U.S. during
World War II.''

Both Ms. Rone and Mr. Payne said they did not have any direct evidence of the
role Mr. Gosh might have played in the Darfur atrocities. But they said that as
chief of Sudan's intelligence and security service, he undoubtedly had knowledge
of the offenses and complicity in them.

A senior administration official said that despite the record of Sudan and its
top officials, the C.I.A.'s mission requires ties with its Sudanese counterpart.

''The purpose of this visit was to continue to build a stronger professional
relationship between two intelligence services,'' the official said, speaking on
condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of relations with foreign
intelligence agencies. ''For years the C.I.A. was forbidden to meet with anyone
who didn't qualify for choirboy. After 9/11 it became clear that you have to
talk to bad guys from bad neighborhoods to fight terrorism.''

Adam Ereli, a State Department spokesman, declined to comment on any objections
raised by department officials to Mr. Gosh's visit. He said Sudan remained a
state sponsor of terrorism, despite ''improved cooperation on
counterterrorism.''

Mr. Ereli said an official of the department met with the Sudanese official at
C.I.A. headquarters ''to send a clear and unequivocal message that the
government of Sudan has to take action to stop the killing in Darfur.''

Officials denied the Los Angeles Times report that there had been any discussion
of arresting Mr. Gosh, saying no legal case had been prepared to support such a
step.

Sudan's ambassador, Khidir Haroun Ahmed, said his country's cooperation with the
C.I.A. predated the 2001 attacks and had only grown stronger.

''Frankly, this is very surprising to me that there are people who still
question our cooperation over combating international terrorism,'' Mr. Ahmed
said. Differences over Darfur, he said, ''should be no reason to stop exchanges
with Sudan.''

One Congressional official said that Mr. Gosh, who holds the rank of major
general, met with midlevel officials and did not see Porter Goss, the C.I.A.
director.

Flight records show that a Boeing 737-style business jet controlled by the
C.I.A. flew from Khartoum to Baltimore-Washington International Airport on April
17 and returned on April 22.

The Bush administration has built its foreign policy since Sept. 11, 2001, not
just on an aggressive pursuit of Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups but also on
the promotion of democracy as an antidote to terrorism.

But those two policies have sometimes clashed, as the administration has sought
the cooperation of Sudan, which harbored Osama bin Laden in the mid-1990's, as
well as Uzbekistan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and other authoritarian governments.

In its 2004 report on terrorism, the State Department said Sudan ''deepened its
cooperation with the U.S. government to investigate and apprehend extremists
suspected of involvement in terrorist activities.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (96%); TERRORISM (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); ESPIONAGE (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(77%); EVIDENCE (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); CAUCUSES (67%);
WORLD WAR II (65%) Intelligence Services; United States International Relations;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (69%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (96%); AL-QAEDA (57%); US DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)
Central Intelligence Agency

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (69%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (69%)

PERSON: DONALD M PAYNE (78%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (57%) Scott Shane; Salah Abdallah
Gosh; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

We Are All Torturers Now

BYLINE: By Mark Danner.

Mark Danner is the author of ''Torture and Truth: America, Abu Ghraib and the
War on Terror.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1429 words


AT least since Watergate, Americans have come to take for granted a certain
story line of scandal, in which revelation is followed by investigation,
adjudication and expiation. Together, Congress and the courts investigate
high-level wrongdoing and place it in a carefully constructed narrative, in
which crimes are charted, malfeasance is explicated and punishment is
apportioned as the final step in the journey back to order, justice and
propriety.

When Alberto Gonzales takes his seat before the Senate Judiciary Committee today
for hearings to confirm whether he will become attorney general of the United
States, Americans will bid farewell to that comforting story line. The senators
are likely to give full legitimacy to a path that the Bush administration set
the country on more than three years ago, a path that has transformed the United
States from a country that condemned torture and forbade its use to one that
practices torture routinely. Through a process of redefinition largely overseen
by Mr. Gonzales himself, a practice that was once a clear and abhorrent
violation of the law has become in effect the law of the land.

Shortly after the 9/11 attacks, Americans began torturing prisoners, and they
have never really stopped. However much these words have about them the ring of
accusation, they must by now be accepted as fact. From Red Cross reports, Maj.
Gen. Antonio M. Taguba's inquiry, James R. Schlesinger's Pentagon-sanctioned
commission and other government and independent investigations, we have in our
possession hundreds of accounts of ''cruel, inhuman and degrading'' treatment --
to use a phrase of the Red Cross -- ''tantamount to torture.''

So far as we know, American intelligence officers, determined after Sept. 11 to
''take the gloves off,'' began by torturing Qaeda prisoners. They used a number
of techniques: ''water-boarding,'' in which a prisoner is stripped, shackled and
submerged in water until he begins to lose consciousness, and other forms of
near suffocation; sleep and sensory deprivation; heat and light and dietary
manipulation; and ''stress positions.''

Eventually, these practices ''migrated,'' in the words of the Schlesinger
report, to Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, where for a time last spring the marvel of
digital technology allowed Americans to see what their soldiers were doing to
prisoners in their name.

Though the revelations of Abu Ghraib transfixed Americans for a time, in the
matter of torture not much changed. After those in Congress had offered
condemnations and a few hearings distinguished by their lack of seriousness;
after the administration had commenced the requisite half-dozen investigations,
none of them empowered to touch those who devised the policies; and after the
low-level soldiers were placed firmly on the road to punishment -- after all
this, the issue of torture slipped back beneath the surface. Every few weeks
now, a word or two reaches us from that dark, subterranean place. Take, for
example, this account, offered by an unnamed F.B.I. counterterrorism official
reporting in August, more than three months after the Abu Ghraib images
appeared, on what he saw during a visit to Guantanamo:

''On a couple of occasions, I entered interview rooms to find a detainee chained
hand and foot in a fetal position to the floor, with no chair, food or water.
Most times they had urinated or defecated on themselves, and had been left there
for 18-24 hours or moreWhen I asked the M.P.'s what was going on, I was told
that interrogators from the day prior had ordered this treatment, and the
detainee was not to be moved. On another occasionthe detainee was almost
unconscious on the floor, with a pile of hair next to him. He had apparently
been literally pulling his own hair out throughout the night.''

This is a fairly mild example when judged against the accounts of the ''abuses''
that have entered the public record. I put quotation marks around the word
''abuses'' because most of these acts -- as the F.B.I. agent acknowledged (''the
interrogators from the day prior had ordered this treatment'') -- were in fact
procedures, which would not have been possible without policies that had been
approved by administration officials.

In the next few days we are likely to hear how Mr. Gonzales recommended
strongly, against the arguments of the secretary of state and military lawyers,
that prisoners in Afghanistan be denied the protection of the Geneva
Conventions. We are also likely to hear how, under Mr. Gonzales's urging,
lawyers in the Department of Justice contrived -- when confronted with the
obstacle that the United States had undertaken, by treaty and statute, to make
torture illegal -- simply to redefine the word to mean procedures that would
produce pain ''of an intensity akin to that which accompanies serious physical
injury such as death or organ failure.'' By this act of verbal legerdemain,
interrogation techniques like water-boarding that plainly constituted torture
suddenly became something less than that.

But what we are unlikely to hear, given the balance of votes in the Senate, are
many voices making the obvious argument that with this record, Mr. Gonzales is
unfit to serve as attorney general. So let me make it: Mr. Gonzales is unfit
because the slow river of litigation is certain to bring before the next
attorney general a raft of torture cases that challenge the very policies that
he personally helped devise and put into practice. He is unfit because, while
the attorney general is charged with upholding the law, the documents show that
as White House counsel, Mr. Gonzales, in the matter of torture, helped his
client to concoct strategies to circumvent it. And he is unfit, finally, because
he has rightly become the symbol of the United States' fateful departure from a
body of settled international law and human rights practice for which the
country claims to stand.

On the other hand, perhaps it is fitting that Mr. Gonzales be confirmed. The
system of torture has, after all, survived its disclosure. We have entered a new
era; the traditional story line in which scandal leads to investigation and
investigation leads to punishment has been supplanted by something else.
Wrongdoing is still exposed; we gaze at the photographs and read the documents,
and then we listen to the president's spokesman ''reiterate,'' as he did last
week, ''the president's determination that the United States never engage in
torture.'' And there the story ends.

At present, our government, controlled largely by one party only intermittently
harried by a timorous opposition, is unable to mete out punishment or change
policy, let alone adequately investigate its own war crimes. And, as
administration officials clearly expect, and senators of both parties well
understand, most Americans -- the Americans who will not read the reports, who
will soon forget the photographs and who will be loath to dwell on a repellent
subject -- are generally content to take the president at his word.

But reality has a way of asserting itself. In the end, as Gen. Joseph P. Hoar
pointed out this week, the administration's decision on the Geneva Conventions
''puts all American servicemen and women at risk that are serving in combat
regions.'' For General Hoar -- a retired commander of American forces in the
Middle East and one of a dozen prominent retired generals and admirals to oppose
Mr. Gonzales -- torture has a way of undermining the forces using it, as it did
with the French Army in Algeria.

The general's concerns are understandable. The war in Iraq and the war on
terrorism are ultimately political in character. Victory depends in the end not
on technology or on overwhelming force but on political persuasion. By using
torture, the country relinquishes the very ideological advantage -- the
promotion of democracy, freedom and human rights -- that the president has so
persistently claimed is America's most powerful weapon in defeating Islamic
extremism. One does not reach democracy, or freedom, through torture.

By using torture, we Americans transform ourselves into the very caricature our
enemies have sought to make of us. True, that miserable man who pulled out his
hair as he lay on the floor at Guantanamo may eventually tell his interrogators
what he knows, or what they want to hear. But for America, torture is
self-defeating; for a strong country it is in the end a strategy of weakness.
After Mr. Gonzales is confirmed, the road back -- to justice, order and
propriety -- will be very long. Torture will belong to us all.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Jonathan Twingley)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (89%); SCANDALS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); MISCONDUCT (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); TERRORISM (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); WAR & CONFLICT
(66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (63%) Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (75%) Mark Danner; Alberto Gonzalez; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico Vows to Indict Ex-Leaders in '68 Massacre

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 332 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Jan. 13


A special prosecutor appointed to investigate Mexico's most important human
rights crimes said Thursday he would bring charges against two dozen former
military and civilian officials for the 1968 student massacre at Tlatelolco.

The prosecutor, Ignacio Carrillo, said former President Luis Echeverria Alvarez
could be among those named in the indictments to be filed in March. If so, it
would be the government's second attempt to win a genocide indictment against
Mr. Echeverria, now 83 and considered the oldest survivor of the authoritarian
government that used fraud and corruption to control the country for more than
seven decades.

Last July, prosecutors charged Mr. Echeverria and several of his former aides
with genocide in the killings of at least 25 student protesters who were
attacked with clubs and chains by shock troops as they marched peacefully
through Mexico City in 1971. The indictment, the first against a former Mexican
president, was considered a signal event.

But the next day, a Mexican judge dismissed the charges, saying the 30-year-old
statute of limitations had passed. That decision is currently being reviewed by
Mexico's Supreme Court.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Carrillo said he would not wait for the Supreme
Court's decision in that case to file the indictments in the Tlatelolco
massacre, in which a military unit opened fire on student protesters gathered in
a downtown plaza shortly before the 1968 Olympics. Hundreds were killed and
wounded, and the Tlatelolco massacre was a turning point in Mexico's struggle
for democracy and fueled an era of social unrest.

Over the next 15 years, the government began violent campaigns against its real
and imagined enemies. At least 275 people were kidnapped and killed in the
so-called dirty war, and independent human rights activists say the real toll is
twice as high.

Mr. Carrillo said he expected to file 30 more indictments in the dirty war
killings before the end of the year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (93%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
STUDENT ACTIVISM (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); ETHICS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); POLITICS (72%);
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (72%); OLYMPICS (68%); JUDGES (67%); RIOTS (64%) Freedom
and Human Rights; Demonstrations and Riots; Ethics; Frauds and Swindling;
Politics and Government

PERSON: Ginger Thompson; Ignacio Carrillo; Luis Echeverria Alvarez

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (92%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%)

REGION: Mexico; Tlatelolco (Mexico); Mexico

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: France: 'Carlos' Wins A Case

BYLINE: By John Tagliabue (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 96 words


The European Court of Human Rights ruled that France failed to provide Ilich
Ramirez Sanchez, the terrorist better known as Carlos the Jackal for his role in
attacks and hijackings in Western Europe, proper legal protection against the
conditions of his imprisonment. Carlos was sentenced to life in prison in 1997.
The court, in Strasbourg, ordered France to pay him the equivalent of $6,500,
arguing that he had been unable legally to contest his solitary confinement. But
it denied his claim that such imprisonment constituted cruel or unusual
punishment.   John Tagliabue (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%);
HIJACKING (88%); SENTENCING (88%); LITIGATION (88%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (93%) European Court of Human
Rights

PERSON: John Tagliabue; Ilich Ramirez Sanchez; Carlos the Jackal (Illich Ramirez
Sanchez)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (96%); EUROPE (92%); WESTERN EUROPE (73%)

REGION: France

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hidden Files Force Brazil to Face Its Past

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Jan. 30


As if by magic, incriminating documents supposedly incinerated years ago by the
government have suddenly reappeared. As a result, Brazil is being forced to
confront one of the most distasteful aspects of its past: the death,
disappearance or torture of hundreds of political prisoners during 21 years of
military dictatorship.

For years, the military and state intelligence agencies swore that no records of
that dark era still existed. ''They were all legally destroyed in the 80's and
90's, in accordance with established procedures,'' Jose Viegas said in an
interview late in 2003 when he was the civilian minister of defense, citing
assurances he said he had received from the military high command.

But in October, a pair of photographs said to be those of Vladimir Herzog, a
political prisoner killed in 1975, unexpectedly resurfaced. In the outcry that
followed, the former military intelligence agent who supplied the pictures said
they were among thousands of pages of documents supposedly destroyed after
democracy was restored in 1985 but were in fact in secret archives still out of
the reach of civilian authorities.

Reluctantly, the state intelligence agency and the intelligence branches of the
armed forces admitted the claim was true. Since then, President Luiz Inacio Lula
da Silva, a former labor leader who was himself briefly jailed by the
dictatorship, has been grappling with the problem of what to do with the
documents and how to punish senior intelligence and military officials, some
still in government service, who lied about the records' destruction.

In files that have already been opened, some shocking discoveries have been
made. Joao Luiz Pinaud, director of the government's Special Commission on the
Death and Disappearance of Political Prisoners until late last year -- when he
resigned, complaining of a lack of official support -- said he had opened one
crate of papers and found with them almost an entire skeleton, apparently of a
guerrilla killed more than 30 years ago in the Amazon.

''Not only were documents concealed, illegally destroyed and lied about, but
bodies were hidden, cemeteries were vandalized and witnesses were coerced, all
of which are crimes,'' said Mr. Pinaud, a former judge and now a law professor.
''My question is what, if anything, the government intends to do about it.''

Initially, the army sought to justify its mistreatment of political prisoners,
leading to a confrontation with Mr. Viegas. Mr. Viegas stepped down in November
after Mr. da Silva declined to fire or even publicly rebuke the army commander,
Gen. Francisco de Albuquerque, for what political commentators here described as
a lack of discipline and a breach of the principle of civilian supremacy.

Recognizing the seriousness of the situation, Mr. da Silva then appointed his
vice president, Jose Alencar, as the new defense minister. After a lunch last
month with commanders of the three military services, which coincided with the
first meeting of a new government commission asked to decide what to do with the
trove of documents from the dictatorship, Mr. da Silva praised ''the loyalty,
dedication and patriotism of the armed forces.''

Nonetheless, last month a cache of partly burned documents, some of them dated
as late as a decade after the return to civilian rule, was uncovered at an air
force base in the northeast. Other deposits of papers have been found at a
school in the northeast and on a ranch in the far southern part of the country.

The number of people who died, disappeared or were tortured during the military
dictatorship that seized power in 1964 is significantly smaller than the
thousands who perished in smaller neighboring countries. But until the recent
revelations forced his hand, Mr. da Silva was much less energetic than Nestor
Kirchner of Argentina or Ricardo Lagos of Chile in pressing for those
responsible to be brought to justice.

The military seized power here a decade earlier than in those other countries,
so ''we exported our torture know-how to our neighbors and really invented all
these terrible things like the disappeared,'' said Cecilia Coimbra, a leader of
the human rights group Torture Never Again. ''But when it comes to recuperating
our historical memory, Brazil has lagged behind because our governments, this
one included, have never taken a tough stance.''

Among those who have expressed reservations about making the documents public is
Mr. da Silva's own national security chief, Gen. Jorge Armando Felix. In an
interview published in November by Folha de Sao Paulo, he said that ''some
dossiers worry us, because they deal with people in extremely embarrassing
situations.''

Some former guerrillas were having affairs that their spouses do not know about
even today, he said, while other former prisoners had informed on their
comrades, sometimes without being tortured. ''Nobody should know about this
except with the authorization of the person involved,'' General Felix contended.

In some quarters, that has been interpreted as a warning to the current
left-leaning government to back off. ''General Felix made a threat, that if you
insist on this, we will reveal things that you won't like,'' Mr. Pinaud said.

But now that the existence of the files has been confirmed, Mr. da Silva is
facing pressure to make them available. Nilmario Miranda, the government's human
rights secretary, did not respond to requests for an interview, but other
officials have proposed sending everything to the National Archives, where, Mr.
Alencar suggested, ''serious'' historians and other researchers would be allowed
to see at least some of the papers.

But that does not satisfy human rights groups, which vow to step up their
campaign when normal business here resumes after Carnival next month. They want
to achieve what they call the ''complete, unrestricted and immediate'' opening
of all files and to establish museums and cultural centers where Brazilians can
have access to a shameful chapter in their country's history.

''It's not only relatives of the dead and disappeared who want to know where,
how and when their loved ones were killed,'' Ms. Coimbra said. ''These were acts
of violence committed against all of society, and the state has to assume its
responsibility, not try to block or limit the dissemination of these
documents.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); ARMIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (77%); MILITARY RULE (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); POLITICS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); VANDALISM (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); MISSING PERSONS (72%);
APPOINTMENTS (71%); ETHICS (65%); CEMETERIES (61%) Freedom and Human Rights;
Torture  ; Political Prisoners; Politics and Government; Missing Persons;
Ethics; Intelligence Services; Armament, Defense and Military Forces

PERSON: LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA (79%) Larry Rohter; Luiz Inacio Lula (Pres) Da
Silva

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (58%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (94%)

REGION: Brazil; Brazil

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Both Sides of Conflict in Darfur Dispute Findings in U.N. Report

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, Feb. 1


The leader of the main rebel group fighting the Sudanese government in Darfur
criticized the United Nations on Tuesday over a report that found that while the
violence in the region included atrocities and crimes against humanity, it did
not constitute genocide.

''When you have thousands and thousands dead, villages burned, women and
children raped by the government and its janjaweed, how can you not call it
genocide,'' Abdelwahid Mohamed Ahmed al-Nur, chairman of the Sudanese Liberation
Movement, said in a telephone interview from Eritrea, where the group's
leadership is based. ''I don't know what the international community means by
genocide, by ethnic cleansing, if not what our people have suffered.''

Criticism also came from the other side of the conflict, with Sudanese
government officials saying that the report was ''emotional'' and that there was
''no evidence'' to back up its claims. The government, which knew of the report
before its public release on Monday, had earlier been saying that the
investigation did not find evidence of genocide. But its stance shifted once the
full details became public.

The details included extensive passages describing rape, attacks on civilians
and other atrocities that the United Nations commission charged with
investigating the violence said were committed by government forces and their
allies.

Justice Minister Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin told Reuters that international
attention on Darfur by the news media and foreign diplomats had distorted the
inquiry.

''This made it an emotional rather than realistic investigation,'' he said,
adding that evidence cited in the report was being ''hidden from us.''

The 176-page report was delivered to the United Nations Security Council last
week. It said there was also evidence that the rebels committed war crimes, but
added that those reports were far fewer than those against the government.

And while it found that there was no evidence of genocide, the report did not
mince words in describing the violence racking Darfur, saying crimes as serious
as genocide had been committed, and calling for referrals to the International
Criminal Court, something the Bush administration opposes.

Human rights organizations praised the commission's work, saying the debate over
whether or not the violence met the technical definition of genocide used by the
United Nations had served largely as a distraction.

''I think the whole bickering over genocide or not aside, it is a very strong
report,'' Leslie Lefkow, a Darfur expert at Human Rights Watch who is based in
Amsterdam, said in a telephone interview. ''It unequivocally states that there
have been crimes against humanity, war crimes and atrocities. The focus on
genocide is really a red herring used by the government of Sudan and others to
distract from the larger issue of what has happened in Darfur.''

While the causes of the conflict are complex, almost everyone agrees that at its
root is a long-running dispute between settled farming tribes, which in Darfur
tend to be African, and predominantly Arab nomadic herders over control of an
ever scarcer supply of arable land.

About 70,000 people have been killed and two million driven from their homes in
the conflict. The Sudanese government is accused of arming militias known as
janjaweed, or outlaws, to fight the rebels and drive ethnic Africans from their
land.

                             --------------------


U.S. Presses for Sudan Sanctions

 WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 (Reuters) -- The United States said Tuesday that it was
renewing its push for United Nations sanctions on Sudan's oil industry to press
the government to stop the violence in Darfur despite its failure to win support
for the step last year.

American officials hoped the new United Nations report that found the Sudanese
government and allied militia systematically abused civilians in Darfur would
prompt Security Council members to take stronger action.

''The United States is now proposing to other Council members a number of
elements: an accountability tribunal, deployment of peacekeepers and the
imposition of sanctions, which we believe up the ante and do move aggressively
to try to stop those atrocities,'' said Richard A. Boucher, a State Department
spokesman.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents displaced from the village of Kailek in the Darfur
region of Western Sudan sought refuge in a camp in Kass, shown in December.
(Photo by Evelyn Hockstein/Polaris)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%);
CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (71%) Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); ERITREA (79%); SENEGAL (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poker-Faced Diplomat, Negroponte Is Poised For Role as Spy Chief

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


When Duane R. Clarridge visited John D. Negroponte last summer in his barricaded
compound in Baghdad, Mr. Negroponte, then the American ambassador, surprised his
visitor by greeting him as ''Mr. Marone.''

That was Mr. Clarridge's alias 20 years ago when they last met. He was running
the Central Intelligence Agency's covert war against communism in Central
America from Honduras, where Mr. Negroponte was in his first ambassadorial post.

The greeting was a reminder that in a four-decade diplomatic career, Mr.
Negroponte, 65, has often operated on the fringes of the secret world of
intelligence.

Now, as the United States fights another borderless war against a different
enemy, terrorism, he is about to move to the center of that world, as the first
director of national intelligence. His task will be to coordinate 15 spy
agencies so that the United States is never again surprised as it was on Sept.
11, 2001, nor as ill-informed as it was about Iraq's weapons programs.

Mr. Negroponte's career has been distinguished by an unflinching allegiance to
his government's policies, whether he was helping arm the Nicaraguan contras or
lining up support for the war in Iraq as ambassador to the United Nations. As he
prepares for Senate confirmation hearings next month, a central question is
whether the traits that served him well as a diplomat are suited to a post that
may require him to tell the president what he does not want to hear.

''It's a hugely different job,'' said Lee H. Hamilton, vice chairman of the
commission that examined the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and recommended creation
of the intelligence czar's job.

''The diplomat's job is to carry out the policy of the United States government,
which is set by the president,'' said Mr. Hamilton, a former congressman from
Indiana. ''In the intelligence job, John Negroponte will have to tell the
president what we know and what we don't know -- whether the intelligence
supports or undercuts the policy. It takes courage and considerable gumption to
say, 'Mr. President, the intelligence does not run the way you'd like it to.'''

Over the years, Mr. Negroponte has developed a reputation as a poker-faced
diplomat who never betrays his personal views. If he harbored doubts before the
war in Iraq, he never let it show, said Paul Heinbecker, who was Canadian
ambassador to the United Nations at the time. ''He didn't expose whether he
thought the position of his country was 100 percent sound, 90 percent sound or
20 percent sound,'' Mr. Heinbecker said. ''He's very much the United States'
representative.''

In five ambassadorships -- the others were Mexico and the Philippines -- and in
Washington, Mr. Negroponte has helped broker peace in Vietnam, negotiated a
treaty to protect the ozone layer, cajoled congressmen to accept the North
American Free Trade Agreement and ushered Iraq through its first democratic
elections.

Mr. Negroponte, who declined to be interviewed for this article, will go to work
amid echoes of the disputes that surrounded the covert wars of the 1980's and
have shadowed his career ever since. News coverage of the fight against terror
includes near-daily reports of abuse of detainees, of the C.I.A. secretly
transporting terrorism suspects to foreign prisons, of politicized intelligence
and partisan debate about how to protect American security while preserving
American values.

Respected by Democrats as well as Republicans for his preference for quiet
negotiation over public grandstanding, his unfailing courtesy and his knowledge
of foreign affairs, Mr. Negroponte has inspired loyalty from many former
colleagues. They say he is no ideologue but a nonpartisan pragmatist, a tough
American conservative with deep European roots.

But Mr. Negroponte has become a lightning rod for liberal activists, led by
those who opposed the Reagan-era Central American intervention as brutal and
unnecessary and view the current Bush policy of pre-emption as a rerun. They say
Mr. Negroponte carried out harsh orders then and fear he will carry out harsher
orders now.

Michael Ratner, president of the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York,
called Mr. Negroponte's nomination ''scary as heck.'' Mr. Ratner recalled a cool
reception when he pressed human rights concerns with Mr. Negroponte in Honduras
two decades ago. Today Mr. Ratner is an advocate for more than 100 Iraqis who
say they were tortured in American detention centers.

''Then, the feeling was they could use any means necessary to defeat
communism,'' Mr. Ratner said. ''Today, the belief is they can use any means
necessary to defeat terrorism.''

Charles Hill, a retired diplomat now at Yale University, sees a different
parallel. During the 1980's and today, he said, some Americans wrongly focused
on scattered abuses, failing to comprehend that ''strength and diplomacy have to
be worked together'' to overcome tyranny and terrorism.

Mr. Hill finds the notion of Mr. Negroponte as a defender of torturers a
preposterous caricature. ''He's the ideal person for this intelligence job,''
Mr. Hill said. ''He's intellectually courageous and honest. He's held his
positions against all kinds of pressure.''

The son of a Greek shipping executive -- the family name comes from the old name
of a Greek island -- Mr. Negroponte was born in London and grew up on Park
Avenue in Manhattan and on Long Island. He graduated from Phillips Exeter
Academy and Yale (in the same class as Porter J. Goss, the director of central
intelligence) and took ski vacations at the family's home in Switzerland. His
friends say he is driven by ambition and a sense of public service.

Mr. Negroponte left Harvard Law School to join the Foreign Service in 1960. By
1964, he was in Vietnam -- Vietnamese is among the five languages he speaks --
and would be immersed in the country over the next decade as an aide to Henry A.
Kissinger in Saigon, Paris and Washington.

Mr. Negroponte eventually broke with his mentor, arguing that Dr. Kissinger's
peace treaty undercut the South Vietnamese. It was a rare rebellion, and it
slowed his career. But he never went public.

''John just said, 'I want out,' and went off to the embassy in Ecuador as
economics officer,'' said Robert B. Oakley, who shared an office with him in
Saigon. ''His approach has always been to work from within.''

Mr. Negroponte arrived in Honduras in 1981 just as President Ronald Reagan
authorized paramilitary operations against the leftist government of Nicaragua.
Honduras became the base for the Nicaraguan opposition, known as the contras,
and their C.I.A. supporters.

This period has haunted Mr. Negroponte. Not only rights activists but also Jack
R. Binns, Mr. Negroponte's predecessor as ambassador, have accused him of
discouraging reporting to Washington of abductions, torture and killings by
notorious Honduran military units.

''I think he was complicit in abuses, I think he tried to put a lid on reporting
abuses and I think he was untruthful to Congress about those activities,'' said
Mr. Binns, now retired in Arizona.

A 1997 report by the inspector general of the C.I.A. seemed to support the
accusations, saying Mr. Negroponte was ''particularly sensitive'' about
reporting abuses.

He has rejected the charges, and the evidence is equivocal. In 2001, at his
confirmation hearing for the United Nations job, Mr. Negroponte labeled the
C.I.A. assertion ''absolutely false.'' He said that democracy was the best
guarantor of both human rights and peace, and that he had tried to nourish
Honduras's fledgling elected government while complaining privately of abuses.

''Could I have been more vocal?'' Mr. Negroponte said. ''Well, you know, in
retrospect perhaps I could have been.''

Two former subordinates in Honduras say they heard Mr. Negroponte raise specific
cases of abuse with Gen. Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, the hard-line military chief.
''I remember very difficult conversations with Alvarez on the treatment of
prisoners,'' said Raymond F. Burghardt, political counselor from 1982 to 1984.

What appears indisputable is that Mr. Negroponte played an active role in
managing the contra war. ''Negroponte was a big supporter of the agency's covert
action mission,'' said Mr. Clarridge, the C.I.A. veteran.

Declassified records from 1983 show Mr. Negroponte asking Washington to
authorize 3,000 weapons to be shipped secretly to Honduras to arm the contras.

''What you have is an ambassador putting on a C.I.A. station chief's hat,'' said
Peter Kornbluh of the National Security Archive at George Washington University.
''Some people might say this makes him more qualified for the new intelligence
job.''

Leo Valladares Lanza, a law professor who as Honduras's human rights
commissioner investigated 184 ''disappearances'' in the early 1980's, said Mr.
Negroponte made aiding the contras a far higher priority than preventing abuses.

''I think he could have stopped all these assassinations and torture,'' Dr.
Valladares said. Of the intelligence job, he added: ''We're against this
nomination. If he didn't see human rights violations in Honduras, it's possible
he won't see human rights violations anywhere in the world.''

After his stint in Honduras, Mr. Negroponte held a series of less-prominent
posts over the next dozen years. As an assistant secretary of state, he worked
on AIDS, ozone and sea law. He served in the Reagan White House as deputy
national security adviser. As ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Negroponte
pressed on foreign colleagues American intelligence on Iraqi weapons that turned
out to be profoundly flawed.

If he was miffed, Mr. Negroponte never spoke out. ''Colin Powell was the good
soldier, and John Negroponte was the good soldier to the good soldier,'' said
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, then British ambassador to the United Nations. Dispatched
last July to Iraq, Mr. Negroponte worked closely with what intelligence
officials describe as the largest C.I.A. station in the world. He was
deliberately as inconspicuous in public as his predecessor with the Coalition
Provisional Authority, L. Paul Bremer III, had been visible.

''He was told to play a low-key role and let the Iraqis be out front,'' said Mr.
Clarridge, the C.I.A. retiree. ''And that's what he likes to do, anyway.''

Mr. Negroponte shifted more than $1 billion to build up the Iraqi Army from
reconstruction projects, a move prompted by his experience with the frailty of
the South Vietnamese Army, said Mr. Oakley, the former colleague from Vietnam.

Before the Jan. 30 election, Mr. Negroponte also defeated a plan proposed by
some officials to send political consultants to Iraq to try to head off too big
a victory by religious Shiites, said Bernard Aronson, a former assistant
secretary of state and an old friend. Mr. Negroponte ''had the courage to say
no,'' arguing that American meddling could undermine the legitimacy of the vote,
Mr. Aronson said.

Of Mr. Negroponte's new intelligence position, two dozen current and former
government officials interviewed agreed that the job is fraught with hazards.

''You have a bureaucracy, and you put another bureaucracy on top of it, and you
expect the bureaucracy on top to solve the problems of the bureaucracy below?''
said Fred C. Ikle, a former defense official who worked with Mr. Negroponte in
the Reagan administration. ''Good luck to him!''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: AT THE U.N. -- As the United States ambassador to Iraq, John D.
Negroponte, right, voted on a Security Council resolution on Iraq in May 2003.
(Photo by Richard Drew/Associated Press)
IN NAJAF -- Under heavy security, Mr. Negroponte arrived last fall to meet with
Iraqi officials. (Photo by Alaa Al-Raya/Associated Press)
IN BAGHDAD -- Ambassador Negroponte, left, met last month with Ibrahim
al-Jaafari of the United Iraqi Alliance. Mr. Jaafari is the Shiite bloc's
nominee for prime minister of Iraq. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images)
 ON CAPITOL HILL -- Mr. Negroponte, testified in 1981 before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (91%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); TERRORISM (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); PUBLIC
POLICY (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (66%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (52%) Intelligence Services; Biographical Information

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (59%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (58%)

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (94%) Scott Shane; John D Negroponte

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%); HONDURAS (92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (90%);
PHILIPPINES (79%); NICARAGUA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             106 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 11, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congress Approves Financing For Military and Immigration

BYLINE: By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


The Senate voted unanimously on Tuesday to pass a bill that included $82 billion
for supplemental military spending as well as several immigration and border
security measures that had provoked fierce debate in Congress that is likely to
continue for months.

The nature of the bill, mainly providing support for American troops overseas
that President Bush had requested, made it all but politically impossible to
oppose in its final form.

''Our brave men and women in uniform will not relent in their fight against
terror, and we must not relent in our support of them,'' Senator Bill Frist of
Tennessee, the majority leader, said. ''I'm glad that the House and Senate were
able to move so swiftly on this legislation.''

Before voting to approve the measure, Democrats complained one last time about
the use of an ''emergency supplemental'' bill to pay for potentially foreseeable
military expenses and accomplish a variety of other things Congress wanted.

''Having this supplemental, unfortunately with the big title of emergency over
it, appears to be an effort to rush things through to avoid Congressional
oversight and scrutiny,'' Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat of New York,
said in the brief debate over the bill.

The most contentious aspects of the bill were a set of immigration measures
sponsored by Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. and attached by the
House, which he argued would make it harder for foreign terrorists to operate in
the United States. Those include provisions, known as the Real ID Act, which
will require states to check the citizenship or legal residence status of any
applicant for a driver's license, imposing new costs on state governments and
requiring more paperwork for drivers.

The bill also overrides environmental rules that have impeded the construction
of a barrier intended to deter illegal immigrants along the Mexican border near
San Diego. A third provision would make it harder for immigrants to gain amnesty
by making claims of persecution or human rights violations abroad.

The amnesty provision drew heavy criticism from religious and human rights
groups who argued that it could harm genuine victims who failed to make their
case effectively enough. Republicans senators persuaded the House and Senate
conference to loosen its language.

Aides involved in the negotiations said the bill had been modified to ensure
asylum-seekers a right to appeal immigration decisions. The measure was also
changed to say that immigration officials ''should consider the totality of
factors'' in evaluating an applicant's credibility to allow for traumatized
asylum seekers' making inconsistent statements.

One Democrat, Representative Robert Wexler of Florida, faulted his party as not
fighting harder to oppose the measures.

''I am baffled that so many Democrats caved in to the parliamentary tricks of
the Republican leadership,'' Mr. Wexler said.

Partly in response to the legislation, the United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops began a ''justice for immigrants'' campaign on Tuesday.

''The bishops have grown increasingly concerned with the current public
discourse surrounding immigrants, in which newcomers are characterized as a
threat to our nation and not a benefit,'' Cardinal Theodore W. McCarrick,
archbishop of Washington, said.

The debate over immigration policy, begun during consideration of the
supplemental spending bill, is expected to continue as Congress considers a
broader immigration policy package including some form of a foreign guest-worker
program that would enable currently illegal immigrants to become citizens.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Senator John McCain,
Republican of Arizona, are expected to introduce that proposal within days.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); APPROVALS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); AMNESTY (85%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DEFENSE SPENDING (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); US REAL ID ACT OF 2005 (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (67%); DRIVERS LICENSES (63%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (61%); RELIGION (61%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (61%) United States
Armament and Defense; Immigration and Refugees; Terrorism; Law and Legislation

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (58%); ROBERT
WEXLER (58%) David D Kirkpatrick; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); MEXICO (79%)

REGION: United States; Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             108 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Executive Whom U.S. Wants to Extradite Challenges Treaty

BYLINE: By HEATHER TIMMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 13


A retired British manufacturing executive is challenging the use of a treaty
with the United States under which his extradition is being sought in a
price-fixing case, contending that the treaty, signed as the two countries were
pledging increased cooperation to fight terrorism, violates his human rights.

The retired executive, Ian Norris, 62, and his lawyers contend that price-fixing
was not a criminal offense in Britain during the period the American
investigation covers. They also say that it is unfair for the Justice Department
to use the treaty because the United States Senate has not ratified it.

''We have effectively denuded our own citizens of legal protection with
absolutely no reciprocity,'' said Alistair Graham, a partner with White & Case
who is representing Mr. Norris. ''This is a matter of huge public interest for
U.K. citizens.''

Mr. Norris and his lawyers join a growing chorus of the treaty's critics in
Britain, including many politicians and human rights advocates. The treaty adds
the United States to a list of European countries that can ask that British
citizens be extradited to stand trial, without providing any evidence of their
crimes, and vice versa.

Critics of the treaty, signed in March, 2003, said they thought American
prosecutors were overreaching. Many in Britain expected the British citizens who
were identified for extradition under its provisions to be mainly terrorism
suspects, but it has been used so far against a number of businessmen as well.

So far, the Home Office said, the United States has sought 43 extraditions under
the treaty: 10 on drug charges, 3 on terrorism charges, 22 for fraud, 2 for
murder and 1 for obstruction of justice. Six people have been extradited, though
information was not available about which ones.

''We are concerned that the American courts are exercising extraterritorial
jurisdiction, particularly in financial fraud matters, that goes beyond anything
the U.K. seeks to exercise,'' said William Goodhart, a member of the House of
Lords who has proposed reviewing the legislation under which the treaty is
carried out in Britain. ''The main argument against the act is that the treaty
itself is not reciprocal.''

Others whose extradition is being sought have also gone to court to challenge
the treaty. Among them are three former NatWest bankers who did work with Enron.
British regulators reviewed their involvement with the company, and did not seek
to prosecute.

Baber Ahmed, a computer expert accused of raising cash to support terrorism
through the World Wide Web, also has sought court protection, contending that he
will be treated unjustly if he is extradited.

In response to questions about the treaty this week, the British Home Office
issued a statement noting that the treaty was completely new, and required the
consent of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee before it could be ratified by
the United States government. ''We have been advised by the U.S. State
Department that although the committee had a heavy schedule, the U.S. State
Department has asked it to consider the treaty at the earliest possible time,''
the statement said.

In Washington, Andy Fisher, press secretary for Senator Richard G. Lugar, the
chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the treaty had not made its
way through the ratification process yet. ''The Senate received the treaty last
year,'' he said. ''The committee has not had a hearing on it yet.'' He said he
did not know when one would be scheduled.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (97%); PRICE FIXING (92%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (90%);
RESTRAINT OF TRADE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%);
EXECUTIVES (78%); LAWYERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); LITIGATION (76%); MAJOR
US LAW FIRMS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); LEGISLATION
(75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (73%); JURISDICTION (71%) Treaties; United States International
Relations; Extradition; Antitrust Actions and Laws; Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism

COMPANY: WHITE & CASE LLP (57%); ENRON CREDITORS RECOVERY CORP (51%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (57%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (57%);
SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (51%)

PERSON: Heather Timmons; Ian Norris

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (97%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Europeans Renew Call For Inquiry

BYLINE: By C.J. Chivers (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 149 words


The 55-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe strongly
criticized the Uzbek government for its crackdown in Andijon last month, saying
that the use of force was excessive and indiscriminate and that Uzbek forces
might have executed unarmed civilians. It estimated that 300 to 500 people were
killed and renewed its call for an international investigation. In Washington,
Representative Lloyd Doggett, a Democrat from Texas and member of the House Ways
and Means Committee, announced that he would introduce an amendment to the 2006
defense appropriations bill seeking to limit American military expenditures in
Uzbekistan. Meanwhile, Human Rights Watch said that 29 Uzbek refugees had been
detained by Kyrgyz authorities and that it feared that the refugees could be
turned over to Uzbek security forces for torture. Four others have already been
sent back.   C.J. Chivers (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
INVESTIGATIONS (87%); LEGISLATION (86%); APPROPRIATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (85%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (74%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (70%);
DEFENSE SPENDING (68%) Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights;
Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY & COOPERATION IN EUROPE (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (57%) Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

PERSON: LLOYD DOGGETT (55%) C J Chivers

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (95%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); ASIA (92%);
KYRGYZSTAN (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Andijon (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             114 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Return Sought For 131 Who Fled

BYLINE: By C.J. Chivers (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 104 words


Uzbekistan is seeking the extradition from Kyrgyzstan of 131 survivors of the
deadly crackdown last month in Andijon, claiming they have been charged in
absentia with involvement in ''terrorist attacks.'' The United Nations and
Western governments have been urging the Kyrgyz government to refrain from
turning over any of the survivors to the Uzbek authorities, who have been
condemned for their use of torture. Human Rights Watch said it was deeply
concerned for the survivors and noted that 29 men had already been taken into
Kyrgyz custody, a step it fears will lead to their extradition to Uzbekistan.
C.J. Chivers (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); REFUGEES (87%); IMMIGRATION (86%);
TERRORISM (85%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (85%) Extradition; Immigration and Refugees;
Freedom and Human Rights; Torture

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%) United Nations

PERSON: C J Chivers

COUNTRY: KYRGYZSTAN (95%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Kyrgyzstan; Andijon (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             115 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Kyrgyzstan To Expel More Uzbeks

BYLINE: By Ethan Wilensky-Lanford (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 144 words


Kyrgyzstan's top prosecutor said his country would return 29 survivors of the
deadly crackdown on a short-lived uprising in neighboring Uzbekistan last month
despite concerns by the United Nations, the European Union and rights groups
that they could face torture. ''Among the 29, there are terrorists and religious
extremists,'' Azimbek Beknazarov, the Kyrgyz prosecutor general, said, according
to The Associated Press. More than 500 Uzbeks fled to Kyrgyzstan after the
revolt was ended by gunfire from the authorities. Survivors have said hundreds
died. Kyrgyz authorities forcibly returned four refugees on June 9. Acacia
Shields, the Central Asia researcher for Human Rights Watch, said, ''It is a
violation of international law to return a person to a country that uses
torture, and we know that Uzbekistan is such a country.''   Ethan
Wilensky-Lanford (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); TERRORISM (87%); EXTRADITION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); IMMIGRATION (86%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%) Torture
; Freedom and Human Rights; Immigration and Refugees; Extradition

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(57%) United Nations; European Union

PERSON: Ethan Wilensky-Lanford

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (98%); KYRGYZSTAN (96%); ASIA (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (87%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Kyrgyzstan; Andijon (Uzbekistan)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             116 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guillermo Suarez Mason, 81, of 'Dirty War'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, June 23


Gen. Guillermo Suarez Mason, a former junta commander under arrest in connection
with suspected illegal adoptions in Argentina's last dictatorship, died Tuesday.
He was 81.

The cause was cardiac arrest, his lawyer, Adolfo Casabal Elias, told the news
agency Diarios y Noticias. He was being held at a Buenos Aires prison when he
was taken to the Central Military Hospital over the weekend.

As former commander of Argentina's First Army Corps, General Suarez Mason was
facing an investigation into allegations of illegal adoptions of children born
to women detained during the 1976-83 dictatorship.

He also had been under past investigation by courts looking into the 1980
disappearances of about 20 armed leftist guerrillas during the military's
crackdown on dissent known as the Dirty War.

He was the commander of the First Army Corps from 1976 until 1979 at the height
of the crackdown.

The corps had command of so-called Zone One, including the capital and populous
outlying areas, when, human rights groups contend, dozens of clandestine torture
centers operated there.

Officially some 12,000 people died or disappeared during the military junta's
campaign against leftists and other dissidents, but human rights groups put the
toll at close to 30,000.

General Suarez Mason had been held under house arrest for years while undergoing
investigation into accusations of illegal adoptions. But he had recently been
sent to the Devoto prison in Buenos Aires after the authorities said he violated
terms of his detention.

After Argentina's dictatorship, many military officers were tried on charges of
torture, disappearances and other abuses and given life prison sentences. Most
were imprisoned in 1985 and later pardoned in 1990 by President Carlos Menem.

General Suarez Mason, who fled Argentina after the dictatorship only to be
extradited from the United States in 1988, was included in the pardon. He had
proclaimed his innocence of any crimes.

Several of the junta's top leaders, including the general, were subsequently
placed under detention or house arrest in the late 1990's on charges of
kidnapping children belonging to mothers who ''disappeared'' during the
military's rule. Those investigations came under a loophole in 1980's amnesty
laws.

On June 15, Argentina's Supreme Court struck down the amnesty laws as violating
international norms that require states to guarantee human rights and punish
abuses.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Guillermo Suarez Mason (Photo by Reuters, 1981)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); ADOPTION
(89%); DEATHS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); HOUSE ARREST (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%);
TORTURE (87%); AMNESTY (86%); MILITARY RULE (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (77%); SENTENCING (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (71%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (69%); PARDONS (69%) Deaths (Obituaries); Biographical Information

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (94%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             118 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 1, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Spells Out New Definition Curbing Torture

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


The Justice Department has broadened its definition of torture, significantly
retreating from a memorandum in August 2002 that defined torture extremely
narrowly and said President Bush could ignore domestic and international
prohibitions against torture in the name of national security.

The new definition was in a memorandum posted on the department's Web site late
Thursday night with no public announcement. It comes one week before the Senate
Judiciary Committee is set to question Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House
counsel and nominee for attorney general, about his role in formulating legal
policies that critics have said led to abuses at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The new memorandum, first reported in The Wall Street Journal and The Washington
Post, largely dismisses the August 2002 definition, especially the part that
asserted that mistreatment rose to the level of torture only if it produced
severe pain equivalent to that associated with organ failure or death.

''Torture is abhorrent both to American law and values and to international
norms,'' said the new memorandum written by Daniel Levin, the acting assistant
attorney general in charge of the Office of Legal Counsel, which had produced
the earlier definition.

Mr. Gonzales, who will go before the Senate committee for confirmation hearings,
served as a supervisor and coordinator inside the administration as lawyers
drafted new approaches on the limits of coercive techniques in interrogations
and the scope of the president's authority in fighting a war against terrorists.

A memorandum in January 2002 to President Bush that Mr. Gonzales signed sided
with the Justice Department in asserting that the Geneva Conventions did not
bind the United States in its treatment of detainees captured in the fighting in
Afghanistan.

The August 2002 Justice Department memorandum and a later memorandum from an
administration legal task force with similar conclusions were widely denounced
in Congress and by human rights groups as cornerstones in the approach to
detainees that led to abuses at Abu Ghraib and at the detention center in
Guantanamo.

The political effect of the new memorandum on Mr. Gonzales's appearance before
the committee was unclear. He has been expected to assert, as he has before,
that neither he nor Mr. Bush condones torture.

But the change could underline what had been the undisputed policy of the
administration at least until June, when officials said it was no longer
applicable and would be rewritten. That position came just after the August 2002
memorandum was disclosed in published reports.

Michael Ratner, the president of the Center for Constitutional Rights, which has
sued the administration over its interrogation policies, said Friday that the
redefinition ''makes it clear that the earlier one was not just some
intellectual theorizing by some lawyers about what was possible.''

''It means it must have been implemented in some way,'' Mr. Ratner said. ''It
puts the burden on the administration to say what practices were actually put in
place under those auspices.''

The International Committee of the Red Cross has said in private messages to the
United States government that American personnel have engaged in torture of
detainees, both in Iraq and at Guantanamo.

The 2002 memorandum was signed by Jay S. Bybee, who was then the head of the
legal counsel office in the Justice Department. Now a federal appeals court
judge in Nevada, Mr. Bybee has declined to comment on the issue.

The bulk of the memorandum is devoted to the Convention Against Torture and
legislation enacted by Congress that gives it the force of law. ''We conclude
that torture as defined in and proscribed by'' the statute and treaty, covers
only extreme acts and severe pain,'' it says.

It also says: ''When the pain is physical, it must be of an intensity akin to
that which accompanies serious physical injury such as death or organ failure.
Severe mental pain requires suffering not just at the moment of infliction but
it also requires lasting psychological harm.''

In revising that view, the current memorandum parses the language and the treaty
differently, saying, for example, that torture could include ''severe physical
suffering'' as well as ''severe physical pain.'' The Bybee memorandum tried to
limit torture to severe physical pain. But the new memorandum also noted that
physical suffering was difficult to define.

One distinction is that the new memorandum rejects the earlier assertion that
torture may be said to occur only if the interrogator meant to cause the harm
that resulted.

David Scheffer, a senior State Department human rights official in the Clinton
administration who teaches law at George Washington University, said Friday that
while the Justice Department's change was commendable, it might still provide
too flexible a definition of torture, leaving too many judgments in the hands of
interrogators.

The new memorandum dealt with the issue of the earlier opinion's granting the
president the power to authorize torture by saying that the Justice Department
did not have to consider that matter any longer as ''such authority would be
inconsistent with the president's unequivocal directive that United States
personnel not engage in torture.''

Mr. Bush's spokesman in Crawford, Tex., Trent Duffy, said on Friday that while
the Justice Department took the lead on the issue, it sought comment from the
president's Office of Legal Counsel. The thrust of the comments were ''to
reiterate the president's determination that the United States never engage in
torture,'' Mr. Duffy said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto R. Gonzales faces questions on interrogation policies in
his Senate confirmation hearings. (Photo by Luke Frazza/Agence France-Presse --
Getty Images)(pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); PRISONS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); LITIGATION
(75%); LAW OF WAR (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); NAVIES (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(71%); WAR & CONFLICT (66%); TERRORISM (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)
Torture; Prisoners of War; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (56%); WALL STREET JOURNAL (56%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO
(56%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (92%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (55%) Justice Department

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Neil A Lewis; George W
(Pres) Bush; Alberto R Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (91%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iraq;
Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             119 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 5, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Coercive Interrogation

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 126 words



To the Editor:

A new Justice Department memo appropriately rejects earlier government efforts
to define away the prohibition of torture (front page, Jan. 1). But the new memo
says nothing about cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, which is also
prohibited by the Convention Against Torture.

Recent reports reveal that United States interrogators at Guantanamo Bay
continue to subject detainees to painful shackling and extremes of cold and
noise. Whether or not these practices amount to torture, they certainly
constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. The Bush administration needs
to explain why it is still authorizing such illegal coercive interrogation.

James Ross
New York, Jan. 1, 2005

The writer is senior legal adviser, Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); WRITERS (86%); NAVIES
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Torture; Political
Prisoners

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Human Rights Watch; Justice Department

PERSON: James Ross

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             121 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 Britons and an Australian To Be Freed at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 11


The United States has agreed to release the last four Britons and one Australian
who have been held without charge or trial at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba for around
three years, officials in the three countries announced Tuesday.

The announcement was broadly welcomed by civil and human rights campaigners here
who said, however, that the United States should now free all the estimated 550
prisoners held at Guantanamo, and that Britain should release 11 foreigners it
is holding without charge or trial under its terrorism laws.

Jack Straw, the British foreign secretary, announced the release in Parliament
on Tuesday, saying it came about after ''intensive and complex'' discussions
with the United States. He added that he expected the men to return to Britain
within the next few weeks.

In a statement in Washington, the Pentagon said it had agreed to release the
four Britons and an Australian, describing them as ''enemy combatants who had
been detained by the United States in accordance with the laws of war and U.S.
law.''

The statement said Britain and Australia had ''accepted responsibility for these
individuals and will work to prevent them from engaging in or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities in the future.'' The Pentagon said further that
the countries had ''made a number of security assurances to the U.S. government
in this regard that was important to the transfer decision.''

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld reaffirmed that point in Washington on
Tuesday. The transfer ''ought not to leave anyone with any particular impression
as to the nature of the individuals,'' he said, ''because in every instance, the
discussions include an arrangement with the other countries as to how they will
manage those individuals once they arrive in their country.''

In Parliament in London, however, Mr. Straw said that once the men were back in
Britain, ''the police will decide whether to arrest them'' in accordance with
terrorism laws.

Mr. Straw said the British authorities would take ''every practical step'' to
''maintain national security and to protect public safety'' after the men's
release. But in response to a question in Parliament, he said no promises had
been made to the United States authorities on the prisoners' treatment back in
Britain.

When five other Britons were released from Guantanamo last March, they were
interviewed by the British police but set free within hours.

The four Britons to be transferred were identified as Moazzam Begg, Feroz
Abbasi, Martin Mubanga and Jamaal Belmar. The Australian was identified by
Australian officials as Mamdouh Habib.

In a statement, Australia's attorney general, Phillip Ruddock, and Foreign
Minister Alexander Downer said the United States believed that ''Mr. Habib had
prior knowledge of the terrorist attacks on or before 11 September 2001,''
adding, ''Mr. Habib has acknowledged he spent time in Afghanistan, and others
there at that time claim he trained with Al Qaeda.'' But, the statement said, it
did not seem likely that he could be prosecuted under Australian law.

According to Mr. Straw, the Britons were among thousands of people detained by
American-led forces, which ousted the Taliban government in Afghanistan after
the Sept. 11 attacks.

But some human rights advocates say not all of the detainees were seized on the
battlefield in Afghanistan, as the United States maintains. One of the British
detainees, Mr. Mubanga, was said to have been arrested in Zambia.

At the same time, Shami Chakrabarti, the director of a civil rights group called
Liberty, urged the British government to heed a ruling last year by Britain's
highest court that said the government could not continue to detain indefinitely
foreign terrorism suspects without charging or trying them. The court, a special
panel of the House of Lords, found that the detentions conflicted with European
human rights conventions.

''We now look to the government to practice what it preaches and to listen to
the House of Lords by releasing or charging all those detained without charge in
the U.K.,'' Ms. Chakrabarti said.

One of those still in detention is Abu Qatada, a Syrian cleric Britain says was
a spiritual mentor to Mohamed Atta, believed to be one of the leaders of the
Sept. 11 attacks.

In Parliament, Mr. Straw said British consular officials had reported that the
four men to be released from Guantanamo seemed to be in reasonable physical
shape.

In a letter last year, which the United States authorities agreed to declassify,
Moazzam Begg, 36, said he had been subjected to torture at Guantanamo. Three of
the Britons released last March also said they had been tortured and mistreated.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Feroz Abbasi, above, and Moazzam Begg are among the last four
Britons the United States is freeing from Guantanamo detention. (Photographs by
Press Association)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
LAW OF WAR (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); NAVIES (68%) Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba); Prisoners of War; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: JACK STRAW (79%); PHILIP RUDDOCK (58%) Jack (Sec) Straw; Alan Cowell

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); AUSTRALIA (95%); CUBA (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Australia; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Out of the Darkness

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: Atlanta


You could get dizzy thinking about the history that has passed in and out of
Ebenezer Baptist Church, which was the spiritual home (and primary safe house)
of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the civil rights movement of the 1950's and
60's. There's now a spiffy new church right across the street, but the memories
of the battles fought and the freedom gained in that tumultuous period live on
in the old building, with its narrow stairways and creaking floors, and the
basement where so many strategy sessions were held.

On Friday night I had the privilege of joining the actors Martin Sheen, Lynn
Redgrave, Alfre Woodard, Sean Penn, Woody Harrelson and others in a reading at
the old church of Ariel Dorfman's play ''Speak Truth to Power: Voices From
Beyond the Dark,'' which is based on the book ''Speak Truth to Power,'' by Kerry
Kennedy and the photographer Eddie Adams. The occasion marked the 76th
anniversary of Dr. King's birth (he was only 39 when he was killed) and the 40th
anniversary of his acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize. Among those in the
audience was Dr. King's widow, Coretta.

''Speak Truth to Power'' is about the emergence of courage and moral leadership
in those bleak periods when free expression, religious liberty, human rights and
even our very humanity are threatened by destructive forces that range from
indifference to murderous brutality. The leadership often comes from unexpected
sources, like Bobby Muller, an American Marine lieutenant whose spinal cord was
severed when he was shot in the back in Vietnam. He became a champion of
veterans' rights and years later, as a co-founder of the Campaign to Ban Land
Mines, shared the Nobel Peace Prize.

Mr. Muller, in a wheelchair, was also in the audience at Ebenezer on Friday
night .

''Courage begins with one voice,'' said Oscar Arias Sanchez, the former
president of Costa Rica, who won the Nobel Prize in 1987 for developing a
Central American peace plan.

Both the play and the book are made up of passages from interviews of men and
women who, in a wide variety of ways, defended human rights in countries that
span the globe. Dianna Ortiz is an Ursuline nun from New Mexico who went to
Guatemala in the 1980's as a missionary. She was abducted, gang raped and
tortured by government agents. She said one of the men overseeing the torture
appeared to be American. At one point she was lowered into a pit filled with the
bodies of men, women and children who had been murdered.

''To this day,'' said Sister Ortiz, ''I can smell the decomposing of bodies
disposed of in an open pit. I can hear the piercing screams of other people
being tortured.''

In a short introduction to Sister Ortiz's interview in the book, Ms. Kennedy
wrote:

''Ortiz's ordeal did not end with her escape. Her torment continued as she
sought answers from the U.S. government about the identity of her torturers in
her unrelenting quest for justice. Ortiz's raw honesty and capacity to
articulate the agony she suffered compelled the United States to declassify
long-secret files on Guatemala, and shed light on some of the darkest moments of
Guatemalan history and American foreign policy.''

Sister Ortiz now runs a center for survivors of torture.

The most hopeful thing to be drawn from Mr. Dorfman's play and Ms. Kennedy's
book is that effective leadership can come from anywhere, at any time. From my
perspective, this is a dark moment in American history. The Treasury has been
raided and the loot is being turned over by the trainload to those who are
already the richest citizens in the land. We've launched a hideous war for no
good reason in Iraq. And we're about to elevate to the highest law enforcement
position in the land a man who helped choreograph the American effort to evade
the international prohibitions against torture.

Never since his assassination in 1968 have I felt the absence of Martin Luther
King more acutely. Where are today's voices of moral outrage? Where is the
leadership willing to stand up and say: Enough! We've sullied ourselves enough.

I'm convinced, without being able to prove it, that those voices will emerge.
There was a time when no one had heard of Dr. King. Or Oscar Arias Sanchez. Or
Martin O'Brien, who founded the foremost human rights organization in Northern
Ireland, and who tells us: ''The worst thing is apathy -- to sit idly by in the
face of injustice and to do nothing about it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ANNIVERSARIES (90%); NOBEL
PRIZES (89%); AWARDS & PRIZES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (86%); CHILDREN
(78%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES
(74%); THEATER (74%); RELIGION (73%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%); INTERVIEWS
(72%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (72%); VETERANS (71%); SURFACE MINING (67%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (66%); LANDMINES (66%); SPINAL CORD INJURIES (63%); PEACE
PROCESS (50%) Blacks; Civil Rights; Theater; Ebenezer Baptist Church (Atlanta)

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (92%) Bob Herbert; Ariel Dorfman; Martin Luther Jr
(1929-68) King

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (92%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); COSTA RICA (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); VIET NAM (68%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (54%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             123 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Indonesia May Restore Military Link

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; ASIA'S DEADLY WAVES: THE PENTAGON;
Pg. 10

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Jan. 16


The United States and Indonesia are seeking to use their cooperation in dealing
with the tsunami crisis as a springboard to restore closer military ties after a
decade of limited contact because of American concern over human rights abuses
by the Indonesian Army, senior defense officials from both countries said
Sunday.

Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, visiting here on a trip to three
countries hit hard by the tsunami last month, said Congressional restrictions on
American training and arms sales should be re-evaluated in light of what the
Indonesian military is doing to refashion itself into a more professional and
accountable force.

''If we're interested in military reform here,'' Mr. Wolfowitz told reporters,
''I think we need to reconsider a bit where we are.''

Earlier in the day, Mr. Wolfowitz, who was the American ambassador here from
1986 to 1989, in the Reagan administration, said, ''Cutting off contact with
Indonesian officers only makes the problem worse.''

Military assistance to Indonesia was halted in 1992 in response to the killing
of demonstrators in East Timor by Indonesian forces. After the Sept. 11 attacks,
some counterterrorism training for Indonesian forces resumed. Last week,
restrictions were relaxed to allow the sale of spare parts for Indonesia's aging
fleet of C-130 military cargo planes so they could be used to deliver aid. Only
8 of Indonesia's 25 C-130's were in condition to be used, American officials
said.

Any further changes would require congressional approval.

Even proponents of the restrictions -- including those who have been critical of
the army for its continuing rights abuses in places like Aceh Province, the site
of worst devastation from the tsunami -- acknowledge that the best hope for
developing an army whose conduct fits a democracy is to send officers for
training in the United States.

Mr. Wolfowitz pointed out on Sunday that the new Indonesian president, Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono, is a former general who trained at the Army's Command and
General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

He has made clear that in restoring assistance, the United States would not
excuse past abuses and would press the Indonesian military to make changes to
prevent such abuses. Any renewed assistance would have to be closely monitored,
proponents of changes said.

Adm. Thomas B. Fargo, the head of the Pacific Command, said in an interview that
the Indonesian military had already taken several steps -- from no longer
allowing officers to hold seats in Parliament, to centralizing control over
special forces -- and said he favored restoring full military ties.

Admiral Fargo is seeking Pentagon approval to expand a series of conferences his
command has sponsored with Indonesian military officers on civil-military
relations, democratic institutions and other nonlethal training, a spokesman
said.

The Indonesian defense minister, Juwono Sudarsono, said Sunday at a news
conference with Mr. Wolfowitz that he was trying to make needed changes in the
350,000-member military despite a limited budget.

Mr. Sudarsono sought to remove one possible irritant in relations between the
United States and Indonesia by pulling back from his government's announcement
last week that foreign militaries assisting the relief operations would have to
leave by March 26, the three-month anniversary of the tsunami.

The comments had roiled some in Congress, who had viewed the remarks as an
ungrateful reply to a surge of emergency American relief aid, particularly from
Navy helicopters flying into remote coastal areas from the aircraft carrier
Abraham Lincoln and other ships off the western coast of Sumatra.

Mr. Sudarsono said Sunday that March 26 was not a deadline for foreign
militaries, but rather the date by which the Indonesian government would try to
improve and accelerate its ability to oversee all relief efforts. ''Foreign
military operations providing relief and rehabilitation will be allowed to
continue, albeit on a reduced scale,'' he said.

Here in Indonesia, Mr. Sudarsono said it was difficult to bolster the military's
public image, especially in places like Aceh Province, which had the greatest
number of deaths from the tsunami and where a separatist rebellion has simmered
for decades. He said he had placed a full-page advertisement in Indonesian
newspapers to thank the military for its efforts in helping tsunami victims.

He also appealed to Washington to provide more training for officers,
particularly in management and on the technical aspects of defense, and Mr.
Wolfowitz responded that such training made sense for a military in a democracy.

Officials from both the United States and Indonesia said that the Indonesian
military's handling of the crisis in Aceh could influence members of Congress on
the issue of restrictions. But perhaps more important, it might also open the
door to a settlement of the long-simmering strife there, American officials
said.

''If the military proves itself in Aceh, and shows they can do something other
than kill people there, it could bring about a settlement,'' said one American
military official who had studied the tensions there but who spoke on condition
of anonymity because he did not have an official policy making position.

Before the tsunami, Aceh was mostly off limits to foreigners, including aid
workers. Martial law was declared in the province in May 2003 and relaxed to a
state of ''civil emergency'' last year, as some 40,000 troops weakened the
rebels.

Human rights groups have accused the Indonesian military of severe abuses of
civilians.

Mr. Wolfowitz will wrap up his inspection of the tsunami-stricken region with a
visit to Sri Lanka on Monday to review the damage there as well as American
military relief operations. He visited Thailand earlier in the weekend.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Indonesian defense minister, Juwono Sudarsono, left, met
with Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz yesterday in Jakarta. (Photo by
Bagus Indahono/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); ARMIES (90%); TSUNAMIS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
NATURAL DISASTERS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); APPROVALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); PRESS CONFERENCES (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (71%); TERRORISM (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (66%); PASSENGER & CARGO
AIRCRAFT (58%) United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights;
Earthquakes; Tsunamis

PERSON: SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO (58%) Paul D (Deputy Sec) Wolfowitz; Juwono
(Min) Sudarsono; Eric Schmitt

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); INDONESIA (97%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA
(79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%)

REGION: Indonesia; Indian Ocean; Far East, South and Southeast Asia and Pacific
Areas

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 708 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-19

Voting Begins in Iraq
Iraqis began casting ballots in the country's first free elections in more than
50 years, a day after a deadly rocket strike on the American Embassy in Baghdad
killed two Americans , wounded five and heightened fears of further attacks.   1


Many Iraqis do not accept that fundamental choices about the shape of their
future political system should be made by a foreign power, but questions over
the election go far beyond the American stewardship.   1

Strained Relations With Qatar
The normally warm relationship between the United States and the tiny state of
Qatar has been strained by its sponsorship of Al Jazeera, the television station
that is a big source of news in the Arab world. Bush administration officials
have complained that Al Jazeera's broadcasts are inflammatory.   1

OPEC May Slow Production
Oil ministers gathered in Vienna for the OPEC meeting signaled that they would
leave production targets unchanged but suggested that they might cut output in
April to fend off a seasonal slowdown in demand after the winter ends in the
Northern Hemisphere. OPEC is finding it hard to justify a reduction in
production with oil trading close to last year's record highs in New York.   6

Clashes in Sudan
At least 14 people have been killed in clashes between supporters of an armed
rebel group in eastern Sudan and security forces in Port Sudan, on the Red Sea,
the local governor said.   8

C.I.A. Holds Documents
The Central Intelligence Agency is refusing to provide hundreds of thousands of
pages of documents sought by a government group under a 1998 law that requires
full disclosure of classified records related to Nazi war criminals, say
Congressional officials from both parties.   10

Karzai Urged to Seek Justice
The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission urged President Hamid Karzai to
make a commitment to bring war criminals to justice after a long era of human
rights abuses. The commission's conclusions were that more than 70 percent of
Afghans had suffered a loss or injury in the last two decades of war and that
Afghans urgently wanted to see war criminals brought to justice and removed from
public office.   8

NATIONAL   20-27

States Battle Drug Problem
Twenty states are trying to fight the growing crisis of methamphetamine
addiction through legislation that would impose tight restrictions on common
cold medicines containing pseudoephedrine, an essential ingredient in making
meth.   20

Mental Test Added for Soldiers
To better identify soldiers suffering serious psychological problems as a result
of combat duty in Iraq, the Defense Department plans to perform an additional
health assessment of servicemen and women after they come home, officials said.
20

Debate Over Meaning of Values
Many religious leaders across the theological spectrum are trying to shift the
politicial focus on moral values away from abortion and gay marriage and toward
promoting world peace and eliminating global poverty.   26

Fugitive Extradited to U.S.
Federal officials said that they had reached an agreement with the Mexican
government to extradite Agustin Vasquez Mendoza, a man suspected of
orchestrating the killing of an undercover American drug agent in Arizona in
1994.   25

SCIENCE/HEALTH

AIDS in Infants Drops Sharply
AIDS among infants has dropped so sharply in the past decade that public health
officials say it may be on the verge of being eliminated in the United States.
In 1990, as many as 2,000 babies were born infected with H.I.V., the virus that
causes AIDS; now, that number has been reduced to a bit more than 200 a year,
according to health officials.   1

NEW YORK/REGION   29-34

Conflict Delays Execution
The lawyer who delayed the execution of Michael Bruce Ross, the convicted serial
killer who was scheduled to be the first person put to death in Connecticut in
45 years, acted hours after a conference call in which a federal judge
criticized his handling of the case.   33

Neediest Cases   34

OBITUARIES   35-36

Consuelo Velazquez
A songwriter whose 1941 Latin hit ''Besame Mucho,'' took on a life of its own
worldwide, she was believed to have been 88.   36

Patsy Rowlands
A British actress who regularly appeared in the ''Carry On''comedy films, she
was 71.   35

Chess   34
Weather   24

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); POLITICS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (75%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (75%);
SPONSORSHIP (74%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (74%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (73%); ENERGY
DEPARTMENTS (73%); GOVERNORS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (70%); ENERGY MARKETS (68%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (65%); METHAMPHETAMINE
(64%); WORLD WAR II (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%);
RELIGION (60%); COMMON COLD (60%); MENTAL ILLNESS (60%); ABORTION (50%);
MARRIAGE (50%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (50%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (50%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (91%); CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (71%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (50%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (79%); RED SEA (74%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SUDAN (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); QATAR
(92%); AUSTRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Finds Crimes, Not Genocide in Darfur

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 31


A United Nations commission investigating violence in the Darfur region of Sudan
reported Monday that it had found a pattern of mass killings and forced
displacement of civilians that did not constitute genocide but that represented
crimes of similar gravity that should be sent to the International Criminal
Court for prosecution.

In a 176-page report, the five-member panel said that its finding that genocide
had not been committed ''should not be taken in any way as detracting from the
gravity of the crimes perpetrated in that region,'' and that ''international
offenses such as the crimes against humanity and war crimes that have been
committed in Darfur may be no less serious and heinous than genocide.''

The commission was appointed by Secretary General Kofi Annan in October to
determine whether genocide had occurred in Darfur, in Western Sudan, where about
70,000 villagers have been killed and 1.8 million driven from their land.

It was also asked to determine how anyone convicted should be punished, and it
answered by saying it ''strongly'' recommended that the Security Council refer
the Darfur crimes to the international court in The Hague. It said the crimes in
Darfur met the jurisdictional terms of the 1998 treaty creating the court.

That course of action is favored by most members of the 15-member Council, but
the United States has said it will vigorously resist because it objects to the
court.

The panel said the Sudanese justice system had proved unwilling or unable to
pursue the crimes in what it described as a ''climate of almost total impunity
for human rights violations.''

While the commission said that no evidence of an organized governmental act of
genocide existed, it suggested that there might have been government officials
and other people who acted ''with genocidal intent.'' Only a court could make
that determination, it said.

The commission said it had identified numbers of people including senior
government officials and commanders, rebel fighters, militiamen, army officers
and others linked to crimes but that it would withhold their names in the
interest of due process and to protect witnesses.

Among the violations of international law and crimes against humanity the
commission found were indiscriminate attacks by government forces and militias
on a widespread basis ''including the killing of civilians, torture, enforced
disappearances, destruction of villages, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, pillaging'' and displacement.''

It said such acts continued even while its investigators were in the country
gathering evidence of them.

The commission dismissed government claims that its actions were
counterinsurgency military moves. ''It is clear from the commission's findings
that most attacks were deliberately and indiscriminately directed against
civilians,'' the report said.

The Bush administration has repeatedly pushed for action against Sudan's
government, saying its involvement in a campaign of violence against black
African villagers amounted to genocide. At the same time, the administration has
objected to referring the atrocities in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court, a tribunal it has opposed from its inception on grounds that the court
could bring politically motivated actions against American personnel abroad.

Mr. Annan has said the court is the ''logical place'' for Darfur crimes to be
tried, and on Monday Australia, Canada and New Zealand circulated a letter
endorsing such a move.

The administration proposed last week that the Darfur charges be sent to a new
tribunal to be run jointly by the African Union and the United Nations and to be
based at the war crimes court in Arusha, Tanzania, which is trying suspects in
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Pierre-Richard Prosper, the United States
ambassador at large for war crimes, briefed major countries at the United
Nations on the American alternative, explaining afterward, ''We don't want to be
party to legitimizing the I.C.C.''

Several Security Council ambassadors objected to that plan immediately, citing
unnecessary duplication and the additional cost of starting a court instead of
using one already in existence. Addressing that on Monday, Richard A. Grenell,
the spokesman for the United States mission, said, ''If you're going to talk
about funding, about how much it would take for what we call the S. court, the
Sudan criminal court, don't forget that there's funding of what it would take on
the I.C.C. We're relatively confident that ours is much less.''

Stuart Holliday, a deputy American ambassador, said the United States would
offer a Darfur resolution this week that would include proposals on
peacekeeping, directed penalties and accountability, though probably not on what
''accountability mechanisms'' should be used. ''The Council just discussed the
fact that it's important that we send a very strong united signal on
accountability,'' Mr. Holliday said.

He said the resolution would probably include a tightened arms embargo and a ban
on flights by government planes that were intimidating villagers. ''The fact
that civilians are being attacked and that human rights workers are being
attacked is not acceptable,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A girl salvaged possessions recently in Darfur, Sudan, after
Arab militiamen known as janjaweed burned her home. An offensive by government
troops and the janjaweed emptied many villages in South Darfur. (Photo by
Michael Kamber for The New York Times)Map of Sudan highlighting Darfur region:
An inquiry confirmed mass killings and displacement in Darfur.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%);
DUE PROCESS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); ARMIES (76%);
TORTURE (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; Freedom and Human
Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             128 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 7, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Takes Steps to Mend Ties With Indonesian Military

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1677 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 5


After a 13-year break, the Bush administration is acting to mend relations with
the Indonesian military, the largest in Southeast Asia and a potentially crucial
player in its campaign against terrorism.

Washington is seizing on an opportunity that came with the tsunami, when
Indonesia accepted the help of the United States military in distributing aid
and had daily contacts with the Americans. Congress, concerned about Indonesia's
human rights record, curbed military ties in 1992 and cut them back further five
years ago after the army was involved in the killings of hundreds of civilians
in East Timor, a province that has since gained independence.

Now, administration officials said, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has
moved to strengthen American training of Indonesian officers considerably. Such
training allows up-and-coming officers to learn modern warfare methods, the
American system of civilian control over the military, accountability and rights
issues. Armies in Asia that receive the training, known as the International
Military Education and Training Program, include Thailand, Malaysia, India and
Pakistan.

In late January, Washington dispatched $1 million worth of spare parts for
Indonesia's aging fleet of military transport planes. For the moment, the
administration was not planning to push for the removal of the ban on the sale
of weapons to Indonesia, although that could come later, a Pentagon official
said.

The Bush administration tried once before to draw closer to Indonesia's
military, but the effort failed in 2002 when two American schoolteachers were
killed in Papua Province, and, American officials say, the Indonesian Army
blocked American investigators.

Ms. Rice now plans to certify to Congress that Indonesia is cooperating
sufficiently in investigating the Americans' deaths, a step that would remove a
major stumbling block to ties, according to an aide to Senator Patrick J. Leahy,
Democrat of Vermont. The aide, Tim Rieser, said Ms. Rice told the senator of her
decision in a telephone conversation this week. Mr. Leahy is the Congressional
architect of the break in relations dating to 1992.

Mr. Leahy and others in Congress assert that the Indonesians first need to
''fully cooperate'' with an F.B.I. investigation into the American deaths, and
in other cases of rights abuse, before full training of Indonesian soldiers in
the United States can resume. Congressional approval is necessary for a
resumption of the military training.

American military officials who have been hankering since the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks to gain access to the army, a dominant though still largely unreformed
force, and the tsunami has presented the opportunity. The Bush administration
views Indonesia, the most populous Muslim nation, as a moderate and increasingly
democratic Muslim state.

At the height of the cold war, when Indonesia was under the authoritarian rule
of General Suharto, it was viewed by American administrations as a bulwark
against Communism in Asia. Over nearly three decades, American training and
equipment poured into Indonesia, though its military became increasingly abusive
and corrupt.

The Indonesian Army itself, where some factions are viewed by American officials
to be sympathetic to Indonesia's Islamic extremist groups, has kept a determined
distance from America. But in an interview, the civilian minister of defense,
Juwono Sudarsono, who is close to the recently elected president, Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, said he planned to go to Washington in March to make the case for
what he called ''re-engagement.''

President Yudhoyono, a former general and one of the last Indonesian officers to
receive training at a United States staff college, is seen as the first
Indonesian leader with a military background to be sympathetic to reform of the
military, a proud and profoundly nationalist institution that is itself skittish
about restoring ties.

Mr. Juwono, who must take that attitude into account, said he intended to make a
''calibrated'' case to Washington that would emphasize the need for a stable
Indonesia having a military with ''accountability and legitimacy.''

He said Indonesia would not beg on its knees. Indeed, he said, the Chinese had
invited Indonesia for strategic talks last November in Beijing, the first
gesture of its kind between the nations. The Chinese, he said, offered to sell
Indonesia fighter jets at concessionary rates. ''They emphasized there would be
no conditionality,'' Mr. Juwono said.

Asked what Indonesia's response was, he said: ''We said it depends on the
strategic partnership. If it's junior partnership for Indonesia, no way.''

Mr. Juwono, who was educated at the London School of Economics, said that even
after the widely heralded democratic presidential election here last year, the
military ''retains the real levers of power.''

''From the political point of view, the military remains the fulcrum of
Indonesia,'' he said.

To upgrade the military, Mr. Juwono said officers needed more training in
management, budget and human rights issues at American military staff colleges.
American officials also argue that training in the United States can create a
more professional and disciplined force.

But Mr. Leahy said in a speech this week on the floor of the Senate that the
United States needed to keep its leverage on the Indonesian military until it
accounted for past actions. ''Although senior Indonesian military officers have
repeatedly vowed to support reform, they have done next to nothing to hold their
members accountable for these heinous crimes,'' he said. ''Instead, the
Indonesian military has consistently obstructed justice.''

After the two teachers' deaths in 2002, American officials said, the army
blocked an F.B.I. investigation for 18 months. The Indonesian police concluded
in a report soon after the killings that elements in the Indonesian military
were responsible for the deaths.

A suspect, Antonius Wamang, who is suspected of having ties to the Indonesian
Army, was finally indicted by the United States last June. He remains at large,
although Mr. Juwono said he believed that the Indonesian military police knew
his whereabouts.

In Aceh, the Indonesian Army, which has been fighting a separatist rebellion for
30 years, has been on full display since the tsunami. Now it is common to see
soldiers standing by, fully armed, as strong men among the refugees fight over
boxes of food.

Soldiers at the military hangar at the Banda Aceh airport, where large
quantities of aid are temporarily stored, severely beat an anticorruption
activist, leaving his face swollen, and an eye badly bruised. The military said
afterward that the activist, Farid Faqih, whose beaten visage was all over
television and the newspapers, had taken aid belonging to the wife of the top
military commander, Gen. Sutarto Endriartono. An army captain was arrested in
the case after President Yudhoyono said the violence was unacceptable.

Of the incident, Mr. Juwono, the defense minister, said: ''It leaves me
defending the indefensible. My argument is that as long as you have an
undertrained, underfed military you will get these cases.''

The army's uppermost concern appears to be to keep a stranglehold on the armed
fighters of the Free Aceh Movement, most of whom have been pushed in the past
two years out of the urban areas of Aceh and into the more remote hills. But the
army is also running refugee camps.

At Seunoddon, about 150 miles east of Banda Aceh, soldiers run three camps with
varying degrees of intimidation.

At one of the camps, a village leader, Hassan Sulaiman, showed a letter he had
written to the local authorities saying the villagers did not want to be moved
to barracks, where many are fearful that they will be controlled by the army,
but rather wanted help in rebuilding their homes.

The day after he made the letter public, Mr. Hassan said the camp's leader, Cpl.
Zulikifri, kicked him in the groin. The confrontation came during the
distribution of household goods donated by the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Hassan said.

''The pain of the kicking was nothing compared to the pain to my dignity,'' he
said later.

To help ensure that the rebels do not gain ground on the decimated west coast of
the province, the army chief, Gen. Ryamizard Ryacudu, who rarely speaks with
foreign journalists, said in an interview that he planned to rebuild the
200-mile coastal road from Banda Aceh to Meulaboh that was swept away by the
tsunami.

The project, which Western engineers estimated could take two years, would be
completed in two months with 5,000 soldiers working ''night and day,'' the
general said. In addition to reaching out to the people devastated by the
tsunami, the army is trying to keep the guerrillas from setting up a stronghold
if the area remained cut off.

General Ryamizard, who has strong nationalist beliefs, has boasted of rising to
the top of the military without training overseas, and is among those in whom
American officials say they have sensed hostility to American overtures.

Asked about restoring ties, he said: ''America is the one that cut relations.
Why are we blamed?''

That impulse in the army to steer clear of the United States has mounted in the
past decade, in part out of a sense of resentment that Washington took away what
it gave during much of the cold war. For the past four years, for example, the
Indonesian Air Force failed to take advantage of a slight easing on the weapons
ban, said Robert Gelbhard, a former American ambassador to Indonesia.

But two shipments of American parts are now being fitted onto C-130 planes that
the Indonesians bought from the United States more than 20 years ago.

Another American contribution to tsunami recovery arrived this week off the
coast of Aceh -- the Mercy, a 1,000-bed United States Navy hospital ship.
American officials said they were thinking of sending teams of the Navy's public
health doctors and nurses into villages on Aceh's west coast, provided that the
Indonesian military agrees.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A United States marine, left, with Indonesian soldiers as they
boarded an American hovercraft last month. (Photo by Weda/European Pressphoto
Agency)Map of Indonesia highlighting Banda Aceh: An Indonesian officer was
arrested after violence in Banda Aceh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); INDIAN OCEAN
TSUNAMI (78%); COLD WAR (78%); MILITARY TRAINING (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (73%); ARMED
FORCES (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES
(72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); APPROVALS (69%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY
SCHOOL TEACHERS (68%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (79%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

STATE: SUMATRA, INDONESIA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (97%); ASIA (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA
(92%); INDIA (79%); MALAYSIA (79%); THAILAND (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); TIMOR-LESTE
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             131 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trials of Some of Hussein's Aides to Start Within Weeks; His Is Expected in 2006

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE IRAQI ELECTION: WAR CRIMES; Pg.
8

LENGTH: 1551 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 9


Iraqi officials say that the long-awaited legal reckoning for Saddam Hussein and
his associates will begin this spring with televised trials for at least two of
the top 12 government members in American military custody, and that prosecutors
will demand the death penalty for those judged guilty of the worst crimes.

One of the first men to be tried will be a cousin of Mr. Hussein's, Ali Hassan
al-Majid, known as Chemical Ali for his role in poison-gas attacks that killed
thousands of Iraqi Kurds in the late 1980's, officials say.

Another will be Barzan al-Tikriti, a half brother of Mr. Hussein's, who served
early in his rule as deputy head of the secret police. Officials say the most
serious charge against him will involve ordering the razing of a Shiite village
north of Baghdad, and the killing of scores of men there, after a failed
assassination attempt against Mr. Hussein in 1982.

Nearly two years after American troops captured Baghdad, twin courtrooms built
for the trials in Baghdad's heavily guarded Green Zone are nearly ready, and
investigating judges are close to completing dossiers summarizing the evidence
for the first cases, officials say.

Although American legal experts have helped prepare the cases, the trials will
be conducted before a special Iraqi tribunal, not before an international court
of the kind set up in The Hague for the former Yugoslavia.

The Iraqi officials, speaking on condition they not be identified, say Mr.
Hussein will not go on trial until the cases against his principal associates
have been completed, perhaps not until well into next year.

Bakhtiar Amin, the human rights minister, said in an interview that court
officials would use the cases against Mr. Hussein's associates to establish
''command responsibility'' for the atrocities committed under his rule, building
evidence tying him to decisions that led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands
of Iraqis.

Mr. Hussein, who is in solitary confinement at Camp Cropper, the American
military detention center near Baghdad's airport, has been meeting recently with
lawyers appointed by his family, according to a Western legal expert who
discussed the trials on Wednesday. Captured by American troops in December 2003
near his hometown, Tikrit, Mr. Hussein became eligible for legal representation
after a brief court appearance last July with the other 11 top leaders. But
Iraqi officials said it was months before any Iraqi lawyers made formal bids to
represent him.

Now, the legal expert said, Mr. Hussein has 10 Iraqi lawyers and as many as 25
foreign lawyers, any of whom will have the right to join his legal team at
trial.

Mr. Hussein's wife, Sajida, fled Iraq before the American invasion with two
daughters and took up residence in a lavish mansion in the Jordan.

Her spokesmen have said that she has appointed lawyers from Belgium, Britain,
France, Jordan, Lebanon and Tunisia, among other countries, and that they will
challenge the legitimacy of the special tribunal to try Mr. Hussein, arguing
that his actions as president were covered by his immunity as head of state.

The Western legal expert, who has been closely involved in preparing the cases,
said all 12 prisoners had been meeting regularly with lawyers. He said the
meetings were not held in the presence of American guards, and that there were
no constraints on what was discussed.

Previously, Iraqi officials had said the detainees were not allowed access to
radio, television or newspapers, severely limiting their knowledge of
developments in Iraq.

Asked if the meetings raised the possibility that the lawyers could act as
couriers for messages from Mr. Hussein and the other detainees to the armed
groups that have spread a wide insurgency across Iraq, the expert said it could
not be ruled out.

''It's possible, but how do you stop that?'' he said. ''There have to be some
sacrosanct aspects to the attorney-client privilege.''

The expert, guarding his anonymity partly to ensure a low profile for the role
play in the tribunal by Western advisers, set out a schedule for the first
trials that suggested that it could be summer before proceedings reach the point
where the tribunal begins to hear in detail of the brutalities inflicted under
Mr. Hussein.

Before the trials can begin, he said, a team of 400 Iraqis working for the
tribunal -- backed by 50 mainly American lawyers and investigators in a support
group known as the Regime Crimes Liaison Office -- must hand in dossiers
outlining the evidence against defendants to the five-judge panels that will
preside at the trials. Investigators have spent much of the past year sifting
through tons of seized documents, interviewing witnesses and reviewing evidence
gathered by forensic teams from at least 12 mass graves.

The transfer of the dossiers to the tribunal, called a referral, will come
within the next few weeks, the expert said. Then the judges will set a trial
date, probably quite promptly, he said.

Some lawyers involved have already said that when the trials begin, they will
argue that the court is illegal because it was set up by the American occupation
authority last year, before Iraq resumed formal sovereignty. That issue would go
to a nine-judge Iraqi appellate court, which would have to rule before the
trials could proceed, the expert said.

Arrangements have been made for television relays to carry the trials live to
Iraqi and worldwide audiences, according to the expert. He said the courtrooms
would include seating for reporters and a public gallery to which ordinary
Iraqis will be admitted first come first served.

Security will include screens or curtains to protect witnesses unwilling to be
seen in open court. Although courts are in the Green Zone, a maze of checkpoints
manned by Iraqis and Americans has already been set up.

One of Mr. Hussein's top associates is not likely to be tried because of his
health problems, the Iraqi officials say. He is Muhammad Hamza al-Zubaydi, Mr.
Hussein's prime minister after he seized power in 1979 and opened a bloody purge
of the governing Baath Party. Mr. Zubaydi, in his late 60's, is the oldest of
the 12 Camp Cropper detainees. Officials say he is suffering from severe heart
trouble that traces back to two bypass operations before Mr. Hussein's ouster,
and that American doctors treating him do not expect him to recover.

Mr. Zubaydi has been under investigation for his role in the purge, which
involved the execution of dozens of people shortly after Mr. Hussein declared
himself president.

The Iraqi officials say some detainees have tried to win their freedom or avoid
the death penalty by promising cooperation.

Early in the tribunal's existence, officials said two of those willing to give
evidence against Mr. Hussein was Tariq Aziz, a former deputy prime minister, and
Sultan Hashem Ahmed, defense minister during the American-led invasion in the
spring of 2003. Mr. Hashem was the general who met with American commanders on
Iraq's border with Kuwait in March 1991 to sign terms ending the Persian Gulf
war.

These overtures took on new significance when Ayad Allawi, the former Baathist
serving as interim prime minister, moved to control the court by dismissing
senior tribunal officials and appointing his own loyalists. One of those
dismissed, Salem Chalabi, the tribunal's director, said Dr. Allawi wanted to
free some defendants, or lessen the charges against them, to form a lever with
other former Baathists active in the insurgency. Dr. Allawi has acknowledged
meeting secretly with such men in efforts to break the tide of war.

But Mr. Amin, the human rights minister, said there would be no compromise in
the case of Mr. Aziz, who was Iraq's main diplomatic emissary for at least 15
years before Mr. Hussein's overthrow.

Mr. Amin, a Kurd, said Mr. Aziz, a Christian, was deeply implicated in Mr.
Hussein's crimes against Iraq's Kurdish minority, and in particular in the
killing of thousands of Kurdish Christians. ''I am opposed to anyone with blood
on his hands, and who has been involved in genocide and other atrocities, being
released,'' Mr. Amin said.

One concern has been that Mr. Hussein could try to use his court appearances to
as a political platform, in the way that Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav
president, has done in years of testimony at The Hague. At his brief court
appearance last July, Mr. Hussein described the Kuwait invasion in 1990 as a
just assertion of Iraq's national interest and condemned the American
occupation. He claimed he was still Iraq's lawful president, and told the judge
that he should be ashamed of himself for dishonoring his country's leader.

But the Western legal expert said Iraqi court procedures, based on civil law,
should prevent attempts to turn the proceedings into political theater. First,
he said, the defense will be handled by lawyers, and not, as in Mr. Milosevic's
case, by the defendant. Beyond that, the wide powers granted to the judges to
select witnesses and direct prosecution and defense lawyers, as well as the
absence of the adversary system used in American trials, would make the
tribunal's hearings ''more expeditious'' than the tribunal in The Hague.

''You're not going to see a Johnnie Cochrane cross-examining somebody in the
manner of the O.J. case,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ali Hassan al-Majid, ''Chemical Ali,'' is likely to be the first
tried. (Pool photo by Karen Ballard)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); JUDGES
(73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); APPOINTMENTS (71%); INTERVIEWS (68%); ASSASSINATION
(54%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Kurds; Biological and
Chemical Warfare; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) John F Burns; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Ali Hassan Al-
Majid

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); NETHERLANDS (79%); LEBANON (79%);
FRANCE (68%); BELGIUM (50%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             132 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Best Court For Justice for Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 210 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Court of First Resort,'' by Samantha Power (Op-Ed, Feb. 10):

Fear that the International Criminal Court will prosecute those responsible for
the killing in Darfur extends well beyond the Sudanese militia leader Ms. Power
describes. Sudanese government leaders whom I met during a recent visit to
Khartoum were also visibly concerned about the court.

The Bush administration, disliking the court, has proposed instead a new,
temporary tribunal for Darfur. But the shorter start-up time of the
International Criminal Court, an existing institution, would allow it to begin
deterring the killers more quickly. And as a permanent court, it has greater
staying power that would better allow it to pursue fugitives.

When the International Criminal Court treaty was negotiated, the United States
government feared politicized prosecutions by a prosecutor selecting targets on
his own. It favored having the Security Council, where the United States
exercises a veto, determine the court's docket.

Because Sudan has not ratified the treaty, the court can gain jurisdiction over
Darfur only by Security Council referral. That's an approach the Bush
administration should support.

Kenneth Roth
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, Feb. 10, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
VETO (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); EXECUTIVES (71%); POLITICS (67%)
Treaties; United States International Relations; Politics and Government; Civil
War and Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) Human Rights
Watch; International Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (90%) Kenneth Roth; George W (Pres) Bush; Samantha Power

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             133 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The U.S. and Iran: History Lessons

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 168 words



To the Editor:

Human rights violations, state-sponsored terrorism, pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction, rape and stoning of women, jailing and assassination of dissidents,
intolerance of religious minorities, and closing of newspapers have been the
trademark of the rule of mullahs in Iran since its inception in 1979.

The regime of mullahs has never abided by its own Constitution or the
international conventions that it has signed. Shirin Ebadi and Hadi Ghaemi
(Op-Ed, Feb. 8) believe that threat of force will make the regime suppress human
rights, but those rights do not exist now.

Iranians should not be scared to stand up for their rights for fear of losing
some in the process. No dictatorial regime ever granted its citizens their
rights willingly.

Appeasement of dictatorial regimes is no solution. At this point in history, the
interests of Iranians and the United States coincide, and it is up to the
Iranians to take advantage of this to overthrow the mullahs.

Iraj Rastegar
Dallas, Feb. 8, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TERRORISM (88%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Freedom and Human Rights;
United States International Relations; Atomic Weapons

PERSON: Iraj Rastegar; Shirin Ebadi; Hadi Ghaemi

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             136 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

It's Called Torture

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 733 words


As a nation, does the United States have a conscience? Or is anything and
everything O.K. in post-9/11 America? If torture and the denial of due process
are O.K., why not murder? When the government can just make people vanish --
which it can, and which it does -- where is the line that we, as a nation, dare
not cross?

When I interviewed Maher Arar in Ottawa last week, it seemed clear that however
thoughtful his comments, I was talking with the frightened, shaky successor of a
once robust and fully functioning human being. Torture does that to a person.
It's an unspeakable crime, an affront to one's humanity that can rob you of a
portion of your being as surely as acid can destroy your flesh.

Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen with a wife and two young children, had his life
flipped upside down in the fall of 2002 when John Ashcroft's Justice Department,
acting at least in part on bad information supplied by the Canadian government,
decided it would be a good idea to abduct Mr. Arar and ship him off to Syria, an
outlaw nation that the Justice Department honchos well knew was addicted to
torture.

Mr. Arar was not charged with anything, and yet he was deprived not only of his
liberty, but of all legal and human rights. He was handed over in shackles to
the Syrian government and, to no one's surprise, promptly brutalized. A year
later he emerged, and still no charges were lodged against him. His torturers
said they were unable to elicit any link between Mr. Arar and terrorism. He was
sent back to Canada to face the torment of a life in ruins.

Mr. Arar's is the case we know about. How many other individuals have
disappeared at the hands of the Bush administration? How many have been sent,
like the victims of a lynch mob, to overseas torture centers? How many people
are being held in the C.I.A.'s highly secret offshore prisons? Who are they and
how are they being treated? Have any been wrongly accused? If so, what recourse
do they have?

President Bush spent much of last week lecturing other nations about freedom,
democracy and the rule of law. It was a breathtaking display of chutzpah. He
seemed to me like a judge who starves his children and then sits on the bench to
hear child abuse cases. In Brussels Mr. Bush said he planned to remind Russian
President Vladimir Putin that democracies are based on, among other things,
''the rule of law and the respect for human rights and human dignity.''

Someone should tell that to Maher Arar and his family.

Mr. Arar was the victim of an American policy that is known as extraordinary
rendition. That's a euphemism. What it means is that the United States seizes
individuals, presumably terror suspects, and sends them off without even a nod
in the direction of due process to countries known to practice torture.

A Massachusetts congressman, Edward Markey, has taken the eminently sensible
step of introducing legislation that would ban this utterly reprehensible
practice. In a speech on the floor of the House, Mr. Markey, a Democrat, said:
''Torture is morally repugnant whether we do it or whether we ask another
country to do it for us. It is morally wrong whether it is captured on film or
whether it goes on behind closed doors unannounced to the American people.''

Unfortunately, the outlook for this legislation is not good. I asked Pete
Jeffries, the communications director for House Speaker Dennis Hastert, if the
speaker supported Mr. Markey's bill. After checking with the policy experts in
his office, Mr. Jeffries called back and said: ''The speaker does not support
the Markey proposal. He believes that suspected terrorists should be sent back
to their home countries.''

Surprised, I asked why suspected terrorists should be sent anywhere. Why
shouldn't they be held by the United States and prosecuted?

''Because,'' said Mr. Jeffries, ''U.S. taxpayers should not necessarily be on
the hook for their judicial and incarceration costs.''

It was, perhaps, the most preposterous response to any question I've ever asked
as a journalist. It was not by any means an accurate reflection of Bush
administration policy. All it indicated was that the speaker's office does not
understand this issue, and has not even bothered to take it seriously.

More important, it means that torture by proxy, close kin to contract murder,
remains all right. Congressman Markey's bill is going nowhere. Extraordinary
rendition lives.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); DUE PROCESS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (77%); CHILDREN (73%); CHILD ABUSE (68%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights; Torture  ; Law and Legislation  ; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (73%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%) Bob Herbert; Edward J (Rep)
Markey; Maher Arar; J Dennis (Speaker) Hastert

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (72%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (94%); SYRIA (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(78%)

REGION: Syria; United States

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             140 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

RULE CHANGE LETS C.I.A. FREELY SEND SUSPECTS ABROAD

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL and DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1663 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 5


The Bush administration's secret program to transfer suspected terrorists to
foreign countries for interrogation has been carried out by the Central
Intelligence Agency under broad authority that has allowed it to act without
case-by-case approval from the White House or the State or Justice Departments,
according to current and former government officials.

The unusually expansive authority for the C.I.A. to operate independently was
provided by the White House under a still-classified directive signed by
President Bush within days of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks at the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon, the officials said.

The process, known as rendition, has been central in the government's efforts to
disrupt terrorism, but has been bitterly criticized by human rights groups on
grounds that the practice has violated the Bush administration's public pledge
to provide safeguards against torture.

In providing a detailed description of the program, a senior United States
official said that it had been aimed only at those suspected of knowing about
terrorist operations, and emphasized that the C.I.A. had gone to great lengths
to ensure that they were detained under humane conditions and not tortured.

The official would not discuss any legal directive under which the agency
operated, but said that the ''C.I.A. has existing authorities to lawfully
conduct these operations.''

The official declined to be named but agreed to discuss the program to rebut the
assertions that the United States used the program to secretly send people to
other countries for the purpose of torture. The transfers were portrayed as an
alternative to what American officials have said is the costly,
manpower-intensive process of housing them in the United States or in
American-run facilities in other countries.

In recent weeks, several former detainees have described being subjected to
coercive interrogation techniques and brutal treatment during months spent in
detention under the program in Egypt and other countries. The official would not
discuss specific cases, but did not dispute that there had been instances in
which prisoners were mistreated. The official said none had died.

The official said the C.I.A.'s inspector general was reviewing the rendition
program as one of at least a half-dozen inquiries within the agency of possible
misconduct involving the detention, interrogation and rendition of suspected
terrorists.

In public, the Bush administration has refused to confirm that the rendition
program exists, saying only in response to questions about it that the United
States did not hand over people to face torture. The official refused to say how
many prisoners had been transferred as part of the program. But former
government officials say that since the Sept. 11 attacks, the C.I.A. has flown
100 to 150 suspected terrorists from one foreign country to another, including
to Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Pakistan.

Each of those countries has been identified by the State Department as
habitually using torture in its prisons. But the official said that guidelines
enforced within the C.I.A. require that no transfer take place before the
receiving country provides assurances that the prisoner will be treated
humanely, and that United States personnel are assigned to monitor compliance.

''We get assurances, we check on those assurances, and we double-check on these
assurances to make sure that people are being handled properly in respect to
human rights,'' the official said. The official said that compliance had been
''very high'' but added, ''Nothing is 100 percent unless we're sitting there
staring at them 24 hours a day.''

It has long been known that the C.I.A. has held a small group of high-ranking
leaders of Al Qaeda in secret sites overseas, and that the United States
military continues to detain hundreds of suspected terrorists at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and in Afghanistan. The rendition program was intended to augment those
operations, according to former government officials, by allowing the United
States to gain intelligence from the interrogations of the prisoners, most of
whom were sent to their countries of birth or citizenship.

Before Sept. 11, the C.I.A. had been authorized by presidential directives to
carry out renditions, but under much more restrictive rules. In most instances
in the past, the transfers of individual prisoners required review and approval
by interagency groups led by the White House, and were usually authorized to
bring prisoners to the United States or to other countries to face criminal
charges.

As part of its broad new latitude, current and former government officials say,
the C.I.A. has been authorized to transfer prisoners to other countries solely
for the purpose of detention and interrogation.

The covert transfers by the C.I.A. have faced sharp criticism, in part because
of the accounts provided by former prisoners who say they were beaten, shackled,
humiliated, subjected to electric shocks, and otherwise mistreated during their
long detention in foreign prisons before being released without being charged.
Those accounts include cases like the following:

$(6$)Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian, who was detained at Kennedy Airport two
weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks and transported to Syria, where he said he was
subjected to beatings. A year later he was released without being charged with
any crime.

$(6$)Khaled el-Masri, a Lebanese-born German who was pulled from a bus on the
Serbia-Macedonia border in December 2003 and flown to Afghanistan, where he said
he was beaten and drugged. He was released five months later without being
charged with a crime.

$(6$)Mamdouh Habib, an Egyptian-born Australian who was arrested in Pakistan
several weeks after the 2001 attacks. He was moved to Egypt, Afghanistan and
finally Guantanamo. During his detention, Mr. Habib said he was beaten,
humiliated and subjected to electric shocks. He was released after 40 months
without being charged.

In the most explicit statement of the administration's policies, Alberto R.
Gonzales, then the White House counsel, said in written Congressional testimony
in January that ''the policy of the United States is not to transfer individuals
to countries where we believe they likely will be tortured, whether those
individuals are being transferred from inside or outside the United States.''
Mr. Gonzales said then that he was ''not aware of anyone in the executive branch
authorizing any transfer of a detainee in violation of that policy.''

Administration officials have said that approach is consistent with American
obligations under the Convention Against Torture, the international agreement
that bars signatories from engaging in extreme interrogation techniques. But in
interviews, a half-dozen current and former government officials said they
believed that, in practice, the administration's approach may have involved
turning a blind eye to torture. One former senior government official who was
assured that no one was being mistreated said that accumulation of abuse
accounts was disturbing. ''I really wonder what they were doing, and I am no
longer sure what I believe,'' said the official, who was briefed periodically
about the rendition program.

In Congressional testimony last month, the director of central intelligence,
Porter J. Goss, acknowledged that the United States had only a limited capacity
to enforce promises that detainees would be treated humanely. ''We have a
responsibility of trying to ensure that they are properly treated, and we try
and do the best we can to guarantee that,'' Mr. Goss said of the prisoners that
the United States had transferred to the custody of other countries. ''But of
course once they're out of our control, there's only so much we can do. But we
do have an accountability program for those situations.''

The practice of transporting a prisoner from one country to another, without
formal extradition proceedings, has been used by the government for years.
George J. Tenet, the former director of central intelligence, has testified that
there were 70 cases before the Sept. 11 attacks, authorized by the White House.
About 20 of those cases involved people brought to the United States to stand
trial under informal arrangements with the country in which the suspects were
captured.

Since Sept. 11, however, it has been used much more widely and has had more
expansive guidelines, because of the broad authorizations that the White House
has granted to the C.I.A. under legal opinions and a series of amendments to
Presidential Decision Directives that remain classified. The officials said that
most of the people subject to rendition were regarded by counterterrorism
experts as less significant than people held under direct American control,
including the estimated three dozen high ranking operatives of Al Qaeda who are
confined at secret sites around the world.

The Pentagon has also transferred some prisoners to foreign custody, handing
over 62 prisoners to Pakistan, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, among other
countries, from the American prison in Guantanamo Bay, in actions that it has
publicly acknowledged. In some of those cases, a senior Defense Department
official said in an interview on Friday, the transfers were for the purpose of
prosecution and trials, but others were intended solely for the purpose of
detention. Those four countries, as well Egypt, Jordan and Syria, were among
those identified in a State Department human rights report released last week as
practicing torture in their prisons.

In an interview, the senior official defended renditions as one among several
important tools in counterterrorism efforts. ''The intelligence obtained by
those rendered, detained and interrogated have disrupted terrorist operations,''
the official said. ''It has saved lives in the United States and abroad, and it
has resulted in the capture of other terrorists.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); TORTURE (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); MISCONDUCT (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); EGYPT (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
SYRIA (79%); JORDAN (72%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             142 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture by Proxy

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 701 words


One of the biggest nonsecrets in Washington these days is the Central
Intelligence Agency's top-secret program for sending terrorism suspects to
countries where concern for human rights and the rule of law don't pose
obstacles to torturing prisoners. For months, the Bush administration has
refused to comment on these operations, which make the United States the partner
of some of the world's most repressive regimes.

But a senior official talked about it to The Times's Douglas Jehl and David
Johnston, saying he wanted to rebut assertions that the United States was
putting prisoners in the hands of outlaw regimes for the specific purpose of
having someone else torture them. Sadly, his explanation, reported on Sunday,
simply confirmed that the Bush administration has been outsourcing torture and
intends to keep doing it.

For years before the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the C.I.A. had occasionally engaged
in the practice known in bureaucratese by the creepy euphemism ''extraordinary
rendition.'' But after the attacks in New York and Washington, President Bush
gave the agency broad authority to export prisoners without getting permission
from the White House or the Justice Department. Rendition has become central to
antiterrorism operations at the C.I.A., which also operates clandestine camps
around the world for prisoners it doesn't want the International Red Cross or
the American public to know about.

According to the Times article, the C.I.A. has flown 100 to 150 suspected
terrorists to countries like Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Pakistan --
each a habitual offender when it comes to torture. It's against American law and
international convention to send prisoners to any nation where they are likely
to be tortured, so the official said no prisoners were sent to another country
without assurances from that government that they would be treated humanely. He
said that C.I.A. officials ''check on those assurances, and we double-check.''

Those assurances are worthless, and the Bush administration surely knows it. In
normal times, the governments of these countries have abysmal standards for
human rights and humane treatment, and would have no problem promising that a
prisoner wouldn't be tortured -- right before he was tortured. And these are not
normal times. The Bush administration has long since made it clear that it will
tolerate torture, even by men and women in American uniforms. And why send
prisoners to places like Syria and Saudi Arabia, if not for the brutal treatment
Americans are supposed to abhor? The senior official said it saved manpower and
money, compared with keeping them in the United States or at American-run
prisons abroad. The idea that this is a productivity initiative would be comical
if the issue were not so tragically serious.

No rational person would deny the need to hunt down terrorists, to try to
extract lifesaving information from them and to punish them, legally. But the
C.I.A. has sent prisoners to countries where they were tortured for months and
then either disappeared or were released because they knew nothing. The guilty
ones can never be brought to justice -- not after they have been illegally
imprisoned and even tortured.

American officials have offered pretzel logic to defend these practices.
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales has said that if the United States sends a
prisoner abroad, then our nation's constitution no longer applies.

This is just the sort of thinking that led to the horrible abuses at prisons in
Iraq, where the Army is now holding more Iraqi prisoners than ever: nearly
9,000. The military says it's doing a better job of screening these prisoners
than in the days when a vast majority of Iraqi prisoners were, in fact, innocent
of any wrongdoing. But there is still a shortage of translators to question
prisoners, the jails are dangerously overcrowded, and there's never been a full
and honest public accounting of the rules the American prison guards now follow.

Let's be clear about this: Any prisoner of the United States is protected by
American values. That cannot be changed by sending him to another country and
pretending not to notice that he's being tortured.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); RULE OF LAW (89%); TORTURE (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); PRISONS (72%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (65%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (65%) Terrorism;
Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; Constitutions; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%);
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES (54%) Central
Intelligence Agency  ; Red Cross

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) George W (Pres) Bush; Alberto R (Atty Gen) Gonzales

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); SYRIA (91%); PAKISTAN (79%);
EGYPT (79%); JORDAN (69%)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             144 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Deportation Case Focuses on Definition of Torture

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1160 words


A New Jersey case before a federal court of appeals has linked the Bush
administration's methods of interrogating prisoners in anti-terrorism efforts to
a sharp change in the standards of humanitarian law at home, possibly affecting
the chances of hundreds of immigrants to win protection from deportation under
the Convention Against Torture.

In 2002, the Bush administration sharply narrowed the definition of torture, as
part of its aggressive approach to terrorism. In allowing use of harsher
interrogation techniques, it said that torture required a ''specific intent'' to
inflict severe pain, not merely the infliction of severe pain.

At the same time, though, many immigrants have sought to win the right to stay
temporarily in the United States by asserting that they face the likelihood of
torture in their native lands. And now Napoleon Bonaparte Auguste, a Queens man
with a cocaine conviction who is facing deportation to Haiti from a jail in New
Brunswick, N.J., is arguing that that narrowed definition of torture could
wrongly lead to his deportation.

Mr. Auguste's motion, filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit, in Philadelphia, argues that in upholding his deportation in January, a
three-judge panel of the court wrongly bowed to the narrow definition of torture
in a 2002 Justice Department memorandum.

That memo was withdrawn and replaced on the Justice Department's Web site late
last December, after its disclosure caused a public outcry. But human rights
lawyers say the memo's definition of torture is still haunting immigration case
law. Mr. Auguste's request for a rehearing by the full court is an uphill
battle, since such rehearings are rarely granted.

No one disputes that for ex-convicts like Mr. Auguste, 28, who completed a
10-month jail sentence for the attempted sale of cocaine, deportation to Haiti
is a grim prospect. Under Haitian policy, federal and immigration courts have
found, deportees with a criminal record are placed in indefinite preventive
detention, without food, water or toilets, in cells so crowded that they cannot
lie down; prisoners are subjected to police beatings, and sometimes are burned
with cigarettes, choked, hooded and given electric shocks. Some have died in
custody.

But is that tantamount to torture under the law? The answers have varied in the
last four years. The Third Circuit panel, while likening the conditions to ''a
slave ship,'' ruled in January that indefinite detention in Haiti did not
constitute torture because Haitian officials intended the detention to prevent
crime, not specifically to inflict severe pain and suffering amounting to
torture.

Their holding, the judges acknowledged, was ''in tension'' with the language of
another Third Circuit panel's decision in a torture claim case, directly
rejecting the ''specific intent'' interpretation. To resolve the contradiction,
Mr. Auguste's motion seeks a rehearing in his case before all the appellate
judges of the circuit, which covers New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

The motion is drawing unusual attention from scholars of human rights law
because it comes amid reports that the Central Intelligence Agency, under a
secret presidential directive, has been transferring terror suspects to be
interrogated in foreign countries known for torture.

Anti-torture laws bar the United States from handing over people, even
criminals, to countries where they are likely to experience torture.

Torture is defined in the law as the intentional infliction of severe pain or
suffering, with the acquiescence of a public official, whether for
interrogation, punishment, intimidation, coercion, ''or for any reason based on
discrimination of any kind.'' The law explicitly rules out making exceptions
during wartime or public emergency, but it excludes from the definition of
torture suffering that is accidental or the consequence of a ''lawful
sanction.''

Based on the 2003 decision rejecting specific intent, other courts granted
protection to Haitians in cases like Mr. Auguste's last year. Only a rehearing
by the full court can resolve the conflict, said Renee C. Redman, one of Mr.
Auguste's lawyers and the director of the International Institute of
Connecticut.

''This is a byproduct of the attorney general's efforts to sign torture out of
existence,'' she said.

Even in Haitian cases very similar to Mr. Auguste's, interpretation has
fluctuated sharply since 1999, when the United States fully enacted domestic
laws enforcing a version of the international Convention Against Torture, which
it ratified in 1994.

By late 2001, the Board of Immigration Appeals, which is run by the Justice
Department, had ruled in several such cases that indefinite detention in Haiti
was torture under the law, halting the deportations. But in 2002, narrower
definitions took hold, said Lori A. Nessel, a legal scholar at Seton Hall
University who has tracked the shifting immigration decisions.

Professor Nessel, who also directs the university's Immigration and Human Rights
Clinic, was one of several scholars who said there was a sudden convergence
between a longer-standing domestic agenda of quicker deportation of illegal
immigrants and ''criminal aliens,'' and the administration's resolve to ''take
the gloves off'' in seeking intelligence that could prevent terrorist attacks.
She said it not only affected ex-convicts, but women fleeing harm based on their
sex, like genital cutting, rape and domestic violence, who often do not fit
asylum categories.

Among those denied protection, for example, was Takky Zubeda, a woman who had
fled from Congo to New York after being raped by the soldiers who decapitated
her father and brother. But in 2003, Ms. Zubeda won an appeal to the Third
Circuit appellate court, which rejected a ''specific intent'' requirement.

Those advocating restrictions on immigration embraced the tougher requirements
for protection, arguing that thousands had used frivolous petitions to delay
deportation. In 2003, some Republican lawmakers in Congress, led by John N.
Hostettler, an Indiana congressman who is chairman of the House subcommittee on
immigration, tried to change anti-torture laws to allow the deportation of
criminals and terrorist suspects to countries where they were likely to be
tortured.

The State Department opposed such a change, saying it would violate
international and domestic law. Immigrants who pose risks to national security
or society can be detained if they cannot be deported, officials said, and
deported as soon as conditions in their countries improve.

Mr. Auguste, who has not been in Haiti since he was 11, said he just wanted to
stay in jail in New Jersey.

''I'm very, very afraid,'' he said. ''As far as me being detained in the United
States of America, it's O.K. because I broke the law. But to be detained and
tortured out there, where I don't have no family, no friends, from what I read,
they might as well just kill you instead.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Those with criminal records who are deported to Haiti may be
placed in indefinite preventive detention, subject to beatings, chokings and
burns, courts have found. Above, the penitentiary in Port-au-Prince in 1995.
(Photo by Ruth Fremson/Associated Press)(pg. B6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
IMMIGRATION (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUDGES (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LAWYERS (75%); DAMAGES
(75%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (68%); COCAINE (68%); CRIME PREVENTION (61%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (72%)

CITY: PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: HAITI (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serbs Report 900 Under Investigation

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, March 31


The Bosnian Serb authorities said Thursday that they were investigating nearly
900 officials of their own government to determine whether they had a role in
the killings of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys from the town of Srebrenica
in 1995 during the war in Bosnia.

A commission of inquiry has given Bosnian state prosecutors the names of 892
people accused of some responsibility in the killings, considered the worst mass
killing in Europe since the end of World War II.

The list was drawn up at the request of Lord Ashdown, the British envoy who is
the international administrator in Bosnia, after a report on the killings
published by the Bosnian Serb government in December.

Until last year, the Bosnian Serb authorities had denied the extent of the
killings, which were committed by Bosnian Serb security forces in a final push
to create an exclusively Serbian state within Bosnia.

The killings eventually prompted Western intervention in the conflict. Since
then Bosnia has been effectively split into two entities, one dominated by
Bosnian Serbs and the other by Muslims and Croats. Srebrenica remains in the
Serbian-controlled area.

In a statement, the Bosnian Serb authorities said the release of the list showed
their ''determination and commitment to meet all obligations to clarify the July
1995 events in Srebrenica.'' The names and positions of the accused were not
made public.

The wartime leader of the Bosnian Serb government, Radovan Karadzic, and the
commander of the Bosnian Serb army, Ratko Mladic, have been indicted by the
United Nations tribunal, accused of planning the killings. Several army officers
have also been charged by the tribunal. The Bosnian Serb courts have not yet
charged anybody with the killings.

A spokeswoman for Lord Ashdown's office said the announcement was a step toward
reforming the police and security forces and strengthening Bosnia's federal
government.

Human rights groups said the large number of officials accused of involvement in
the killings showed that many of the officials, politicians and security
officers who conducted the war were still in power.

''The ruling parties, in particular the Serbian Democratic Party, expected that
the crimes in Srebrenica would be forgotten,'' said Branko Todorovic, the
director of the Helsinki Human Rights Committee, in Banja Luka, the
administrative capital of the Bosnian Serb government. ''They have not.''

Mr. Todorovic said international pressure on the Bosnian Serb government had
left it with little choice but to hand over the list. ''Now it is important to
see what the prosecutors will do with the names,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); ARMIES (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%);
WAR CRIMES (77%); INDICTMENTS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); RELIGION (72%); WORLD WAR II (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (68%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: ZAGREB, CROATIA (67%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); CROATIA (93%);
EUROPE (92%); FINLAND (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             148 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 2, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Transgender Group Reaches Agreement on Restrooms

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 454 words


When Pauline Park watched Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg sign an amendment
toughening the city's anti-discrimination laws two years ago, she never expected
to become one of its first beneficiaries.

But yesterday, a complaint filed by Ms. Park -- a co-chairwoman of the New York
Association for Gender Rights Advocacy, which helped lobby for the amendment to
the New York City Human Rights Law -- became part of the first settlement issued
under it. The amendment forbids discrimination based on sexual identity whether
or not it differs from a person's biological sex.

The settlement, administered by the city's Commission on Human Rights, found
that people working for Advantage Security, a New York security guard company,
discriminated against Ms. Park when they demanded to see her identification
after she used a women's restroom at the Manhattan Mall in Herald Square last
April.

She said that she had been having lunch with friends and was ''taken aback''
when five guards -- four men and a woman -- stopped her after she used the
restroom a second time that day. The first time occurred without incident, she
said.

''They encircled me in a very menacing and hostile stance,'' Ms. Park said.

''The female security guard demanded to know, 'Are you a man or a woman?''' Ms.
Park said. ''I said to her that I identify as a woman. And she said, 'One of my
colleagues thought you were a man.'''

The settlement also covered a second incident involving the same company at a
different location.

Last March, an Advantage Security guard asked Justine Nicholas for
identification after she came out of a women's restroom in a Manhattan office
building where she was taking the Graduate Record Examination.

Like Ms. Park, Ms. Nicholas was born male but identifies herself and lives as a
woman.

Under the terms of the settlement, Advantage Security will adopt and enforce a
policy allowing people to use bathrooms ''consistent with their gender
identity,'' said Michael D. Silverman, executive director and general counsel
for the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund, which represented the two
complainants before the commission. The company will also pay $2,500 to each
complainant.

Ms. Park said she was pleased with the settlement.

In a statement released by the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund, Ms.
Nicholas said that she had been ''humiliated'' by the incident and that the case
would ''increase the public's awareness of transgender people's needs.''

Officials at Advantage Security did not return several telephone calls seeking
comment.

The commission's chairwoman, Patricia L. Gatling, said that the settlement
''sends a message that discrimination in any form will not be tolerated in our
city.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pauline Park, a co-chairwoman of the New York Association for
Gender Rights Advocacy, at the Manhattan Mall in Herald Square yesterday. (Photo
by Hiroko Masuike for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION (91%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW
(90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); WOMEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); SECURITY GUARD SERVICES
(74%); LAWYERS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); LOBBYING (72%);
CORPORATE COUNSEL (71%); EXECUTIVES (70%); STANDARDIZED ACADEMIC TESTING (62%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (73%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Poses First Big Trial For World Criminal Court

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Marc Lacey contributed reporting from Khartoum,
Sudan, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1210 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Almost three years after the International Criminal Court opened over United
States opposition, the United Nations Security Council asked it to investigate
atrocities in Sudan and, in the process, placed the court squarely in the
international spotlight. By any measure, the request was an important vote of
confidence in the new tribunal.

But at the court's glass-and-steel headquarters in The Hague, the reaction has
been less than euphoric. Still wrestling with the mechanics of how to carry out
its mandate to deal with large-scale human rights abuses, the new institution
faces high expectations but lacks practical experience.

Unlike temporary tribunals, such as those addressing Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
Sierra Leone, this is the world's first permanent and independent criminal court
for judging war crimes. The chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, has taken up
two cases, involving large-scale killings in Uganda and Congo, but neither case
is expected to come to court soon.

On the conflict in Darfur in Western Sudan, however, where as many as 300,000
people have been killed and more than two million others displaced, the court is
under pressure to act swiftly, not only in the hope of ending the bloodshed but
also, some diplomats say, because it would allow the Security Council to
postpone direct intervention and nonetheless appear to be taking action.

Darfur will put the court to its first major test, as it carves a legal path
from accusation, through investigation and indictment, all the way to trial,
verdict and punishment.

Christian Palme, a spokesman for the prosecution, said he did not know when the
Darfur investigation would formally begin. ''But you can count on the work being
expeditious,'' he said.

In mid-April, court analysts began poring over nine boxes of material collected
by a United Nations commission of inquiry that spent three months scrutinizing
Sudan's ethnic killing campaign and its humanitarian crisis.

Antonio Cassese, an Italian law professor, led that commission, and he knew what
to look for, having served for almost eight years as a judge of the war crimes
tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

He said the boxes contained the type of material used to document other war
crimes, including photographs and videos of weapons, ammunition and war damage,
as well as hundreds of statements from military officers, rebels, prisoners and
witnesses to atrocities. ''The prosecutor will use this as he deems fit, but our
material can provide clues, where to investigate, how to identify
perpetrators,'' Mr. Cassese said. His 30-member team, which included 13
investigators, also prepared a list of suspects. Among the 51 names listed, he
said, were ''military and civilians about whom there is much convincing
evidence.''

That evidence includes accounts from senior military officers that the Sudanese
government ''openly uses militia gangs, gives them weapons and salaries and
tells them to kill and burn and it backs them up with planes and helicopters,''
Mr. Cassese said. ''There is no restraint. More than 2,000 villages have been
burnt. The scale of looting, raping and torture is horrible.''

Since the commission sent the 51 names to the court, much speculation has
occurred in Darfur over who they are.

''People see themselves as on the list,'' a Western diplomat said. ''They're
asking questions. They're saying, 'If I'm on the list, what can I do about
it?'''

For the time being, though, the wealth of material provided by the commission
cannot be treated as evidence because the Cassese inquiry was a fact-finding
mission that did not collect sworn witness statements. In contrast, Mr.
Moreno-Ocampo must conduct criminal investigations that can stand up in court.
He has called on other governments and individuals to provide any information
they have.

''It will be an uphill battle for the prosecutor to prepare specific cases, I
don't envy him,'' Mr. Cassese said, recalling that his own investigation faced
many obstacles.

Lawyers familiar with the court said the prosecutor was likely to focus on a
dozen or fewer of the top suspects in Sudan's atrocities.

To build his case, they say, he must prove the chain of command during the
conduct of military operations, demonstrate who had control of the militias
responsible for much of the looting, raping and killing, and show which
officials, politicians or military officers had the authority to prevent the
atrocities committed against civilians or at least to punish the perpetrators.

This means court investigators will have to question suspects who are high-level
officials, including members of the Sudanese government, which has already
objected to the court's involvement. The prosecution will almost certainly have
to turn to Western governments to request intelligence intercepts.

''With Darfur, the court has moved into the big league and now the burden is on
the prosecutor to produce,'' said Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights
Watch. ''He has to demonstrate to the Security Council and to the world that he
can act swiftly and effectively. Darfur certainly focuses attention in a way
that the investigations in the Congo and Uganda have not.''

Court officials here said the Security Council resolution of March 31 asking the
court to act has certainly energized the staff. But some said the staff also
felt apprehension.

''Most people here realize we are now under a magnifying glass,'' said one court
official. ''It could make or break the institution.''

The court has 360 employees, 85 of them in the office of the prosecutor. With
Darfur on its roster, the court will accelerate its plans to hire more police
investigators and legal analysts. It draws its recruits from the 98 nations that
have ratified the 1998 Rome Treaty establishing the court.

The Bush administration withdrew the United States from the treaty and has
campaigned against the court, demanding that it have no jurisdiction over
Americans. After two months of opposition and diplomatic wrangling, the Security
Council was only able to refer the Darfur crisis to the court because the United
States agreed to abstain, rather than cast its veto.

European governments that have championed the court are eager for its first
major case to succeed.

Foreign Minister Michel Barnier of France, who had provided much of the drive
behind the Security Council's move, visited the court recently to be briefed on
its plans.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, meanwhile, has gone to Washington to seek help. Sudan has
told the Cassese commission that it will never surrender any Sudanese to The
Hague and will try to block court action by opening its own investigations.

''These will have no credibility,'' Mr. Cassese said. ''The country has no way
to conduct proper trials, the whole judiciary is flawed.''

                             --------------------


More Peacekeepers Due in Darfur

 ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia, April 28 (AP) -- The African Union agreed Thursday to
more than triple the size of its peacekeeping force in the Darfur region of
western Sudan by Sept. 30.

The union's Peace and Security Council approved bolstering the 2,200-member
force to more than 7,700, including nearly 5,500 troops, 1,600 civilian police
and about 700 military observers, an African Union spokesman, Assane Ba, said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Seraf, in western Darfur, lay in charred ruins last week after
Arab militias burned it down to warn non-Arab residents not to return to their
homes. (Photo by Beatrice Mategwa/Reuters)
 A malnourished child, one of many victims of the strife in Darfur, was weighed
late last year at a refugee camp in Nyala, in southern Darfur. (Photo by Thierry
Dudoit/L'Express/Editing)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); EVIDENCE (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WITNESSES (78%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%) Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Immigration and
Refugees

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (84%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); NETHERLANDS (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%);
UGANDA (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Just Shut It Down

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: London


Shut it down. Just shut it down.

I am talking about the war-on-terrorism P.O.W. camp at Guantanamo Bay. Just shut
it down and then plow it under. It has become worse than an embarrassment. I am
convinced that more Americans are dying and will die if we keep the Gitmo prison
open than if we shut it down. So, please, Mr. President, just shut it down.

If you want to appreciate how corrosive Guantanamo has become for America's
standing abroad, don't read the Arab press. Don't read the Pakistani press.
Don't read the Afghan press. Hop over here to London or go online and just read
the British press! See what our closest allies are saying about Gitmo. And when
you get done with that, read the Australian press and the Canadian press and the
German press.

It is all a variation on the theme of a May 8 article in The Observer of London
that begins, ''An American soldier has revealed shocking new details of abuse
and sexual torture of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay in the first high-profile
whistle-blowing account to emerge from inside the top-secret base.'' Google the
words ''Guantanamo Bay and Australia'' and what comes up is an Australian ABC
radio report that begins: ''New claims have emerged that prisoners at Guantanamo
Bay are being tortured by their American captors, and the claims say that
Australians David Hicks and Mamdouh Habib are among the victims.''

Just another day of the world talking about Guantanamo Bay.

Why care? It's not because I am queasy about the war on terrorism. It is because
I want to win the war on terrorism. And it is now obvious from reports in my own
paper and others that the abuse at Guantanamo and within the whole U.S. military
prison system dealing with terrorism is out of control. Tell me, how is it that
over 100 detainees have died in U.S. custody so far? Heart attacks? This is not
just deeply immoral, it is strategically dangerous.

I can explain it best by analogy. For several years now I have argued that
Israel needed to get out of the West Bank and Gaza, and behind a wall, as fast
as possible. Not because the Palestinians are right and Israel wrong. It's
because Israel today is surrounded by three large trends. The first is a huge
population explosion happening all across the Arab world. The second is an
explosion of the worst interpersonal violence between Israelis and Palestinians
in the history of the conflict, which has only recently been defused by a
cease-fire. And the third is an explosion of Arabic language multimedia outlets
-- from the Internet to Al Jazeera.

What was happening around Israel at the height of the intifada was that the Arab
multimedia explosion was taking the images of that intifada explosion and
feeding them to the Arab population explosion, melding in the minds of a new
generation of Arabs and Muslims that their enemies were J.I.A. -- ''Jews, Israel
and America.'' That is an enormously toxic trend, and I hope Israel's withdrawal
from Gaza will help deprive it of oxygen.

I believe the stories emerging from Guantanamo are having a similar toxic effect
on us -- inflaming sentiments against the U.S. all over the world and providing
recruitment energy on the Internet for those who would do us ill.

Husain Haqqani, a thoughtful Pakistani scholar now teaching at Boston
University, remarked to me: ''When people like myself say American values must
be emulated and America is a bastion of freedom, we get Guantanamo Bay thrown in
our faces. When we talk about the America of Jefferson and Hamilton, people back
home say to us: 'That is not the America we are dealing with. We are dealing
with the America of imprisonment without trial.'''

Guantanamo Bay is becoming the anti-Statue of Liberty. If we have a case to be
made against any of the 500 or so inmates still in Guantanamo, then it is high
time we put them on trial, convict as many possible (which will not be easy
because of bungled interrogations) and then simply let the rest go home or to a
third country. Sure, a few may come back to haunt us. But at least they won't be
able to take advantage of Guantanamo as an engine of recruitment to enlist
thousands more. I would rather have a few more bad guys roaming the world than a
whole new generation.

''This is not about being for or against the war,'' said Michael Posner, the
executive director of Human Rights First, which is closely following this issue.
''It is about doing it right. If we are going to transform the Middle East, we
have to be law-abiding and uphold the values we want them to embrace --
otherwise it is not going to work.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); MILITARY BASES (78%); TRENDS (78%); INTERNET
& WWW (74%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (73%); NAVIES (73%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (67%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (66%); ARMED FORCES (61%) Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights

COMPANY: GOOGLE INC (55%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%) Human Rights
First (Orgn)

TICKER: GOOG (NASDAQ) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(55%)

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (58%) Thomas L Friedman; Michael Posner

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (87%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); CANADA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Great Britain; Australia; Canada; Germany; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             162 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Has Loosened Rules For Arms Sales, Study Says

BYLINE: By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 438 words


The sale of military weapons to other countries, including many that were once
barred from making such purchases, has increased sharply since the attacks on
Sept. 11, according to a study by a New York research group.

As the United States is trying to secure new allies in its fight against
terrorism, the study by the World Policy Institute -- a research group based at
the New School University --  says that the nation has expanded the sales of
weapons to countries that were once prohibited from receiving American-made
goods because of their poor human rights records.

Among the countries are Pakistan and Afghanistan as well as Algeria and
Uzbekistan. Some two dozen countries have either become first-time recipients
since Sept. 11 or have been readmitted to the program after long absences.

The study found that the largest aid program, Foreign Military Financing,
increased 68 percent from 2001 to 2003, to reach $6 billion -- a peak amount --
before trending back to a current $4.5 billion.

More than half of the top 25 recipients in 2003, either through the commercial
sales program or through foreign military sales, were countries that the State
Department has defined as undemocratic.

They included Saudi Arabia (purchases of $1.1 billion); Egypt ($1 billion);
Kuwait ($153 million); and the United Arab Emirates ($110 million).

In other cases, weapons were sold to countries having internal conflicts,
including Angola, Chad and Ethiopia, or where the human rights record was
''poor,'' according to the State Department; this category included Nigeria,
Tunisia and Nepal.

Policy makers in Washington have said that the aid is necessary to secure
overseas military bases or reward allies.

But the author of the report, William Hartung, said the equipment could end up
''fueling conflict, arming human rights abusers or falling into the hands of
U.S. adversaries.''

Charles Pena, a military specialist at the Cato Institute, a Washington research
group that promotes free-market policies, said that while arms transfers were
preferable to sending troops, there are risks.

''If a regime can use these arms to subdue their own population,'' Mr. Pena
said, ''this could come back to haunt us. We need to be more mindful of the
long-term implications, especially in the Muslim world.''

While the overall increase in these military sales may make for some good
strategic policy, said Michael O'Hanlon, a military specialist at the Brookings
Institution, the approach could be a ''missed opportunity'' if not accompanied
by other forms of aid.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (92%); ARMS TRADE (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (89%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); DEFENSE SECTOR PERFORMANCE (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); TERRORISM
(78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HIJACKING (78%); TRENDS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (73%); SALES & SELLING (73%); ECONOMIC POLICY (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (64%) Armament, Defense and
Military Forces; Terrorism; World Trade Center (NYC); Airlines and Airplanes;
Hijacking; Armament, Defense and Military Forces; Arms Sales Abroad; United
States Armament and Defense

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: World Policy Institute

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (54%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (54%)

PERSON: Leslie Wayne

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); UZBEKISTAN (92%); EGYPT (92%); KUWAIT (92%);
NIGERIA (79%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: New York City; Pakistan; Afghanistan; Algeria; Uzbekistan; Saudi Arabia;
Egypt; Kuwait; United Arab Emirates

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             163 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Real Gulag

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 166 words



To the Editor:

By referring to the United States detention facility at Guantanamo Bay as the
''the gulag of our times'' (''U.S. 'Thumbs Its Nose' at Rights, Amnesty Says,''
news article, May 26), Amnesty International demeans and trivializes the
suffering and deaths of millions of people in Soviet prisons, labor camps and
death camps from the 1920's through 1991.

This inappropriate hyperbole hinders efforts to have Russia acknowledge and
atone for Soviet crimes. It also sets back efforts to promote democracy and
respect for human rights in the Russian Federation today.

This is surprising in light of Amnesty's work, over many decades, in support of
prisoners unjustly confined in the real Soviet gulag. Amnesty's secretary
general, Irene Khan, owes an apology to the peoples of all nations who suffered
under the inhuman conditions of the Soviet Union's notorious prison system.

Margers Pinnis
Sleepy Hollow, N.Y., May 26, 2005

The writer is president, Baltic Association to the United Nations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NAVIES (74%); WRITERS (73%)
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (82%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%) Baltic Assn to United Nations; Amnesty International

PERSON: Margers Pinnis

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); AFGHANISTAN
(74%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Russia

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             164 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Aid Worker Is Detained in Sudan Over a Report on Rapes in Darfur

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 345 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 31


Sudanese officials on Tuesday detained a second international aid worker in what
aid groups call an effort to intimidate those who speak out about rape and other
atrocities in the Darfur region.

The Sudanese government is accused of responding to a two-year rebellion in
Darfur with a counterinsurgency campaign in which militiamen committed abuses,
including killings, rape and arson, on such a scale that some officials have
labeled it genocide.

The Dutch branch of Doctors Without Borders released a report in March that said
doctors had collected evidence of 500 rapes over four and a half months, with
more than 80 percent of the victims identifying attackers as soldiers or members
of government-allied militias.

The group's director for Sudan, Paul Foreman, was charged Monday with spreading
false information and told not to leave the country pending trial. The group's
Darfur coordinator, Vincent Hoedt, was detained Tuesday. No other information on
his arrest was immediately available, said Susanne Staals, a spokeswoman for the
group.

''The scale of the violence is immense, and no action is being taken to protect
victims,'' Ms. Staals said by telephone from Amsterdam. ''We hope we can
continue our work and continue to speak out.''

The focus on Doctors Without Borders is part of a pattern of arbitrary arrests
and threats against more than 20 workers from several foreign agencies over the
last six months, said Leslie Lefkow, a Human Rights Watch researcher who has
tracked developments in Darfur.

Sudanese officials denied there was a campaign to interfere with aid agencies'
work.

''There should not be any mixing of legal action taken against somebody and
humanitarian action,'' Ahmed Adam, an official in the country's Ministry of
Humanitarian Affairs, said Tuesday.

For months after the conflict broke out in early 2003, Sudanese officials
severely limited international aid organizations' access to Darfur. Aid workers
were allowed in only after protracted negotiations and international pressure,
and many feel their status remains precarious.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MEDICAL CHARITIES
(90%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); ARRESTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); GENOCIDE (76%); LITIGATION (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (71%); ARSON (71%) Sex Crimes; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%) Doctors
Without Borders

PERSON: Paul (Doctors Without Borders) Foreman

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             167 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dancing With the Dictator

BYLINE: By Jasper Becker.

Jasper Becker is the author of ''Rogue Regime: , Kim Jong Il and the Looming
Threat of North Korea.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: Beijing


THERE are hopes that President Bush's meeting tomorrow with President Roh Moo
Hyun of South Korea, coming on the heels of the latest North Korean overture on
restarting nuclear-weapons negotiations, may lead to a breakthrough. However,
anyone who expects the South to help us put pressure on the North hasn't been
paying much attention to what has happened between the two countries over the
last five years.

Since South Korea's president at the time, Kim Dae Jung, met with North Korea's
Kim Jong Il in 2000 (and pocketed a Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts), Seoul
has gone to remarkable lengths to gain the North's trust. Unsurprisingly, the
only real changes under this Sunshine Policy have occurred in South Korea. And
efforts by President Roh, who was elected in 2002, to engage Kim Jong Il have
led him to plunge his own nation into North Korea's world of lies.

For example, Seoul no longer sees any evidence of North Korea's crimes: the
government tries to keep South Korean newscasts from showing a smuggled tape of
the public execution of ''criminals'' by the North that has been broadcast in
Japan and elsewhere; reports that China is shipping refugees back to North Korea
are denied by the Roh government; the North's testing of chemical weapons on
live prisoners goes largely unmentioned; and even Pyongyang's apparent
preparations for nuclear weapons tests are played down.

South Korea, a member of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, has
abstained for the last three years from voting to condemn the North for its
abuses. The South's latest national defense white paper even indicates that
Seoul no longer considers the North to be its ''main enemy'' -- which implies
that the presence of American forces on the peninsula is no longer necessary.

Because Seoul chooses to regard the North as a friendly neighbor, it no longer
wants to help North Koreans fleeing the regime -- even though its Constitution
declares that these refugees have the legal right to become citizens of South
Korea. There have been press reports that Seoul has been pressuring China to
prevent North Korean escapees from seeking asylum in South Korea's embassy and
consulates in China (there are at least 100,000 North Koreans hiding in China).

Last year, when 468 North Korean refugees who had taken refuge in Vietnam were
flown into South Korea, Seoul's minister in charge of reunification declared
that ''we disapprove of mass defections'' and promised there would not be
another large-scale movement of refugees. In December, the ministry cut the
''resettlement'' grant program for escaped Northerners by two-thirds and
announced that henceforth there would be far greater scrutiny of asylum-seekers
(on the questionable grounds that these refugees might be spies).

President Roh has defended this approach by more or less throwing up his hands.
He refuses to give even moral support to dissidents in the North, claiming that
Kim Jong Il would ruthlessly crush any protests. For Mr. Roh, there is no chance
his ''partner for peace'' will fall from power; in fact, he makes clear that he
would not wish the regime to crumble any time soon.

So, what has President Roh received for all this appeasement? The South still
has to keep paying in hard cash for any political or economic contacts to take
place -- it even has to bribe the North to take part in tae kwon do
competitions. No reunions among families who have been divided since the
armistice of 1953 have taken place in the last year; the previous rounds of
reunions received a lot of positive news media coverage around the world but
consisted of only brief encounters involving a small number of elderly people
wanting to meet loved ones before they die. And, of course, the entire world has
to put up with Pyongyang's nuclear shell game.

Many of those pushing the Sunshine Policy came of age while trying to force
South Korea's postwar dictators to step down; they believe that the North can
follow their model, in which economic gains paved the way for democracy. But
forcing North Koreans to remain under Kim Jong Il's rule and hoping that he will
make gradual reforms is unlikely to bear fruit.

North Korea undertook some economic changes in 2002, but they actually left the
people worse off. A United Nations World Food Program report last month noted
that the market price of rice in North Korea has nearly tripled and that of
maize has quadrupled in the last year. And of course it is the government, with
its monopoly on commodities, that reaps the profits from high prices.

Kim Jong Il has conned the South's big businesses as well as its government,
luring them in with offers of exclusive concessions. For example, in 2000 the
automaker Hyundai gave the North $500 million in exchange for a promise that it
would be awarded all the major civil engineering projects Pyongyang would
undertake after it received an influx of foreign aid. Hyundai has yet to realize
any profit from the deal and its chairman, who faced criminal charges stemming
from his dealings with the North, killed himself in 2003.

WHY does Seoul pay so dearly to prop up the criminal regime? It has claimed that
if North Korea were to collapse, it would cost $1.7 trillion to rebuild it, a
sum that would cripple the South's treasury. But this figure seems preposterous.
Given its population of about 23 million people, the North would need an
emergency influx of only about $1 billion a year to pay for food, medicines and
fuel until it got back on its feet. South Korea, with its trillion-dollar gross
domestic product, could easily afford this.

Nor is Seoul necessarily correct to assume that the collapse of the North would
lead to an exodus of desperate people to the South. After ridding themselves of
the criminal regime, wouldn't those in the North be just as likely to stay in
their homes than to flee south as paupers? The huge need for capital investment
in the North would probably create an economic boom, just as it has done in
China over the last 25 years. With Mr. Kim gone, South Korean conglomerates and
international agencies like the World Bank would be eager to invest in new power
stations and factories. Unification is more likely to provide a boost to the
South Korean economy than to damage it.

But beyond the economic factors, we must consider the moral ones. South Korea is
seeking to keep a tyrant in power against the wishes of his own people. At 63,
Kim Jong Il has spent a lifetime in a paranoid and claustrophobic dictatorship.
If he were going to become a reformer, we would surely know it by now. And even
if against all odds he undertook reforms, he is still personally responsible for
a manmade famine that has killed 3 million people over the last decade. Would
Pol Pot have been given a second chance if he had vowed to open Cambodia's
markets?

Rather than coddling Kim Jong Il and paying him nuclear blackmail, we should be
working to arraign him before an international criminal tribunal, just as we did
with the murdering leaders of Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. Yes, it is
highly unlikely we would ever get him before such a court, but simply making the
symbolic effort might get leaders in China, Japan, South Korea and the West to
envision just how attractive a post-Kim era would be for everyone.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Brad Holland)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); REFUGEES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (87%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
SMUGGLING (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); NOBEL PRIZES (70%); IMMIGRATION (70%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (70%); GRANTS & GIFTS (69%); GENOCIDE (64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(64%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (63%); CITIZENSHIP (50%) United States
International Relations; Atomic Weapons; Immigration and Refugees; Freedom and
Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); KIM JONG IL (90%) Jasper Becker; George W (Pres)
Bush; Roh Moo Hyun (Pres); Kim Jong Il; Kim Dae Jung

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (93%); PYONGYANG, KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (69%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (55%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (99%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (98%);
CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); JAPAN (79%); VIET NAM (79%)

REGION: North Korea; South Korea  ; North Korea

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             169 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 15, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld Says No Alternatives Exist for Guantanamo Prison

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


The detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, will be needed for years to come,
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld suggested on Tuesday.

Mr. Rumsfeld said at a news conference at the Pentagon that there was no
alternative site to hold and question the suspected terrorists there.

''I don't know any place where we have infrastructure that's appropriate for
that sizable group of people,'' he said. ''The United States government, let
alone the U.S. military, does not want to be in the position of holding
suspected terrorists any longer than is absolutely necessary. But as long as
there remains a need to keep terrorists from striking again, a facility will
continue to be needed.''

The secretary defended Americans' management of hundreds of detainees at the
Navy base, many of them captured in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The center has 520
in custody. Others have been released or turned over to their home countries.

Mr. Rumsfeld said Guantanamo operations had been more open to scrutiny than
those of any military detention center. He said valuable information had been
gleaned from the detainees, most of whom are classified as threats to American
security.

He said the prisoners included trainers, bomb makers, recruiters, financiers,
bodyguards for Osama bin Laden and would-be suicide bombers. ''They're not
common car thieves,'' he added. ''They're believed to be determined killers.''

Last week, President Bush left open the possibility that the center might be
closed. Mr. Rumsfeld gave no such indication. He said taxpayers had spent
$100million to build the center, which he added costs more than $90million a
year to operate.

Prominent Republicans say closing the center will not repair the image of the
United States. ''To cut and run because of image problems,'' the Senate majority
leader, Bill Frist, said, ''is the wrong, wrong thing to do.''

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said that there was no doubt about
the image problem but that ''the key to this is to move the judicial process
forward so that these individuals will be brought to trial for any crime that
they are accused of rather than residing in the Guantanamo facility in
perpetuity.''

Human rights advocates and some lawmakers, mostly Democrats, want the
administration to close the detention center because of the accusations of
torture and abuse of detainees.

Amnesty International has called the center ''the gulag of our time,'' and
former President Jimmy Carter has also said it should be closed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); PRISONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY BASES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); NAVIES (78%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (78%); RELOCATIONS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); TORTURE (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(72%); CORRECTIONS (71%); VEHICLE THEFT (65%) Freedom and Human Rights;
Prisoners of War; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%); JOHN MCCAIN (55%); JIMMY
CARTER (52%) Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             170 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 22, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stain of Guantanamo: We Do Care

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 154 words



To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis points to the humiliation of prisoners at Guantanamo and declares
it a violation of human rights. But what rights do these prisoners have?

They are not criminals -- they committed no crime on United States soil. They
are not soldiers -- they wear no uniform of an established government. But they
are enemies of our country, captured on a faraway battlefield.

Since Mr. Lewis wants to discuss rights, let's discuss them. What rights do
these non-citizens, non-criminals, non-soldiers have? This is where the concept
of human rights turns to ashes.

I can have no rights other than what I can protect myself or have a government
protect for me. The prisoners held in Guantanamo are without rights because of
their choice to fight without any government's protection. Americans have no
reason to protect them.

As our enemies, they are lucky even to be alive.

Bill Decker
San Diego, June 21, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NAVIES (74%); TERRORISM
(59%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Anthony Lewis; Bill Decker

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             173 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

MOOD OF ANXIETY ENGULFS AFGHANS AS VIOLENCE RISES

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 29


The loss of a military helicopter with 17 Americans aboard in eastern
Afghanistan on Tuesday comes at a time of growing insecurity here. For the first
time since the United States overthrew the Taliban government three and a half
years ago, Afghans say they are feeling uneasy about the future.

Violence has increased sharply in recent months, with a resurgent Taliban
movement mounting daily attacks in southern Afghanistan, gangs kidnapping
foreigners here in the capital and radical Islamists orchestrating violent
demonstrations against the government and foreign-financed organizations.

The steady stream of violence has dealt a new blow to this still traumatized
nation of 25 million. In dozens of interviews conducted in recent weeks around
the country, Afghans voiced concern that things were not improving, and that the
Taliban and other dangerous players were gaining strength.

An American Chinook helicopter that crashed on Tuesday was brought down by
hostile fire as it was landing during combat in a mountainous border area,
American military officials said Wednesday. [Page A14.]

Afghans interviewed about the continuing violence also expressed increased
dissatisfaction with their own government and the way the United States military
was conducting its operations, and said they were suspicious of the Americans'
long-term intentions.

''Three years on, the people are still hoping that things are going to work out,
but they have become suspicious about why the Americans came, and why the
Americans are treating the local people badly,'' said Jandad Spinghar, leader of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in Nangarhar Province in the
east, just across the Khyber Pass from Pakistan.

Poverty, joblessness, frustrated expectations and the culture of 25 years of war
make for a volatile mix in which American military raids, shootings and
imprisonments can inflame public opinion, many here say.

''Generally people are not against the Americans,'' Mr. Spinghar said. ''But in
areas where there are no human rights, where they do not have good relations and
where there is bad treatment of villagers or prisoners, this will hand a free
area to the Taliban. It's very important that the Americans understand how the
Afghan people feel.''

Reflecting the shifting popular mood, President Hamid Karzai has publicly
criticized the behavior of American troops and called for closer cooperation
when Afghan homes are raided.

The Taliban's spring offensive has sounded an alarm for the United States
military and the Karzai government, both of which had said that the Taliban were
largely defeated and that the nation was consolidating behind its first elected
national leader.

''We were wrong,'' a senior Afghan government official acknowledged, saying of
the Taliban, ''It seems they were spending the time preparing.'' He insisted on
anonymity because of the delicacy of the subject within the government.

While the government blames the Taliban -- and its backers in Pakistan and Al
Qaeda -- for the violence, the American military is frequently blamed by Afghans
for drawing radical Islamic fighters to the country and then failing to control
them.

''The Americans are the cause of the insecurity,'' said Abdullah Mahmud, 26, a
law student in Kabul. ''If they were not here, there would not be any
insecurity. The money they are spending on military expenses -- if they spent
half of it on the Afghan Army and police and raised their skills, then there
would not be any security questions.''

Opponents of the government are calling for foreign troops and international aid
organizations to leave Afghanistan, a call that has resonated with Afghans'
spirit of independence. The government, though, is anxiously seeking assurances
that the foreign troops and assistance will stay and help it through this latest
wave of adversity.

During the anti-American protests that followed allegations that guards at
Guantanamo Bay had desecrated the Koran, Kabul's students demonstrated against
the establishment of permanent United States military bases in Afghanistan, said
Muhammad Mir Jan, 25, a literature student. ''Students support the current
presence of troops because we need them now,'' he said, ''but not a permanent
presence.''

An unemployed man sitting in a corner shop in Jalalabad with a group of friends
said of the Americans, ''They should go.'' But others demurred.

''No, I think the Americans should be here, because if they are not, the
warlords would come back again and the poor people would not be able to survive
in this country,'' said Samiullah, 27, who said he was applying for a job as a
driver with a foreign group.

Abdul Zaher, 26, the owner of the shop, said, ''They should not leave our
country until they have rebuilt it.''

Sayed Asadullah Hashimi, an assistant professor at Kabul University's School of
Islamic Law, said, ''Outside Kabul, two-thirds of the people think that the
Americans came only to invade and occupy Afghanistan, and that is why day by day
the tension is growing. The mood is worsening.''

With parliamentary elections approaching in September, the issue of the American
military presence is already emerging at the forefront of political debate.
Foreign diplomats are forecasting that the election will deliver a Parliament
divided on ethnic lines and largely anti-Karzai, with a strong element of jihadi
leaders and Islamists.

President Karzai will have to change his cabinet, now largely made up of
technocrats, to reflect the makeup of Parliament, said one diplomat, who asked
not to be identified because of the political nature of his comments.

The current instability does not yet add up to a national uprising. The Taliban
movement remains restricted to a narrow core of believers and a larger number
who are motivated by money more than anything else, Afghan and foreign officials
said. But they warned that it would be dangerous to ignore the signs of unrest.

Changes have often come suddenly in Afghanistan's turbulent history, frequently
catching outsiders by surprise: the slaughter in the Khyber Pass of retreating
British forces in the 19th century; the kidnapping and killing of the American
ambassador in 1979; and the Russian debacle after 10 years of brutal occupation
in the 1980's.

The airlift of foreign aid workers from Jalalabad after a day of rioting last
month raised the specter of the Afghans turning against foreigners once more.

Afghans interviewed this week frequently warned that if the American forces did
not show greater care, especially in their treatment of detainees and their
families, the people could turn against them. ''They should respect our culture
and our religion and they will be successful,'' said Lal Muhammad, the senior
partner of a real estate firm in the southern city of Kandahar.

His partner, Taher Shah, said the United States should not overestimate the
extent of its own power. ''The Americans are very powerful and they can control
the government,'' he said. ''But if the people don't like them, they will have
to leave.''

Foreign officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the delicate
nature of the issue, said much of the public disillusionment and frustration was
traceable to a lack of governance -- from the simple absence of government, to
the failure to administer the law properly, to the corruption of the local
police and the courts.

''Since 2002,'' one of the officials said, ''we have been issuing warnings that
the main threat was the failure to address profound governance problems, and if
we did not take it seriously, grievances would start to stem from that.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American soldier and an Afghan translator interrogated an
Afghan on Sunday in Zabul Province. Reflecting a shift in popular mood,
President Hamid Karzai has begun to criticize the behavior of American troops.
(Photo by Tomas Munita/Associated Press)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); POLITICAL
PROTESTS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (73%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); RIOTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(64%) Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Kidnapping; Demonstrations and Riots;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (89%) Carlotta Gall; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kabul (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             176 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Newly Released Reports Show Early Concern on Prison Abuse

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1923 words


In late 2002, more than a year before a whistle-blower slipped military
investigators the graphic photographs that would set off the Abu Ghraib prison
abuse scandal, an F.B.I. agent at the American detention center in Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, sent a colleague an e-mail message complaining about the military's
''coercive tactics'' with detainees, documents released yesterday show.

''You won't believe it!'' the agent wrote.

Two years later, the frustration among F.B.I. agents had grown. Another agent
sent a colleague an e-mail message saying he had seen reports that a general
from Guantanamo had gone to Abu Ghraib to ''Gitmo-ize'' it. ''If this refers to
intell gathering as I suspect,'' he wrote, according to the documents, ''it
suggests he has continued to support interrogation strategies we not only
advised against, but questioned in terms of effectiveness.''

When the Abu Ghraib scandal broke last spring, officials characterized the abuse
as the aberrant acts of a small group of low-ranking reservists, limited to a
few weeks in late 2003. But thousands of pages in military reports and documents
released under the Freedom of Information Act to the American Civil Liberties
Union in the past few months have demonstrated that the abuse involved multiple
service branches in Afghanistan, Iraq and Cuba, beginning in 2002 and continuing
after Congress and the military had begun investigating Abu Ghraib.

Yesterday, in response to some of the documents, the Pentagon said it would
investigate F.B.I. reports that military interrogators in Guantanamo abused
prisoners by beating them, grabbing their genitals and chaining them to the cold
ground.

Questions on the handling of detainees will be central to Senate hearings today
on the nomination of the White House counsel, Alberto R. Gonzales, as attorney
general and to the court-martial of the accused leader of the Abu Ghraib abuse,
which begins Friday in Texas.

An article in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine says that
military medical personnel violated the Geneva Conventions by helping design
coercive interrogation techniques based on detainee medical information. Some
doctors told the journal that the military had instructed them not to discuss
the deaths that occurred in detention.

No one predicted the acts that showed up in snapshots from Abu Ghraib -- naked
detainees piled in a pyramid or leashed and crawling -- but the documents showed
many warnings of mistreatment, most explicitly from the F.B.I.

''Basically, it appears that the lawyer worked hard to write a legal
justification for the type of interviews they (the Army) want to conduct here,''
one agent said in an e-mail message from Guantanamo in December 2002.

The Pentagon now says 137 military members have been disciplined or face
courts-martial for abusing detainees. A separate federal investigation in
Virginia is looking into possible abuses by civilians hired as interrogators.
Several military investigations are still pending, including ones into the
deaths of about a dozen detainees.

The charges against the 137 service members, officials say, reflect a
zero-tolerance attitude toward abuse -- and a small percentage of the 167,000
troops in Afghanistan and Iraq.

''Our policy is clear,'' said Lt. Col. John A. Skinner, a Pentagon spokesman.
''It has always been the humane treatment of detainees.''

Civil liberties groups complain that no high-level officers have been held
accountable for abuse.

''When you see the same thing happening in three different places, you see
abuses being committed with impunity, then it ceases to be the sole
responsibility of the individual soldiers,'' Reed Brody, special counsel to
Human Rights Watch, said. ''At a certain point, it becomes so widespread that it
makes it look like a policy.''

Colonel Skinner said that while Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has said he
believes the abuse was limited, ''the secretary has also been clear that we're
going to have multiple lines of inquiry to really fully understand what took
place, and to have the appropriate investigations to find out any wrongdoing
that's occurred.'' Three of eight military reports on the abuse, he said, have
yet to be concluded.

An Army officer, Brig. Gen. John T. Furlow, will lead the new investigation at
Guantanamo.

Officials have defended some cases of harsh treatment by saying it was simply
the cost of the so-called global war on terror. The Special Operations task
force was assigned to track down terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan. But many of
the detainees were not terrorists. In Iraq, 70 percent to 90 percent of those
detained, according to military intelligence estimates reported by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, ''had been arrested by mistake.'' A
military report on Iraqi prisons said that many detainees were held for several
months for things like expressing ''displeasure or ill will'' toward the
American occupying forces.

The Bush administration decided in February 2002 that the Geneva Conventions did
not apply to members of Al Qaeda and that while they did apply to the Taliban,
prisoners taken in Afghanistan were not entitled to the protections of the
conventions. Many detainees were taken to Guantanamo, held indefinitely and
interrogated with harsh techniques approved for by Mr. Rumsfeld in April 2003.
The administration said detainees in Iraq were covered by the conventions, which
should have protected them from threats or harassment in interrogations, or from
physical or mental torture.

But a military report by a former defense secretary, James R. Schlesinger, which
was released in August, concluded that harsh tactics intended for use only at
Guantanamo -- threatening detainees with dogs, leaving them naked in extreme
heat or cold, shackling them upright to keep them awake -- ''migrated''
improperly to Afghanistan and then to Iraq.

''The AC had been turned off, making the temperature in the unventilated room
probably well over 100 degrees,'' one F.B.I. agent reported from Guantanamo in
August. ''The detainee was almost unconscious on the floor, with a pile of hair
next to him. He had apparently been literally pulling his own hair out
throughout the night.''

The earliest abuses on record in Iraq apparently came in May 2003. On May 15,
two marines in Karbala held a 9-millimeter pistol to the head of a bound
detainee while a third took a picture. One marine, according to military
records, then poured a glass of water on the detainee's head. In June 2003,
according to records, a marine ordered four Iraqi children who had been detained
for looting to stand next to a shallow ditch, then fired a pistol in a mock
execution.

In August, a marine put a match to a puddle of hand sanitizer that had spilled
in front of an Iraqi detainee, igniting a flame that severely burned the
detainee's hands.

In April of 2004, marines shocked detainees with wires from an electric
transformer -- ''the detainee 'danced' as he was shocked,'' an investigative
report said. And in June, Defense Intelligence agents reported members of a
military Special Operations task force repeatedly punching a detainee in the
face. The agents also reported finding prisoners with burn marks on their backs
and complaining of kidney pain.

C.I.A. agents reported concerns that the Special Operations task force had
abused detainees a year before the Defense Intelligence agents had, leading the
C.I.A. to order its agents not to participate in task force interrogations. A
military investigation found no evidence of abuse. The F.B.I. also warned its
agents at Guantanamo and in Iraq not to participate in military interrogations
that used tactics like harsh light, excessively loud music and extreme
temperatures, which were not accepted F.B.I. practices.

The Red Cross reported concerns about mistreatment in all three places and
raised concerns about medical personnel at Guantanamo sharing health information
with military units that planned interrogations. The New England Journal report
went further, saying the doctors helped design interrogation strategies using
private medical records.

The Pentagon denied that any doctors had taken part in any mistreatment of
prisoners but said yesterday that it was reviewing its medical policies
regarding detainees.

The F.B.I. complaints began in December 2002, according to the documents. A year
later, an agent complained that ''these tactics have produced no intelligence of
a threat neutralization nature to date.''

But agents struggled with what they could complain about, believing that, in
some cases, tactics they considered harsh or abusive had high-level approval.

''This technique and all of those used in the scenarios was approved by the dep
sec def,'' or deputy secretary of defense, one agent wrote from Guantanamo in
January 2004.

An agent in Iraq reported seeing military interrogators yelling at detainees,
covering them with hoods and subjecting them to loud music. That went beyond
acceptable F.B.I. practice, the agent wrote, but had been ''authorized by the
president under his executive order.'' An e-mail message from the agent made
several references to President Bush's signing of an order allowing such
techniques.

''We know what's permissible for F.B.I. agents but are less sure what is
permissible for military interrogators,'' the agent wrote.

After Abu Ghraib, when the F.B.I. asked agents to report any abuse they had
seen, agents reported 26 incidents they believed to be mistreatment. But the
bureau's general counsel said 17 of those were allowed under Pentagon policy.

The Pentagon and the White House say that no executive order existed.

But earlier memorandums from the White House and the Pentagon on interrogation
techniques could have created confusion.

The A.C.L.U. argues that whether or not an executive order existed, the fact
that an F.B.I. agent believed so demonstrates the uncertainty over what was
permissible.

''It's this climate of confusion and the creation of a legal framework that
allowed detainee rights to be violated that has to be parked on the doorstep of
leading government officials,'' said Anthony Romero, the executive director of
the A.C.L.U.

Most of the 137 people who have been charged or disciplined, were members of the
Army. Of those, 46 resulted in nonjudicial or administrative punishments, which
generally mean fines or reductions in rank.

Fourteen marines have been convicted by courts-martial, including one who
shocked a detainee with electrical wires. That marine was sentenced to one
year's confinement. The marine who conducted the mock execution received a
reduction in rank, 30 days' hard labor and 6 months' forfeiture of pay.

One Special Operations member, the Pentagon said, admitted using a stun gun on
detainees.

The Pentagon said the punishments reflected different levels of involvement, but
the A.C.L.U. and human rights groups said that many serious cases were not given
appropriate punishments. After an Army specialist shot a detainee in Tikrit in
September 2003, an investigation found probable cause to charge him with murder,
records showed. Instead, the specialist was demoted to private and discharged.

Another report on Abu Ghraib cited 34 military intelligence soldiers, including
the top two officers at the prison. But only one solider has been punished, and
the two officers have not been charged. A military investigation implicated 28
soldiers in the deaths of two men at the Bagram detention center in Afghanistan;
but only one has been charged.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., right, accused of prisoner
abuse, with a military police investigator, Joe Wilson, at Fort Hood, Tex., last
month. (Photo by Harry Cabluck/Associated Press)(pg. A24)Chart: ''Reports of
Charges Come to Light''In recent months, reports and documents have revealed new
charges of prisoner abuse, including a number of incidents that were reported
after the Abu Ghraib prison scandal broke last April. Many of the documents have
been made public as part of a lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties
Union.Recently revealed charges of abuseJUNE 2003 -- A marine ordered four Iraqi
children who had been detained to stand next to a shallow hole, then fired a
pistol in a mock execution.AUGUST 2003 -- A marine squirted a flammable liquid
on an Iraqi detainee's hand and lit it with a match.SEPT. 2003 -- A soldier shot
and killed an Iraqi prisoner. Investigators found probable cause to charge him
with murder. Instead the soldier was demoted and discharged.DECEMBER 2003 -- In
a memorandum, an agent expressed concern about military interrogators' posing as
F.B.I. agents at Guantanamo and the ''torture techniques'' used.APRIL 2004 --
Marines repeatedly used an electric transformer to shock a detainee at
Mahmudiya, south of Baghdad.JUNE 2004 -- Two Defense Intelligence agents
reported observing brutal treatment of Iraqi insurgents captured in Baghdad.JUNE
2004 -- An International Committee of the Red Cross inspection team visited
Guantanamo. In a confidential report, it said the military had used coercion
techniques that were ''tantamount to torture.''AUG. 2004 -- A message sent to
F.B.I. officials by an agent reported detainees chained in uncomfortable
positions for up to 24 hours at Guantanamo.Abuse at Abu GhraibOCTOBER AND
NOVEMBER 2003 -- The most serious abuse of detainees ocurred at Abu
Ghraib.JANUARY 2004 -- The top American commander in Iraq ordered a criminal
investigation into the allegations of abuse.MARCH 2004 -- Charges announced
against six soldiers.APRIL 2004 -- Pictures of soldiers abusing prisoners at Abu
Ghraib made public in the news media.(pg. A24)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SCANDALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
WHISTLEBLOWERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); SEX SCANDALS (89%); MILITARY
COURTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); POLITICAL SCANDALS
(77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); NAVIES (73%);
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (71%); LAWYERS (70%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (69%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (69%); INTERVIEWS (66%); WAR & CONFLICT (64%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(61%); TERRORISM (60%); GENOCIDE (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Suits and
Litigation; Courts-Martial; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Electronic Mail; Computers and the Internet

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (83%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (59%); CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED
CRESCENT MOVEMENT (59%) American Civil Liberties Union; Federal Bureau of
Investigation; Central Intelligence Agency; Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (57%); JOE WILSON (50%) Kate Zernike; Alberto Gonzalez;
Charles A (Specialist) Graner

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             179 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Opens Inquiry Into Abuse of U.S. Detainees

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


The Justice Department has opened a wide-ranging investigation into reports from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the military's use of coercive and
abusive tactics against prisoners held in American custody at Guantanamo Bay and
in Iraq, officials said on Thursday.

The investigation, initiated recently by the inspector general at the Justice
Department, will examine not only how reports of abuse witnessed by F.B.I.
agents at the American base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and in Iraq were handled,
but also whether bureau agents themselves took part in any improper methods of
interrogation at the prisons, which are run by the military.

Investigators ''want to look at what happened to these complaints, and also did
F.B.I. agents participate in the abuse?'' said a senior law enforcement official
who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''Were they more than simply witnesses?''

The Justice Department inquiry parallels a separate investigation by the
military into the tactics used by its interrogators at Guantanamo.

A raft of documents, released to the American Civil Liberties Union under the
Freedom of Information Act, has diclosed concerns by F.B.I. agents stationed at
the Guantanamo prison who said in e-mail messages and memorandums that they had
seen military interrogators using ''coercive tactics,'' beating prisoners and
grabbing their genitals.

Bureau personnel also told of detainees' being chained for up to 24 hours and
left on the cold floor to urinate and defecate on themselves. In one case, an
agent said, a detainee who was nearly unconscious had pulled out much of his
hair during the night.

Some bureau personnel reported their deep concerns about the tactics to senior
agency personnel, including the director, Robert S. Mueller III. One focus of
the inspector general's inquiry will be to determine how those internal concerns
were handled within the agency and whether they were relayed to proper
authorities in the military and elsewhere in the administration.

The documents obtained by the A.C.L.U. suggest the possibility that some F.B.I.
agents may have acquiesced in or ignored abusive military tactics at Guantanamo
at times, but they do not appear to offer evidence of specific abuses carried
out by anyone at the bureau.

A senior official at the bureau said Thursday that he was unaware of any
complaints of abuses carried out by its agents at Guantanamo and pledged the
bureau's full cooperation in the inspector general's investigation.

''This is a healthy process,'' the official said of the review. ''We'll bend
over backwards to help and do whatever needs to be done.''

In a letter to the Justice Department inspector general on Dec. 21, after the
first batches of documents from the A.C.L.U. became public, Representative John
Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee,
and five other lawmakers, all Democrats, made an ''urgent request'' for the
office to investigate the reports of torture and to determine how presidential
or military directives played into such tactics.

Glenn A. Fine, the inspector general at the Justice Department, responded on
Jan. 4, saying that his office had already begun ''examining the involvement of
Federal Bureau of Investigation staff in either observing or participating in
the alleged abuse of detainees at the Guantanamo facility and at Abu Ghraib,''
according to a copy of the letter provided by a member of Congress to The New
York Times.

The inspector general's office began investigating the treatment of prisoners
before the A.C.L.U. documents became public, officials said. It was not clear
whether an internal complaint or separate concerns had led the inspector
general's office to open its investigation.

Mr. Fine's office, which has jurisdiction over the F.B.I., is known for its
aggressive oversight of the Justice Department. It has produced several critical
reports of the department's treatment of illegal immigrant detained in the
United States after the Sept. 11 attacks, the bureau's difficulties in
translating terrorism material, and on other national security issues.

The office is expected to release another critical report on Friday regarding a
former F.B.I. linguist who said she had been retaliated against for complaining
of ineptitude in the bureau's translation programs.

Mr. Fine's latest investigation takes him into perhaps his most sensitive
terrain yet, centering on the Bush administration's tactics and legal rationales
for how it elicits information from terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo and in
Iraq.

The documents obtained by the A.C.L.U. showed that the bureau's concerns at
Guantanamo dated back as far as December 2002, some 10 months before abusive
tactics at Abu Ghraib started. Critics of the Bush administration have argued
that a series of legal decisions in Washington by senior administration
officials condoned a permissive attitude toward abuse and opened the way for the
mistreatment of prisoners in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo.

But Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel who has been nominated as
attorney general, denounced the use of torture against terrorism suspects at his
confirmation hearing last week and said the administration did not condone
torture of prisoners in American custody. Mr. Gonzales said that the F.B.I.'s
reports of abuses at Guantanamo ''surprised and shocked me, because it's
certainly inconsistent with what I've seen when I've traveled down there.'' He
said that if confirmed, he would personally sit down with bureau officials to
''ascertain the facts.''

Mr. Gonzales expressed skepticism about some details in the bureau's internal
reports, pointing to one e-mail message from an agent in Iraq that cited a
supposed executive order from President Bush authorizing abusive techniques.

The agent's reference to such an order was ''just plain false,'' Mr. Gonzales
said. He said: ''That never occurred. And so, if something like that is wrong in
these e-mails, there may be other facts that are wrong in the e-mails.''

Mark Corallo, a Justice Department spokesman, said he was unaware of any
criminal investigations the department had initiated in response to the F.B.I.
concerns.

''Judge Gonzales said he would look into it, and I'm sure he will,'' Mr. Corallo
said. ''Beyond that, there's no reason for us to open an investigation. It's not
a criminal matter.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (94%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (93%);
INVESTIGATIONS (93%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%); PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (73%); NAVIES (73%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); TERRORISM (59%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (97%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%) Federal
Bureau of Investigation; Justice Department

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (73%); JOHN CONYERS (50%) Eric Lichtblau

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Offers Plan to Restrain, Not Jail, Foreign Terror Suspects

BYLINE: By LIZETTE ALVAREZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 26


The British government announced a plan on Wednesday to overhaul its
antiterrorism laws, hoping to grant itself broad new powers to monitor and
control foreign terrorism suspects without having to detain them indefinitely
without charges, a policy that was declared illegal last month by Britain's
highest court.

The measures, which must be put forward to Parliament as a bill, would give the
home secretary, Charles Clarke, the ability to give suspects curfews, tag them
with electronic bracelets, limit their access to telephones and the Internet,
restrict their communications with ''named individuals'' and, as a last resort,
place them under house arrest.

The new ''control orders'' would apply to foreigners and British citizens,
addressing the court's judgment that special treatment for foreign detainees was
discriminatory and violated the European Convention on Human Rights. The orders,
the government said, could be applied if there are ''reasonable grounds'' for
suspecting terrorist activity. Prosecuting a suspect on charges requires a
higher threshold.

In announcing the plan to the House of Commons, Mr. Clarke said that the
suspects now in detention -- the number is thought to be between 9 and 12 --
would remain in jail until the ''control orders'' were in place, adding that
they continued ''to pose a threat to national security.'' Some of the men have
been in detention for three years.

''There remains a public emergency threatening the life of the nation,'' Mr.
Clarke said. ''The threat is real, and I believe that the steps I am announcing
today will enable us more effectively to meet that threat.''

The plan would revise the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act, passed shortly
after the 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States. Reaction was mixed, with
some opposition politicians questioning whether the measures might create
resentment and stoke terrorism, rather than fight it.

Human rights lawyers said the plan, while better than indefinite detention in
jail, still raised considerable concerns, particularly since house arrest is a
serious measure and suspects should be presumed innocent until proven guilty.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); HOUSE ARREST (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); BRITISH
PARLIAMENT (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%);
ELECTRONIC MONITOR SENTENCING (77%); POLITICS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); REFUGEES
(74%); IMMIGRATION (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
CURFEW (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Immigration and Refugees; Law and Legislation; Terrorism

PERSON: Lizette Alvarez

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             184 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

21st-Century Slavery

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 193 words



To the Editor:

Re ''After the Brothel'' (column, Jan. 26):

Nicholas D. Kristof may be right that most people would consider it an
exaggeration to characterize sex trafficking as 21st-century slavery.

Most people might also find it hard to believe that some 27 million people
around the world -- 10 million of whom are children -- are enslaved. This
includes 50,000 men and women living in the United States.

Americans tend to think of slavery historically, in terms of the shackles,
whips, human-cargo ships and auctions that defined the trans-Atlantic trade in
Africans.

Contemporary slavery, however, takes many forms, including forced labor, servile
marriage, debt bondage, child labor and sex trafficking.

Many of today's slaves are no better off than their predecessors. Tricked or
trapped into working for little or no pay, they endure conditions that violate
their basic human rights.

All too often, they are beaten, tortured, mutilated and raped.

Stopping such exploitation should be a national and global priority.

Spencer Crew
Cincinnati, Jan. 26, 2005

The writer is president and chief executive of the National Underground Railroad
Freedom Center.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING
(90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (90%); FORCED LABOR (77%); CHILD LABOR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); TORTURE (71%); EXECUTIVES (65%)
Prostitution; Children and Youth; Freedom and Human Rights; Slavery

ORGANIZATION: National Underground Railroad Freedom Center

PERSON: Spencer Crew; Nicholas D Kristof

CITY: CINCINNATI, OH, USA (55%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             191 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

House Passes Tightening Of Laws on Immigration

BYLINE: By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


The House of Representatives voted on Thursday to approve a bill tightening
immigration laws in the name of border security. The main provisions of the
bill, which passed 261 to 161, block states from issuing standard drivers'
licenses to illegal immigrants and make it easier for judges to expel asylum
seekers.

Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican of Wisconsin and sponsor
of the bill, said that the measures were necessary to fulfill recommendations of
the commission that investigated the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

Noting that several of the men involved in those attacks were illegal immigrants
who had American drivers' licenses, which they used as identification when
boarding planes, Mr. Sensenbrenner said the bill ''aims to prevent another
9/11-type attack by disrupting terrorist travel.''

Democrats argued that Congress had already fulfilled the commission's
recommendations by ordering the Department of Transportation, the Department of
Homeland Security and the states to work together to set national standards for
drivers' licenses. The National Governors Association said the new bill placed
an undue burden on states to update and standardize their procedures for
granting licenses.

Democrats, the evangelical organization World Relief, Amnesty International and
other groups contended that the tougher barriers to asylum seekers could send
legitimate refugees home to torture or other abuse.

Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, said the
bill ''targets legitimate victims of persecution -- innocent people under threat
of torture or death for their religious beliefs'' and ''unconstitutionally
forbids federal judges from hearing asylum cases involving real threats of
torture.''

Some supporters of the bill's provisions acknowledge that it faces an uphill
battle in the Senate, which blocked some similar drivers' license provisions
last year.

The vote sets the stage for a fight among Senate Republicans over President
Bush's proposal to create a guest worker program open to illegal immigrants. Mr.
Sensenbrenner and Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader,
have said the House will not take up the program until passage of the drivers'
license measure. But Senate Democrats are seeking to push for the proposed guest
worker program first, in part to play up the Republican divisions.

Mr. Sensenbrenner and other proponents of the restrictions have sought to
separate it from the guest worker plan, which many opponents characterize as
offering amnesty for law breakers because it would give illegal immigrants a
path to legitimacy.

In an apparent trade-off to win more support for the guest worker proposal, the
White House issued a statement that it ''strongly supports'' the main provisions
of the bill that the House passed Thursday while calling for modifications ''to
ensure the changes do not unintentionally create new barriers to asylum.''

This week Mr. Delay discussed a possible compromise between Republicans and
President Bush on the guest worker program that would allow immigrants to apply
from abroad with a job lined up, with a fixed return date and without the right
to bring their families. In the Senate, Senator John McCain, Republican of
Arizona, and Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, are working
with a bipartisan group of senators on an alternate immigration bill that
includes some border security steps as well as a version of the proposed guest
worker program.

In an interview Thursday, Mr. McCain said the drivers' license restrictions in
the House bill ''addressed significant portions of one aspect of the problem,
but it does not address the overall solution to the problem'' and he called the
asylum system changes ''more draconian.''

''We would like to examine what we do with the 8 to 13 million people who are
already here illegally, because we think we need comprehensive immigration
reform, as does the president,'' he said, adding that he ''absolutely opposed''
deporting them, as many House conservatives insist be done.

Mr. McCain said the president's proposed guest worker program would differ from
an amnesty because illegal immigrants would be subject to fines and delays
before eligibility for citizenship.

But Senator Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi, said, ''The president's guest
worker program is not going anywhere, period.'' Mr. Lott added: ''He needs to go
ahead and accept it. We are not going to do anything that looks like, smells
like or in anyway resembles amnesty, period.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Border Patrol agent yesterday along the barrier that
separates San Diego and Tijuana, Mexico. (Photo by David Maung/European
Pressphoto Agency)
 Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., the bill's sponsor. (Photo by
William Philpott/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); TERRORISM (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY (91%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LICENSES & PERMITS (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); REFUGEES (90%); APPROVALS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); TORTURE
(90%); DRIVERS LICENSES (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); AMNESTY (77%); JUDGES (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); RELIGION (66%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Immigration and
Refugees; Asylum (Political); Illegal Aliens; Drivers Licenses; Security and
Warning Systems; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
(82%); US DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (56%) National Governors Assn; Homeland
Security Department; Transportation Department (US); Amnesty International

PERSON: F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (90%); NANCY PELOSI (58%) David D Kirkpatrick;
F James (Rep) Sensenbrenner

CITY: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             193 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico Opens Files Related to '71 Killings

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON; Gladys Boladeras and Antonio Betancourt contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 11


In perhaps the most important test of Mexico's new transparency laws, a group of
lawyers this week won the release of 691 pages of the government's indictment
against former President Luis Echeverria. He was charged last summer with
genocide in the killings of at least 25 student protesters by government-run
paramilitary troops more than 30 years ago.

After a seven-month legal battle led by lawyers at Freedom of Information-Mexico
(LIMAC), a government panel ordered the attorney general's office to release the
indictment against Mr. Echeverria. It is the first time that such an indictment
of a high-level official has been made public.

The Mexican attorney general's office fought hard against the release, saying
that it could hurt the investigation against Mr. Echeverria. Until recently,
Mexican law had allowed the government to keep all indictments sealed. But in
2002, an exception to the law was passed that allowed indictments to be released
to the public in cases of crimes against humanity.

Even after they were ordered to release the indictment, however, prosecutors
turned over only a small part of the entire 9,382 pages. And they marked out
most of the text with black crayons to conceal not only identities and
testimonies, but also mundane information gleaned from old newspaper stories.

Still, Kate Doyle, director of the Mexico Project at the National Security
Archives, applauded the release as an important step forward in opening this
country's convoluted and corrupt justice system to public scrutiny. The
documents, which will be available starting Monday on the Web site of Freedom of
Information-Mexico at www.limac.org.mx, provide a glimpse into what is widely
considered Mexico's most important investigation.

On June 10, 1971, a secret government paramilitary unit called the Falcons, or
Halcones in Spanish, assaulted university students marching peacefully through
the streets of Mexico City. The indictment charges that the group was formed by
officials at the highest levels of the government, but hidden within Mexico
City's Department of General Services, which is responsible for managing the
city's parks, cemeteries and public transportation systems.

The agency was run by former military officers, the indictment says. They
recruited hundreds of young men and sent at least 40 for special training in the
United States, Britain, France and Japan.

Mr. Echeverria, 82, is the first former Mexican president to be indicted for
abuses committed during his time in office. He was charged last summer by the
special prosecutor, Ignacio Carrillo Prieto, who was appointed by President
Vicente Fox in 2002 to pursue cases against public officials accused of human
rights violations.

But the indictment's validity is in dispute. A lower court found that the
statute of limitations on the crimes had passed and threw out the indictment
less than 24 hours after it was first filed last summer. The attorney general
later sent the indictment to the Supreme Court for its consideration. The court
has yet to make its ruling.

Human rights groups here and abroad have raised questions about the special
prosecutor's decision to accuse the former president of genocide, saying the
charge may be too big for the crime. Other lawyers have doubts that the special
prosecutor can win convictions for crimes that happened nearly 34 years ago,
especially since many of the leading witnesses and participants have died. They
also wonder whether he can withstand the turbulent political forces against him.
The special prosecutor has said that leaders of the Institutional Revolutionary
Party, the former governing party, warned him that they ''simply would not
allow'' Mr. Echeverria to be taken into custody. Mr. Echeverria's lawyer has
argued that there is nothing in the reams of documents handed over to the courts
that directly links the former president to the 1971 killings.

Much of the unsealed section of the indictment addresses the legal questions. In
exhaustive detail, it explores international precedents on genocide dating from
the 1930's.

Mexico, it argues, ratified United Nations conventions against genocide in 1952,
and in 1967 Mexico's federal penal code criminalized genocide, which it defined
as an effort to ''destroy totally or partially, one or more national groups, and
other groups of ethnic, racial or religious character.''

Students, the indictment argues, fall within the legal definition of ''national
group.''

Jesus Martin del Campo, who has followed every step of this investigation
because his brother Edmundo was among those killed in 1971, worried that the
indictment did not make a convincing case.

''What these documents describe is a government operation that went out of
control,'' he said. ''They do not prove genocide.''

Indeed, there was nothing in the unsealed portion of the indictment that
directly linked Mr. Echeverria to the killings. The special prosecutor relies
heavily on old newspaper interviews with students who had attended the march and
high-level city authorities. But it argues that, as president of Mexico, Mr.
Echeverria kept such tight control of state security forces that the attack by
the Falcons could not have happened without his knowledge.

Newspaper reports indicate that Mr. Echeverria was informed every 10 minutes
about developments that day.

Perhaps the most compelling parts of the indictment are the testimonies from
former members of the Falcons and the men who trained them. The names of the men
who offered the testimony are crossed out. Prosecutors recovered many of the
statements from Mexico's national archives, first opened three years ago.

In the testimonies, the Falcons explained that they were first organized at the
end of 1968, the year when government troops fired on student protesters in the
plaza at Tlatelolco. Human rights investigators say hundreds were killed in that
incident.

At the end of that year, a new subway system was opened in Mexico City.
President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz wanted to suppress student protests and protect the
subway and other important facilities. After the Tlatelolco incident, Mr. Diaz
did not want to assign the work to uniformed soldiers.

So he and his interior secretary, Mr. Echeverria, created the Falcons. When Mr.
Echeverria became president in 1970, he kept the group.

According to testimonies by former members, they carried false identifications
and used code words and nicknames.

''No one could reveal the objective of their work, or they would be fired,'' one
member said in testimony on page 9,178.

The Falcons earned $6 to $15 a day and were paid every 10 days by a commander
called ''Rock.''

On page 9,159, one of the Falcons explained in his testimony that immediately
after the attack, he and other members of the group rushed back to their camp
and tore it apart so that by the time investigators arrived the next day, there
was nothing there.

He testified that he and others hid in the basement of the city Treasury
Department for a few days. Then they were transported to a trolley bus repair
center on the south side of the city, given their final pay and dispersed.

Some of the Falcons, the former group member testified, followed instructions
received by an operative known as ''the teacher'' and from their former
commanders and ''dedicated themselves to committing crimes, with the intention
of distracting the attention of public opinion.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mexican students were attacked during a demonstration on June
10, 1971, in Mexico City
 25 were killed. (Photo by UPI)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (94%); LAWYERS (91%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); CORRUPTION (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); STATUTE OF
LIMITATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(77%); SCHOOL VIOLENCE (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(75%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); WEB SITES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); GENOCIDE
(72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); TESTIMONY (70%);
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (69%); CITY GOVERNMENT (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (64%);
PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (58%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (94%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); FRANCE (51%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             194 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee Says He Was Tortured in U.S. Custody

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1962 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 12


Mamdouh Habib still has a bruise on his lower back. He says it is a sign of the
beatings he endured in a prison in Egypt. Interrogators there put out cigarettes
on his chest, he says, and he lifts his shirt to show the marks. He says he got
the dark spot on his forehead when Americans hit his head against the floor at
the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

After being arrested in Pakistan in the weeks after Sept. 11, 2001, he was held
as a terror suspect by the Americans for 40 months. Back home now, Mr. Habib
alleges that at every step of his detention -- from Pakistan, to Egypt, to
Afghanistan, to Guantanamo -- he endured physical and psychological abuse.

The physical abuse, he said, ranged from a kick ''that nearly killed me'' to
electric shocks administered through a wired helmet that he said interrogators
told him could detect whether he was lying.

Speaking publicly for the first time since he was freed two weeks ago, Mr.
Habib, a 49-year-old Australian citizen born in Egypt, also described
psychological abuse that seemed intended to undermine his identity -- as a
husband, a father and a Muslim man. At Guantanamo, he said, he was sexually
humiliated by a female interrogator who reached under her skirt and threw what
appeared to be blood in his face. He also said he was forced to look at
photographs of his wife's face superimposed on images of naked women next to
Osama bin Laden.

Mr. Habib's claims of mistreatment and torture cannot be confirmed, yet many are
in line with accounts from other former detainees, as well as from human rights
reports and from some government agents involved in the detention system. In
addition, Australian officials confirm Mr. Habib's movements during his
confinement, including his imprisonment in Egypt, where his lawyers say the
United States sent him for harsh interrogation through a process known as
rendition.

There is a part of his experience that Mr. Habib will not address, the months
before the Sept. 11 attacks when Australian intelligence officials say Mr. Habib
trained at two camps for Al Qaeda in Afghanistan. The officials also said Mr.
Habib told his wife in a phone call just days before Sept. 11 that something big
was going to happen in the United States. Mr. Habib said he planned to sue the
Australian government for not protecting him, and then, ''I will answer every
single question in a court.''

American officials said he admitted to training some of the Sept. 11 hijackers
and to having prior knowledge of the attack, but they never charged him. Mr.
Habib said any confessions he made were a result of torture and were not
genuine.

''Whatever they wanted me to sign,'' he said, ''I signed to survive.''

Despite his activities in Afghanistan, Australian officials said there was no
evidence that he trained any of the hijackers. One official said, ''I have
absolutely no sympathy for him,'' but added that whatever he did, it did not
justify the torture he said he had endured.

A Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Cmdr. Alvin Plexico, declined to address Mr. Habib's
specific claims, saying in a statement that there was no evidence that any
Australian in Defense Department custody ''was tortured or abused.'' The C.I.A.
declined comment and the embassies of Egypt and Pakistan in Australia did not
responded to questions.

Mr. Habib recounted his story, previously outlined in legal papers, during
interviews with The New York Times, with his Australian lawyer, Stephen Hopper,
present much of the time. Mr. Habib also spoke with the Australian television
news program ''60 Minutes,'' which paid him an undisclosed amount for the
interview, people involved in the arrangements said.

He said that during months and months of detention: ''I don't feel anything
anymore. I want to die.'' This week, standing at the water's edge north of
Sydney, looking out at an expanse of sailboats and the green woods beyond, he
said, ''Until now, I believe I'm dreaming.''

Drawn to Militant Islam

 Mr. Habib was arrested in early October 2001 on a bus to Karachi, where he was
to catch a flight home. For several years he had been growing increasingly
militant in his Muslim faith, and he had gone to Pakistan, he had told friends
in Australia, to find a religious school for his children.

Mr. Habib, who Australian intelligence officials knew as a committed follower of
militant Islam ideology, was detained in a prison in Islamabad. Australian
officials said their investigators questioned Mr. Habib in Pakistan, along with
American interrogators.

When the sessions began, Mr. Habib said, an American woman, who spoke both
Arabic and English, asked the questions: Had he been to Afghanistan? Whom did he
know there? He was shown pictures. Did he know these men?

He said he was defiant and told his interrogators: ''I don't have to talk to
you. I don't know who you are.''

He said the American woman told him ''this is your last chance,'' and that an
Australian official said, ''I'm sorry for you, Mr. Habib, you're never going to
see your kids anymore.''

Mr. Habib said he was taken to a room with hooks on the wall and a barrel, set
sideways like a roller, on the floor. His arms were stretched out, he said, and
each wrist was handcuffed and fastened to a hook on the wall. By his
description, the only way not to be left hanging was to stand on the barrel; an
electric wire ran through it. Mr. Habib said he believed the interrogators in
that room were Pakistani.

Mr. Habib said that when he refused to confess to being part of a 1995 terror
plot, one man turned on the current. He lifted his feet to avoid the shock, he
recalled, and he was suspended from the wall.

''I lost everything,'' he said. He doesn't know how long he was unconscious, but
he said that when he came to, he again refused to confess to terrorism. While he
was still hanging from the wall, another man, who said he was a martial arts
expert, came in and, Mr. Habib said, ''starts jump-kicking in my face,
jump-kicking in my stomach.''

The next night, he said, the Pakistanis took him to an airport where he saw 15
or 20 beefy men wearing masks, black T-shirts and combat boots. From their
voices, he said, he knew they were Americans. Mr. Habib started to fight with
the Pakistanis, he recalled, and ''then the Americans came and started beating
me.''

They beat him quiet and stripped him naked, he said. Men in black masks came
into the room. One had a still camera, the other a video camera. ''They make
picture of everything in my body,'' he said.

He said he was handcuffed and shackled and put on a plane. Then, he said, the
men put duct tape over his mouth, a bag over his head and goggles over the bag.

In November 2001, Maha Habib received a fax from the Australian Foreign
Ministry. ''We remain confident that your husband is detained in Egypt,'' it
said, adding that ''the government has received credible advice that he is well
and being treated well.''

Family Ties as Torture Tools

 Mr. Habib's lawyers have alleged that he was sent to Egypt as part of the
rendition program, which the United States has used increasingly to transfer
terror suspects to countries where they can be interrogated, sometimes using
practices not allowed in the United States, according to American diplomats and
C.I.A. officers. In recent months, several stories have emerged of men who say
they were the subject of renditions and complain of being mistreated by their
captors.

One frequent destination for renditions, those officials say, is Egypt, which
has a history of torture. In its 2003 human rights report, the State Department
said ''there were numerous credible reports that security forces tortured and
mistreated detainees.''

''Welcome to Egypt,'' Mr. Habib said he was greeted in Arabic when he arrived at
a prison. The interrogation began almost immediately, he said. Were you in
Afghanistan? Whom did you know there? Why were you there?

When he refused to answer, Mr. Habib said, the interrogators told him: ''We have
here two ways to make people talk. Nicely, what we're talking to you now. But we
have another way.''

Then someone kicked him, he said. ''This kick nearly killed me. I jumped maybe
three, four meter.''

Mr. Habib said that his chief interrogator spoke Arabic and English and later
appeared in Afghanistan when Mr. Habib was held there. He said that during
interrogations, he was surrounded by men who hit him and doused him with ice
water.

During what he called ''the worst day in my life,'' Mr. Habib said an
interrogator told him: ''Mamdouh, I've got your family here -- you're going to
talk to us.''' The interrogator taunted him with the possibility of seeing his
wife and four children. Mr. Habib said that in his delirium, he believed they
were there. When he realized they were not, he said, ''I became crazy.''

He said he jumped up, still shackled to a chair, and attacked the interrogator.

He said he was dragged from the room, handcuffed. ''And they hang me from the
ceiling,'' he said. ''They got sticks and everyone, they go on beating me.'' He
lifted his shirt to show the bruise on his back. ''I want to die,'' he said.

Touched by Female Soldiers

 After several months in Egypt, his treatment improved. Then, he said, he was
driven to the airport, where he was taken by men Mr. Habib described as ''fully
Americans.''

In April 2002, the Australian government issued a statement saying Mr. Habib
''was being held in custody by the United States military in Afghanistan.'' He
said other detainees told him he was at the Bagram air base, an American
detention site.

In Afghanistan, he said, female soldiers ''touched me in the private areas''
while questioning him. ''They was swearing at me, 'you criminal,' 'you
terrorist,''' he said. Interrogators also put a helmet connected to wires on his
head, Mr. Habib said. When they did not like his answers, he said he would feel
a jolt, and his body would start shaking.

He spent only a week at Bagram before being flown to Guantanamo in May 2002. He
arrived sick and faint. ''I was really scared,'' he said. ''I don't know who I
am.''

When his interrogators asked about his treatment in Egypt, he said, he told them
about the psychological abuse using his wife and children. Soon, he said, his
Guantanamo interrogators were doing the same.

Three or four times, he said, when he was taken to an interrogation room, there
were pictures doctored to make it appear that his wife was naked next to Osama
bin Laden. ''I see my wife everywhere, everywhere,'' he said.

He said that during one interrogation session, a woman wearing a skirt said to
him, ''You Muslim people don't like to see woman,'' he said. Then she reached
under her skirt, Mr. Habib said, pulling out what he described as a bloody
stick. ''She threw the blood in my face,'' he said.

There have been other reports of sexual humiliation at Guantanamo, one from an
F.B.I. agent who reported seeing a female Army sergeant rub lotion on a
detainee's arms and grab his genitals, according to government documents
released to the American Civil Liberties Union.

At Guantanamo, Mr. Habib was also interrogated by Australian investigators who
hoped to learn enough from the Americans to prosecute him, Australian officials
said. But, one of them said, ''all they had was that he was caught on the bus,
and whatever he gave up under 'extreme circumstances' in Egypt.''

When the Americans decided last month not to charge Mr. Habib, the Australians
sought his release. With Mr. Habib back home, Australian officials have revoked
his passport and say they intend to monitor him closely.

A few days ago, Mr. Habib said, he gathered his family and told them everything
that had happened since he left Sydney in July 2001. Just in case something bad
happens to him, he said, ''I want them to know fully everything.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mamdouh Habib, shown back in Australia with his wife, Maha, and
two of their four children, Ahmed and Hajer, after his 40 months in custody.
(Photo by Regis Martin for The New York Times)(pg. 15)
 A prison bracelet from Guantanamo Bay identifies Mamdouh Habib. (Photo by Regis
Martin for The New York Times)(pg. 1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
JAIL SENTENCING (78%); CONTUSIONS (78%); SHOPLIFTING (78%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(73%); ARRESTS (71%); HIJACKING (70%); LAWYERS (65%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(61%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (55%)

CITY: SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (55%)

STATE: NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AUSTRALIA (95%); PAKISTAN (93%); EGYPT (93%); CUBA
(91%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             202 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Museum, Putting a Human Face on the Holocaust, Opens in Israel

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, March 15


More than 40 heads of state and cabinet ministers, many of them from Europe,
gathered here on a chill Tuesday evening for the opening of a new Holocaust
history museum at Yad Vashem, the Israeli guardian of the Holocaust and its
history.

More than 10 years in the making, the new museum tries to tell the story of the
six million Jewish dead, the names of half of them still unknown, through the
diaries, images, experiences and testimonies of about a hundred individuals.

Rather than relying on dry histories and photographs, the new museum uses more
modern techniques of film and recreation of reality through artifacts,
concentrating on the stories of individuals caught up in the horror of a
previously unimaginable world.

The Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, told some 1,500 guests and dignitaries
the story of the annihilation of a single French family, recorded in the museum,
and then said: ''When you leave this museum, you see the sky of Jerusalem. I
know how a Jew feels when he emerges from these depths and breathes the air of
Jerusalem. He feels at home. He feels protected. He feels the terrible
difference between living in one's own country, in one's homeland, in a country
which can provide protection, and standing alone, utterly defenseless,
confronting a beast in human form.''

Mr. Sharon then added the real message of Yad Vashem: ''He knows Israel is the
only place in the world where Jews have the right to defend themselves, and that
proves the Jewish people will never know another Holocaust.''

The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, said that the United Nations,
like the state of Israel, had emerged from the ashes of the Holocaust, which was
also a ''driving force'' behind the adoption of the universal declaration of
human rights.

Among the leaders at the ceremony, which comes 60 years after the liberation of
the Auschwitz death camp, were the Polish president, Aleksander Kwasniewski and
the French prime minister, Jean-Pierre Raffarin. Germany, now one of Israel's
closest allies, sent Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer, and the British were
represented by Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott. But while the American
delegation included the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel, a Holocaust survivor, and
other dignitaries, there was no representative of the federal government, which
caused a lot of tongue-wagging here. The delegation was led by the mayor of New
York City, Michael R. Bloomberg.

The $56 million museum is four times larger than the old one, and is housed in a
striking new building of architectural concrete that cuts through the Mount of
Remembrance on which the Yad Vashem campus sits. Designed by the architect Moshe
Safdie, the building is a huge triangle, nearly 200 yards long, largely
underground, topped by a skylight that runs the length of the apex.

It is an acknowledgment that as the generation that lived the nightmare
disappears, responsibility for passing on its experience and lessons will fall
to educators and museums.

The chairman of Yad Vashem, Avner Shalev, said that the turnout ''illustrates
the importance world leaders place on Holocaust remembrance and highlights the
vital role Yad Vashem plays in achieving the common goal of remembering the past
and shaping the future, by helping to fight anti-Semitism and standing up for
the values of human rights and democracy.''

Mr. Shalev, a former chief of the Israeli Army's educational division, has
concentrated on trying to make the Holocaust relevant to the young, hoping that
the museum will inspire visitors to make moral choices.

Among the members of the American delegation was Menachem Z. Rosensaft, whose
parents were Holocaust survivors. His mother, Hadassah, finished a memoir
published last year in a joint project with Yad Vashem and the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum just before she died. ''I'm here in large part because
my parents are not,'' Mr. Rosensaft said. ''I'm here for them.''

The two central events of modern Jewish life are the Holocaust and the creation
of Israel, he said. ''So to emerge from this museum to see this explosion of
life below is very meaningful. You get a sense of triumphant survival, of
surviving to build a new life and a new state in the face of annihilation.'' At
similar Holocaust museums in Washington and New York, he said, ''you just get
survival.'' But here, ''you remember the dead, but with a sense of renewed life.
The Holocaust is important and central, but in context -- the life of the Jews
before, and the life of the Jews afterward, which is all around you.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: With victims' pictures in the background, a chorus performed
yesterday at the new Holocaust Museum. (Pool photo by Lefteris Pitarakis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (94%); HOLOCAUST (92%); HISTORY (90%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); AWARDS & PRIZES (67%); NOBEL
PRIZES (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities;
Museums; Yad Vashem Memorial; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (50%) Steven Erlanger; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Ariel
(Prime Min) Sharon; Michael R (Mayor) Bloomberg

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (68%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);
POLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Israel; Jerusalem

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             205 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. IS EXAMINING PLAN TO BOLSTER DETAINEE RIGHTS

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1487 words


The Defense Department is considering substantial changes to the military
tribunals that the Bush administration established to prosecute foreign terror
suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, military and administration officials say.

The proposed changes, many of which are detailed in a 232-page draft manual for
the tribunals that has been circulating among Pentagon lawyers, come after
widespread criticism from the federal courts, foreign governments and human
rights groups.

Those changes include strengthening the rights of defendants, establishing more
independent judges to lead the panels and barring confessions obtained by
torture, the officials said.

The draft manual has renewed a sharp debate within the Bush administration
between military and civilian lawyers who are pushing to overhaul the tribunals
and other officials who have long insisted that suspected terrorists held at
Guantanamo are not entitled to many of the basic rights granted defendants in
United States courts.

Military officials said the draft, which is modeled after the Manual for
Courts-Martial, was written under the auspices of the Pentagon official in
charge of the tribunals, Maj. Gen. John D. Altenburg Jr., who is now retired.
The proposals gained momentum after high-level discussions late last year that
included officials at the Pentagon, the office of the White House Counsel and
the National Security Council.

The proposals would generally move the tribunals -- formally known as military
commissions -- more into line with the judicial standards applied to members of
the American military in traditional courts-martial, officials said. Many
military lawyers have privately urged such a shift since President Bush first
authorized the commissions after Sept. 11.

The administration's willingness to restructure the commissions, which have been
a central part of its strategy for fighting terrorism, is uncertain. Some
officials said they considered the proposals premature because a lawsuit
challenging the legality of the commissions is now in a federal appeals court.

In addition, some of the White House aides who supported changes to the
commissions have recently moved to new jobs, leaving behind a small but powerful
group of officials, led by Vice President Dick Cheney and his staff, who have
opposed changing the commission rules unless forced to do so by the courts,
officials said.

''There are a number of folks who would like to make changes,'' one Pentagon
official said of the rules governing the military commissions. But, the official
added, ''Cheney is still driving a lot of this.''

At an interagency meeting earlier this month on detainee policy, officials said,
the State Department's designated legal adviser, John B. Bellinger III, who was
formerly the legal adviser on the National Security Council staff, raised the
question of possible modifications to the commission procedures and was quickly
rebuffed by Mr. Cheney's counsel, David S. Addington.

''We don't need any changes in the commissions,'' the officials quoted Mr.
Addington as saying.

A spokesman for Mr. Bellinger, who was traveling, declined to comment. A
spokesman for the vice president's office did not respond to requests for
comment on Mr. Addington's views.

A spokeswoman for General Altenburg, Lt. Susan McGarvey, said, ''We are always
considering ways to improve the commissions process,'' but she declined to
discuss the draft manual.

The plan to use military commissions to try terrorism suspects emerged in the
weeks following the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, from a small group of White House
and Justice Department lawyers who consulted closely with Mr. Cheney, current
and former administration officials have said.

By their own accounts, those officials sought to use the presidency's war powers
to allow the military to detain, interrogate and prosecute terrorism suspects
who might be harder to question or convict in the federal justice system.

A military order signed by Mr. Bush on Nov. 13, 2001, promised that the
tribunals would be ''full and fair.'' But the order and subsequent Pentagon
regulations denied defendants some due-process guarantees of civilian and
military courts, including the right to hear and contest all of the evidence
against them.

After more than two years of delays, the commission hearings began last August
but were marred by disorganization and other problems. For a time, Pentagon
officials said, they considered removing the presiding officer chosen to lead
the first four trials.

Those proceedings were halted after a federal district judge in Washington ruled
on Nov. 8 that the commissions could not legally try one of the first
defendants, Salim Ahmed Hamdan.

The judge, James Robertson, said the administration had improperly bypassed
Congress in setting up the commissions and violated binding international law
when it refused to screen prisoners like Mr. Hamdan in accordance with the
Geneva Conventions. Judge Robertson also held that commission rules allowing the
defendant to be excluded from some proceedings and denied access to some of the
evidence against him were ''fatally contrary to or inconsistent with'' the
standards of American military and civilian courts.

Rather than push forward with other trials, General Altenburg chose to regroup.
Several weeks earlier, he had asked a senior lawyer on his staff, Col. Lee
Deneke, to oversee a group of lawyers in drafting a manual that would address
procedural shortcomings of the tribunals and some of the criticisms made by
legal experts, foreign governments and human rights groups, officials said.

''There has been a push for some time to address some of the outstanding issues
on military commissions,'' said one administration official, who like others
insisted on anonymity because of the secrecy of the process. ''But now it is no
longer just a few voices advocating changes. Now you have the courts saying that
some things need to be done.''

Several officials who have read the draft manual said it would address only some
of the criticisms raised by Judge Robertson, a former civil rights lawyer and
naval officer appointed by President Bill Clinton.

In his 45-page ruling, Judge Robertson also noted other discrepancies between
the military commission rules and the courts-martial regulations of the Uniform
Code of Military Justice, including the lack of speedy trial provisions or
guarantees against self-incrimination and the smaller size of a commission panel
and the comparative ease with which it can vote a life sentence.

The draft manual affords defendants more power to challenge the evidence against
them, even when that information is classified, officials said. Another proposal
raises the minimum number of military officers on a tribunal to five from three.
In a capital case, as many as 12 panel members might be required, one military
lawyer said.

The manual would also bar any ''confession or admission that was procured from
the accused by torture,'' according to portions of a draft read to a reporter.
The definition of torture in the draft is fairly broad, covering any act
''specifically intended to inflict severe physical or mental pain and
suffering.''

The draft manual includes a legal analysis of each provision. Without the
analysis, the 232-page draft runs just over 100 pages, an official said.

One of the most significant proposals would make the commissions' presiding
officer more like the judge in a general courts-martial. Officials said that
change was intended to solve procedural problems created by rules that now
require all commission members to rule on questions of the law, as well as on
the facts of a case, even though the members are generally active-duty or
reserve officers without legal training.

But the problem might also be one of the most difficult to fix, officials said.

In order to change the scheme, military lawyers, including General Altenburg,
would now like to amend the presidential order, a step that would probably be
opposed by some in the White House and that might take months to move through
the bureaucracy even if it were fully endorsed, officials said.

Administration officials also appear to be divided over the wisdom of changing
any of the commission rules before the federal lawsuit is resolved.

Although many officials are optimistic about the administration's chances before
three Republican-appointed judges who are scheduled to hear arguments in the
case on April 7 in the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit,
many of those officials also expect the matter to reach the Supreme Court
regardless of the outcome.

''People who think that it will be full steam ahead for the commissions after
the appeals court rules fail to appreciate how much litigation might be ahead of
us,'' said a military lawyer who advocates changes to the commissions. ''A
manual like that might make the courts more reluctant to intervene.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A room at Guantanamo Bay set up to hold military tribunals is
equipped with a closed-circuit television to show proceedings as they occur.
Changes to the tribunals are being considered by the Bush administration. (Photo
by Angel Franco/The New York Times)
 Maj. Gen. John D. Altenburg Jr. was in charge of the tribunals. (Photo by
Department of Defense via Associated Press)(pg. 23)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY COURTS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(76%); LITIGATION (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); APPEALS COURTS (71%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             209 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

We Can't Remain Silent

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 729 words


At dinner on a rainy night in Manhattan this week, I listened to a retired
admiral and a retired general speak about the pain they've personally felt over
the torture and abuse scandal that has spread like a virus through some sectors
of the military.

During the dinner and in follow-up interviews, Rear Adm. John Hutson, who is now
president of the Franklin Pierce Law Center in Concord, N.H., and Brig. Gen.
James Cullen, a lawyer in private practice in New York, said they believed that
both the war effort and the military itself have been seriously undermined by
official policies that encouraged the abuse of prisoners.

Both men said they were unable to remain silent as institutions that they served
loyally for decades, and which they continue to love without reservation, are
being damaged by patterns of conduct that fly in the face of core values that
most members of the military try mightily to uphold.

''At some point,'' said General Cullen, ''I had to say: 'Wait a minute. We
cannot go along with this.'''

The two retired officers have lent their support to an extraordinary lawsuit
that seeks to hold Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld ultimately accountable for
policies that have given rise to torture and other forms of prisoner abuse. And
last September they were among a group of eight retired admirals and generals
who wrote a letter to President Bush urging him to create an independent
9/11-type commission to fully investigate the problem of prisoner abuse from the
top to the bottom of the command structure.

Admiral Hutson, who served as the Navy's judge advocate general from 1997 to
2000, said he felt sick the first time he saw the photos of soldiers abusing
detainees at Abu Ghraib prison. ''I felt like somebody in my family had died,''
he said.

Even before that, he had been concerned by the Bush administration's decision to
deny the protections of the Geneva Conventions to some detainees, and by the way
prisoners at Guantanamo Bay were being processed and treated. He said that when
the scandal at Abu Ghraib broke, ''I knew in my soul that it was going to be
bigger than that, that we had just seen the tip of the iceberg and that it was
going to get worse and worse and worse.''

The letter to President Bush emphasized the wide scope of the problem, noting
that there were ''dozens of well-documented allegations of torture, abuse and
otherwise questionable detention practices'' involving prisoners in U.S.
custody. It said:

''These reports have implicated both U.S. military and intelligence agencies,
ranging from junior enlisted members to senior command officials, as well as
civilian contractors. No fewer than a hundred criminal, military and
administrative inquiries have been launched into apparently improper or unlawful
U.S. practices related to detention and interrogation. Given the range of
individuals and locations involved in these reports, it is simply no longer
possible to view these allegations as a few instances of an isolated problem.''

Admiral Hutson and General Cullen have worked closely with a New York-based
group, Human Rights First, which, along with the American Civil Liberties Union,
filed the lawsuit against Mr. Rumsfeld. A report released this week by Human
Rights First said that the number of detainees in U.S. custody in Iraq and
Afghanistan has grown to more than 11,000, and that the level of secrecy
surrounding American detention operations has intensified.

Burgeoning detainee populations and increased secrecy are primary ingredients
for more, not less, prisoner abuse.

One of the many concerns expressed by Admiral Hutson and General Cullen was the
effect of the torture and abuse scandal on members of the military who have had
nothing to do with it. ''I think it does stain the honor of people who didn't
participate in it at all,'' said Admiral Hutson. ''People in the military who
find that kind of behavior abhorrent are painted with the same broad brush.''

General Cullen, who has served as chief judge of the Army's Court of Criminal
Appeals, spoke in terms of grief. ''You feel sorrow,'' he said, ''because you
know there are so many servicemen and women out there who want to do the right
thing, who are doing tough jobs every day. And to see these events blacken their
names and call into question their whole mission just makes me sad. Very, very
sad.''

Paul Krugman is on vacation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); SCANDALS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
NAVIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LAW OF WAR (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
PRISONS (74%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%); TERRORISM (64%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Suits and Litigation; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%);
GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (54%) American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) Bob Herbert; John D (Rear Adm) (Ret) Hutson; James
(Brig Gen) (Ret) Cullen; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%); CONCORD, NH, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (93%); CUBA (85%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             210 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 3, 2005 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Limits Set for Boy Jockeys In Emirates' Camel Races

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates, March 31


As he scratched the cigarette burns on his arms, his face blemished with cuts,
8-year-old Salih Sulaiman recounted the most tormenting moment of his life as a
slave.

About a year ago, Salih said, he watched as a boy fell off a camel, broke his
neck and was left for dead. ''They wrapped his body up in a blanket before the
race and hid it,'' Salih, a bony Sudanese jockey, said in disbelief. ''Then they
buried him in a hole after the race was over.''

No one mentioned the incident again, but that day Salih decided he had to escape
the camp where he had been held for four years.

Far from Dubai's high-rises and Abu Dhabi's luxurious lifestyles, thousands of
young boys like Salih endure Dickensian conditions as jockeys in camel races in
the desert hinterlands of the United Arab Emirates. Boys primarily from
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sudan have long been kidnapped or sold by impoverished
parents to race camels in the United Arab Emirates and in other Persian Gulf
countries, where child slavery remains an open secret. Child welfare groups
estimate that as many as 5,000 children toil as jockeys or in camel farms, known
as ozbahs, in the United Arab Emirates alone. Most work unsalaried, with any
payments going to smugglers and occasionally to the children's parents.

Now, after years of campaigning and pressure by human rights groups, the
emirates' government has begun to crack down on the use of child jockeys,
promising to impose tough new penalties on violators and hoping to close
loopholes used to smuggle children into the country. Among the changes is a new
law requiring jockeys to be at least 16 and weigh at least 100 pounds. The law
came into effect on Thursday.

In unusually public decrees and newspaper notices, government officials have
warned of the penalties in the legislation and of more legislation that promises
even harsher penalties if camel owners do not comply.

''The issue is not just against our traditions and our religion, but it is
simply inhumane,'' said the emirates' information minister, Sheik Abdallah bin
Zayed al-Nuhayyan.

There already were laws on the books regulating the camel-racing industry, but
enforcement has been weak. In the United Arab Emirates, as with most other
Persian Gulf countries, slavery is illegal but camel farms have rarely been
policed.

Previous attempts to crack down on violators reduced the number of child
jockeys, officials say, but loopholes were exploited. A major thrust now is to
convince the industry that the government is serious.

''This time it's going to be difficult for them not to enforce the laws,'' said
Ansar Burney, a Pakistan-based rights lawyer who has led a 16-year campaign
against the use of the child jockeys. ''Everyone is now looking at the U.A.E.
and what they will do.''

This latest crackdown is seen as pragmatic in part because the issue continues
to hamper the emirates' efforts to join monetary unions and trade pacts with the
West. Notices placed by the Interior Ministry in local newspapers describe child
slavery as ''against our national interests'' and emphasize that it is ''in
violation of the U.A.E.'s obligations under international treaties and
obligations.''

Last year, the International Labor Organization accused the government of taking
little action to stem the use of underage jockeys.

The effort to clean up the industry will not be an easy one. Camel racing is big
sport in this country, where prestige, if not money, rides on a victory.

Camel owners prefer child jockeys because they are lighter and more agile. And
usually, the younger the better: Mr. Burney says a 4-year-old fetches up to $600
on the market, while an 8-year-old will attract half that price.

Each year, Mr. Burney said, hundreds of boys like Salih, some as young as 2, are
taken to makeshift desert camps where they are typically underfed, abused and
sometimes sodomized. The children receive poor medical care; infections and
disease are common, as are untreated broken limbs. Salih said his cigarette
burns were punishment for losing races or for misbehaving.

Many people credit a documentary broadcast on HBO's program ''Inside Sports,''
which also made the rounds here, for prompting the government's crackdown. The
program showed film from a hidden camera taken by Mr. Burney into the ozbahs
showing the harsh conditions under which children were being kept -- in some
cases worse than that provided for the camels.

Mr. Burney said the documentary caught the attention of the United Arab
Emirates' armed forces chief of staff, Muhammad bin Zayed al-Nahyan, who is said
to have been confronted by his surprised sons after they had seen it.

Rather than banishing Mr. Burney from the emirates, as Mr. Burney had expected,
the sheik invited him to Abu Dhabi to help find a solution, Mr. Burney said.

''We are part of the problem, though we're not the only problem,'' said an
official close to the government. ''And we intend to be part of the solution.''

With the backing of Sheik Muhammad, Mr. Burney agreed to organize a shelter on a
U.A.E. Army base just south of Abu Dhabi, where boys could be taken for medical
and psychological care before being sent back to their home countries. He also
began a publicity campaign at racetracks throughout the country to let boys know
about their rights.

For Salih, the shelter proved a ticket home. About three months ago, he said, he
managed to get to a cellphone and called the police to report ''undocumented
workers'' at the camel farm were he was being held. When the police arrived, he
said, the boys rushed to the officers. In all, six children were freed from the
farm and taken to the shelter.

Salih hopes to return soon to his home in Rashad, Sudan. Meanwhile, he is being
treated for various infections and other ailments at the government's expense.
Officials at the shelter said children would also receive one-time payments to
ease their way home.

''My mother is happy I will be returning, but my father isn't,'' he said. ''He
needs the money. It's always the same.''

So far, the center has processed 44 children, who have been sent home, Mr.
Burney said. But he said he expected hundreds more children to arrive in the
coming days as they are released from the ozbahs.

He also said he expected the underage-jockey issue to open the way to tackling
even bigger taboos in the region like teenage prostitution and sexual slavery.

''This is going to be a major precedent,'' Mr. Burney said. ''This is now the
law of the land.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 5, 2005



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about a new law in the United Arab Emirates
that will ban child jockeys in camel races misstated the name of an HBO program
that broadcast a documentary credited with having helped to prompt the
legislation. It is ''Real Sports With Bryant Gumbel,'' not ''Inside Sports.''



GRAPHIC: Photos: Competition is fierce at the season's final meet at the Wathba
track in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, seen as camel-racing's Super
Bowl.
 Young jockeys like this one are prized. Another boy, Salih Sulaiman, 8, fled
and is trying to return to Sudan. (Photographs by Christopher Brown/Polaris, for
The New York Times)Map of the United Arab Emirates highlighting Abu Dhabi: In
Abu Dhabi, a new law requires jockeys to be at least 16 years old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); SMUGGLING (89%); SLAVERY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); FINES & PENALTIES (86%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (78%); BURN INJURIES (78%);
CHILD LABOR (77%); BONE FRACTURES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (69%); CHILD WELFARE
(66%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: ABU DHABI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (94%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (97%); GULF STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rio Police Partied Before Killings, Inquiry Shows

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, April 15


Policemen charged with killing 29 people in Rio de Janeiro two weeks ago were
seen drinking beer and singing karaoke tunes before their rampage, Rio's chief
investigator told Reuters on Friday.

The investigator, Alvaro Lins, also said the inquiry was focusing on two
possible motives for the random killings by a death squad believed to be made up
of police officers. He said one theory was that the crimes were meant as a show
of force to a rival group.

The gunmen shot to death men, women and children in the working-class districts
of Nova Iguacu and Queimados on Rio's north side in the worst massacre in more
than a decade in the violent city.

The other possible motive was that the killings were a response to a crackdown
on corrupt police officers, with the aim of causing a change in police command
in the area.

Mr. Lins said three witnesses saw five policemen drinking beer and singing in a
bar for three hours before the killings. Afterward, they jumped into a car later
seen at the crime scenes, the witnesses said. Empty cartridges from bullets used
in the killings were found in the car.

The investigation has led to the arrests of 10 officers from the state police
force in charge of street patrols and the indictments of 8 of them.

The number of death squads in Rio has decreased in recent years, Mr. Lins said,
but some are still operating, mainly in the suburbs, and they nearly always
include policemen. The Justice Ministry promised earlier this month to send
hundreds of federal police agents to battle death squads.

''They mostly start as vigilantes, killing bandits in violent areas, but then
they all start losing control and kill everyone who stands in their way,'' Mr.
Lins said. Rio is plagued by violent crime, with rival drug gangs controlling
many slum areas and defying authorities.

Death squads charge a protection fee from local businesses and sometimes
households. Mr. Lins said an argument over such fees with a rival group could
have caused the massacre. ''We suspect they were trying to show to the other
group who calls the shots in the districts,'' he said.

He said the inquiry was difficult as some policemen tried to cover up for their
colleagues.

The police suspect the indicted policemen of executing at least 15 people over
the past few years. Human rights groups say most such killings in Rio are
executions of suspects.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); POLICE FORCES (79%); CORRUPTION (78%); VIOLENT CRIME
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); ARRESTS (74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%);
GANGS (58%); SLUM DWELLINGS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (93%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             214 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Long Island Has Failed to Stem Segregation, a Group Charges

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 690 words


Racial segregation persists on Long Island because government has not enforced
anti-bias laws, municipal zoning has failed to foster integration and real
estate agents continue to steer buyers and renters illegally, an advocacy group
charges in a new report.

The report was prepared by Erase Racism, a nonprofit group based in Syosset that
promotes racial equity on Long Island. The group is financed by grants and
donations.

The federal census shows that Long Island continues to be among the most
segregated suburban areas in America, the report said. Eighty-four percent of
whites on Long Island live in white neighborhoods, it said, while nonwhites are
concentrated in other neighborhoods.

''Yet the very agencies charged with overcoming housing discrimination,
enforcing fair-housing laws and discouraging segregation in housing are doing
little or nothing to ameliorate racial patterns,'' it said. ''In fact, sometimes
their policies are barriers to integration.''

The report is being formally released today at a news conference in Bethpage.
Nassau County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi, who is scheduled to attend the
conference, said, ''Housing discrimination is very real.'' He added that
government at all levels had been ineffective in dealing with the problem, and
said that he wanted to use the ''the good work of the report as a jumping-off
point'' and ''get all the players together to develop a strategy.''

The report, which Erase Racism provided to The New York Times, makes 29
recommendations, including requiring local government to promote integration
though planning and zoning, and beefing up enforcement of anti-bias laws, using
undercover testers to uncover illegal steering.

One bias victim cited in the report is a black professor at Touro Law Center,
Deborah W. Post, who said she had asked a real estate agent to show her houses
in Smithtown, which is predominantly white. Instead, she said, she was shown six
homes in Huntington Station, which has a substantial black population.

Dr. Lee E. Koppelman, the executive director of the Long Island Regional
Planning Board, said the problems of discrimination and segregation on Long
Island were ''very intractable.'' Despite decades of efforts to integrate
housing, he said, ''to tell you candidly, I lost every one of those battles.''

He added, ''The same 13 black communities I identified in the 1960 census are
the same 13 that still exist in the 2000 census.''

The report said that both Nassau and Suffolk County's Human Rights Commissions
have failed to take action in housing discrimination cases because they were
underfinanced and understaffed. Instead, the commissions referred cases to state
and federal agencies, where, the report said, complaints can take years to
process, though a spokeswoman for the State Division of Human Rights, Denise L.
Ellison, said the cases are now handled more quickly.

The report also accused local governments of ignoring segregation and failing to
use their planning and zoning powers to stop it. When municipalities apply for
money from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
report said, they fail to comply with requirements to list barriers to equal
housing and provide remedial plans.

Some towns officially deny having any problem, and others do little or nothing
about the problem, the report said. Erase Racism's president, Elaine Gross,
said, ''None of the Long Island entities that were required to file offered any
substantial plans to counteract segregated housing.''

The report cited the Town of Huntington, which it said gave no plan of action in
its latest filing even though HUD criticized it in the late 1990's for
exclusionary zoning. Don McKay, a spokesman for the Huntington town supervisor,
Frank Petrone, said that town officials had not seen the report, but he disputed
the criticism.

''We are clearly committed to affordable housing, and in the last couple of
years have done a number of racially mixed high-quality developments,'' Mr.
McKay said, adding that the town is addressing housing issues in a new master
plan it is preparing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACE & RACISM (93%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW
(90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); LAND
USE PLANNING (89%); CENSUS (89%); ZONING (89%); SUBURBS (78%); COUNTIES (78%);
COUNTY GOVERNMENT (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH & WELFARE LAW (78%); LEGISLATION (78%);
REAL PROPERTY LAW (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EXECUTIVES (67%); PRESS CONFERENCES (67%) Housing; Blacks;
Zoning; Renting and Leasing; Brokers and Brokerage Firms  ; Discrimination;
Suburbs; Law and Legislation; Housing; Minorities (US)

ORGANIZATION: Erase Racism (Orgn)

PERSON: Bruce Lambert

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Long Island (NY)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Acts on War Crimes To Strengthen Ties to West

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: BANJA LUKA, Bosnia and Herzegovina, April 22


On Oct. 22, 1999, the morning of his 45th birthday, Zelko Kopanja got into his
car in this Bosnian Serb city and turned on the ignition, detonating a bomb.

Mr. Kopanja, editor of the newspaper Nezavisne Novine, contends that the bomb,
which cost him both his legs, was planted by Serbia's security services to stop
him from publishing articles detailing atrocities committed by Serbs against
Muslims during Bosnia's civil war, from 1992 to 1995. A subsequent F.B.I.
investigation supported his suspicions.

Six years after the bombing, though, he says he is witnessing a remarkable turn
of events, with governments across the region seeking closer ties with the West
by taking action against those his articles said were responsible for war
crimes.

In the last three months the Serbian government and the authorities in Bosnia's
Serb Republic have transferred 11 Serbs accused of involvement in atrocities
during the wars of the 1990's to the World Court in The Hague. Another suspect,
Gen. Nebojsa Pavkovic, the commander of the Yugoslav Army during the 1999
conflict in Kosovo, is expected to be transferred to the court on Monday.

''Those who labeled me as a traitor and a spy today believe in my concept of
life,'' said Mr. Kopanja, who now walks with prosthetic legs and crutches.
''They have become the biggest supporters of Nezavisne Novine.'' While he said
he was not necessarily comfortable with the newfound support, he also said it
indicated substantial change in the region.

While many Serbs still regard the war crimes suspects as heroes, the readiness
of their governments to surrender them to the court represents weakening
nationalism across the region, diplomats and political analysts say. Diplomats
say the change results from international pressure, including United States
penalties and threats from Bosnia's international administrator to dismiss
politicians who did not comply.

But politicians here also say they have little choice but to seek membership in
the European Union and NATO to help flagging economies.

The benefits of membership to Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia have become more
evident as their former Communist bloc neighbors Bulgaria and Romania have moved
within two years of possible membership and have grown substantially.

''We need a proper vision for the future, and right now we can find that in the
European vision,'' said Serbia's agriculture minister, Ivana Dulic-Markova, a
member of the G17 Plus change-oriented party.

Serbia has become the last of the former Yugoslav states embroiled in the wars
of the 1990's to drop its opposition to the World Court. Croatia transferred
eight suspects to the court in 2004. Bosnia's Serb Republic began to comply late
last year, and Serbia stepped up its hitherto lackluster cooperation in
February.

Serbia has begun to arrest war crimes suspects, albeit declaring they have
surrendered ''voluntarily,'' the deputy prime minister, Miroljub Labus, said.
Previously, they left it up to those sought on war crimes charges to decide
whether to surrender. ''We decided to make it or break it,'' Mr. Labus said
recently. He said that G17 Plus, which is also his party, had threatened to quit
Serbia's minority government unless it changed its policy and tried to forge
closer ties with the European Union.

Serbia's bid for European Union membership had been blocked over its lack of
cooperation with the court.

On April 12, the European Commission, the European Union's executive branch,
rewarded Serbia for its policy shift with a recommendation for talks on a
Stabilization and Association Agreement, a first step toward membership.
European foreign ministers are expected to approve that decision on Monday if
General Pavkovic surrenders.

Full membership is unlikely, however, until Serbia turns over the tribunal's two
most-wanted suspects, Ratko Mladic, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb
Army, and Radovan Karadzic, the former leader of the Bosnian Serb government.

Conservatives, including Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, have long contended
that it would be hard for Serbia to cooperate with the tribunal because of the
strength of the highly nationalistic Serbian Radical Party, which has the
largest number of seats in Parliament of any party. Nationalist parties emerged
as the strongest in elections in neighboring Bosnia and Croatia in 2003.

But people seem to be realizing that nationalism will not bring them prosperity,
analysts say. ''The environment is different to what it used to be,'' Mr.
Kopanja said.

''Karadzic and Mladic are less and less the heroes, and more and more of a
burden to people psychologically and economically,'' he said.

Bogdan Ivanisevic, the director of Human Rights Watch in Serbia Montenegro and
Bosnia, said, ''The public has become more and more aware of the E.U. component
in cooperation with The Hague.''

Nationalism remains a vocal element of Serbian political life. Ms. Dulic-Markova
was condemned after she said Serbia had squandered time in the 1990's in wars
with its neighbors instead of undertaking major economic changes.

The government still calls the arrests of war crimes suspects ''surrenders,''
which human rights groups say shows it is still ideologically opposed to the
court's mission.

''Absolutely nothing in how the government is cooperating with The Hague
tribunal would affect the way a person in the street thinks about war crimes,''
Mr. Ivanisevic said. Serbia's decision to cooperate with the tribunal, like
Croatia's and Bosnia's Serb Republic before it, was a pragmatic one, he said,
and while public opinion might be shifting, politicians were not yet ready to
examine their country's past.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 28, 2005



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a new
willingness by Serbia and other countries in the region to turn over those
accused of war crimes for international prosecution misidentified the court at
The Hague that tries such cases. It is the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, not the World Court.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Serbia has yet to turn over the war crimes suspects Radovan
Karadzic, above, and Ratko Mladic to the international tribunal. (Photo by Emil
Vas/Reuters)
 (Photo by Dragan Filipovic/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); POLITICS (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); BOMBINGS (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%);
CIVIL WAR (76%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); ESPIONAGE (73%); PUBLISHING (72%); PROSTHETICS & ORTHOTICS
(72%); EUROPEAN UNION (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (59%); RELIGION (56%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (90%); FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Radovan Karadzic; Ratko Mladic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA (95%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ROMANIA (79%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); BULGARIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             221 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths
CLARK, KENNETH B.

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Classified; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 951 words


CLARK--Kenneth B. The American Civil Liberties Union, its officers, Board of
Directors and staff deeply mourn the passing of a principled, influential and
pioneering leader on civil liberties. Dr. Clark was 90. The US Supreme Court
cited his study on the effects of racial discrimination as an influence in its
historic 1954 Brown v. Board of Education ruling declaring segregation in public
schools unconstitutional. The ACLU was a friend-of-thecourt participant in the
case. A towering figure in the struggle to end legally sanctioned racial
discrimination, Dr. Clark was instrumental in developing the strategy to
dismantle the system of explicit racism and overturn Jim Crow laws across the
country. Even with the success of his efforts, he still understood the
continuing effects of systemic discrimination. ''This is probably one of the
most dangerous things facing manking today: A use and training of intelligence
excluding moral sensitivity'', Dr. Clark once said. Throughout his career, he
was always committed to integration because of his larger vision for what a
diverse democracy ought to be. Where some civil rights leaders later came to
question the value of integration, Dr. Clark defended the premise that an
integrated American society would be better for everyone. An educational
psychologist whose life work encompassed racial integration and improvement in
the education of black children, Clark became a part of the ACLU in 1970,
serving as a member of the national Board of Directors for one year. He joined
the ACLU's National Advisory Council in 1985.

He assumed chairmanship of the council in 1991, a post he retained until his
death. ''The ACLU has persisted in meeting the most difficult tests of being the
moral conscience of our nation'', Clark said in 1980. ''It has protected the
fundamental political and human rights of all Americansindeed of all human
beings within our jurisdiction''. Clark is survived by his daughter Kate C.
Harris, and son Hilton B. Clark.

CLARK--Kenneth B., Phd. Passed away on May 1, 2005, after a long illness. He
leaves behind his son, Hilton B. Clark, his daughter, Kate C. Harris, his three
grandchildren, Scott K. Harris, Natalie B. Thompson, and Andrea K. Harris, and
his five great grandchildren, Myles, Paige, and Chase Thompson, and Katelin and
Nathaniel Harris. With his late wife, Dr. Mamie Phipps Clark, he founded
Northside Center for Child Development in 1946; the first private child guidance
center in Harlem. Dr. Kenneth B. Clark was an eminent scholar, social activist
and humanist, who dedicated his life to justice and social change. Family and
friends will gather on Sunday May 8, 2005 from 2 to 6 P.M. at Benta's Funeral
Home, 630 Saint Nicholas Avenue at 141st Street. Funeral services will be held
Monday May 9, 2005 at 10 A.M. at Saint Phillip's Episcopal Church, 204 West 134
Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues. In lieu of flowers, the family
requests that donations be sent to: Northside Center for Child Development,
Executive Office, 1301 Fifth Avenue, NY, NY 10029. 212-426-3412. He will be
deeply missed by his friends, colleagues, and above all, his entire family. The
Family

CLARK--Kenneth B., our Chairman Emeritus, spiritual father and beloved mentor,
America's race diagnostician, and pioneer in the pursuit of social justice and
an integrated society: full of insight, clarity of purpose, integrity, temerity,
charm and wit, stubborn courage, who fought relentlessly to save all children
from the damaging effects of race and caste. A great life, a giant public
intellectual, wonderful human being, and a great loss. We whose lives have been
touched and whose ideas have been formed by ''Dr. Clark'' are forever grateful,
and will always be guided by his spirit and example. Michael Meyers, Executive
Director New York Civil Rights Coalition

CLARK--Dr. Kenneth. The Board of Directors, staff and families of Northside
Center for Child Development mourn the passing of our cherished founder. He was
our leader and inspiration. Along with his wife Mamie, he founded Northside, the
first mental health agency serving children and families of Harlem. While he
will be remembered for his neverending fight for justice and equality, we shall
remember a gentle friend whose eyes sparkled with joy as he entered the haven he
and Mamie founded. He will be dearly missed but will always be in our hearts and
minds. Susan Patricof, Chairman Dr. Thelma Dye Executive Director

CLARK--Kenneth. The City College of New York mourns the passing of a true giant
of the twentieth century, Dr. Kenneth B. Clark. Professor Clark, who taught here
from 1942 to 1975 and was the first African-American to become a tenured
professor at The City University, was a true pioneer whose work documenting the
brutalizing and dehumanizing effects of racism and segregation helped change
America for the better. Dr. Gregory H. Williams, President The City College of
New York/CUNY

CLARK--Kenneth B. The City University of New York deeply mourns the death of Dr.
Kenneth B. Clark, CUNY Distinguished Professor of Psychology at City College
from 1942 to 1976. He will be long remembered for his lifelong commitment to
education and against segregation. His brilliant career stands as an enduring
inspiration for human rights. We extend our heartfelt sympathies to his family.
Benno C. Schmidt, Jr., Chairman Matthew Goldstein, Chancellor

CLARK--Kenneth B. The Board of Trustees of The Hudson River Museum express their
sadness at the passing of their esteemed former Board Member, Kenneth B. Clark,
who contributed so much to us, our community and our nation. Jan Adelson, Chair
Michael Botwinick, Director The Hudson River Museum

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (94%); RACE & RACISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (90%);
BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (89%); GRANDCHILDREN (86%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%);
SUPREME COURTS (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (72%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (71%); PSYCHOLOGY (68%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (92%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
STATES (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             222 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Chile: Court Lifts Time Limit On Rights Cases

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 48 words


The Supreme Court said it was lifting a sixth-month deadline it set in January
to wrap up investigations into hundreds of charges of human rights abuses, most
involving former President Augusto Pinochet. Rights groups and the families of
victims had campaigned strongly against the deadline.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); POLITICS (83%) Freedom
and Human Rights; Politics and Government

PERSON: Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

COUNTRY: CHILE (92%)

REGION: Chile

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             224 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Protests Against U.S. Spread Across Afghanistan

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, May 12


Anti-American violence spread to 10 of Afghanistan's 34 provinces and into
Pakistan on Thursday as four more protesters died in a third day of
demonstrations and clashes with the police.

Hundreds of students took part in three separate demonstrations here in the
capital, where they burned an American flag, and a provincial office of CARE
International was ransacked in a continuation of the most widespread protests
against the American presence since the fall of the Taliban government more than
three years ago.

In the most violent single incident, the police fired on hundreds of tribesmen
from Khogiani, a district in eastern Afghanistan, who were trying to march in
protest on Jalalabad, the town where four people died and 60 were wounded on
Wednesday.

The police blocked the tribesmen, many of whom were armed, 20 miles from the
city and had orders to fire into the air to disperse the crowd, said Fazel
Muhammad Ibrahimi, the director of health in the province.

The Afghan authorities and Kabul residents said the spate of violence was the
fault of outsiders, who they said were seeking to capitalize on student protests
stirred up by reports, most recently in the May 9 issue of Newsweek, that
Americans had desecrated the Koran during interrogations at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.

Islamic fundamentalist political parties, remnants of the former Taliban
government and a renegade anti-American commander, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, are all
possible sources of the violence, said Lutfullah Mashal, a spokesman for the
Interior Ministry.

The American military is still trying to analyze whether the violence is
politically driven, instigated by outsiders or a sign of general public
frustration with the slow pace of reconstruction in the country, said a
spokesman, Col. James Yonts. Students interviewed in Kabul pointed to the
presence of American troops in the country as another source of resentment.

Local governors might also be encouraging protests against the central
government and its American backers to improve their own standing before
parliamentary elections in September, said Jandad Spinghar, head of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission in Jalalabad.

Seeking to calm the passions raised by the desecration report, Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice expressed regret for the loss of life and promised a full
investigation of the allegation against Americans at Guantanamo. ''Disrespect
for the Holy Koran is not now, nor has it ever been, nor will it ever be
tolerated by the United States,'' Ms. Rice said in a surprise statement issued
before an appearance at the Senate Appropriations Committee.

Protests erupted throughout the country on Thursday, spreading south from the
capital region.

In the town of Chak in Wardak Province, south of Kabul, a high school student
was killed and five were wounded when the police opened fire on demonstrators
who marched on the provincial capital, said the provincial police chief, Basir
Salangi.

''The people claim the police did it, and the police say it was the
demonstrators,'' he said, reflecting the confusion over many of the clashes that
broke out. The protesters set fire to the administration building, in anger at
the shooting by the police, the official Afghan news agency, Bakhtar, reported,
quoting one of the student demonstrators.

In Logar, another province south of Kabul, protesters toppled a mobile telephone
tower and destroyed equipment at its base overnight, local officials said. High
school students then gathered at their school in the town of Muhammad Agha at
7:30 a.m. Thursday to protest the report from Guantanamo. Protesters broke the
windows of a new foreign-financed district administration office that was opened
just last Saturday by President Hamid Karzai.

The rioters then attacked the offices of CARE International, the American aid
group, and of another aid organization next door, scaling the walls, breaking
windows and smashing computers and beating some of the local staff. The crowd
returned three times to the compound during the day, Paul Barker, the country
director of CARE, said.

The high school students did not instigate the violence, Mr. Barker said. ''They
were the majority,'' he said, ''but our staff feels someone else was the
instigation.'' He cited the demolition of the telephone tower and a roadside
explosion that wounded a policeman as proof that the violent acts required more
sophistication than could be expected from teenagers.

A prominent local political figure was killed in Ghazni Province, south of
Kabul, in an attack that the governor, Asadullah Khan, attributed to Taliban
insurgents. Two of the attackers were killed and seven arrested, the Bakhtar
news agency reported.

Three people were killed and two injured by another roadside bomb, further south
in Zabul Province, on Wednesday, said an official in the governor's office, who
added that Taliban insurgents were suspected there as well.

Hundreds of students from Kabul University and Kabul Polytechnic demonstrated in
the capital, Kabul, but with a heavy police presence, their protest remained
peaceful. They blocked traffic for an hour outside the university as they
chanted anti-American slogans and burned an American flag.

Some of the students demanded that the United States interrogators, who are
alleged to have placed copies of the Koran in a toilet to upset detainees and in
one case to have flushed the holy book down the toilet, be arrested and tried by
a Muslim court. Desecration of the Koran is punishable by death in Afghanistan
and Pakistan.

Others said they wanted President Bush to make a formal apology to all Muslims
for the sacrilege. Protesters also complained about the continued presence of
United States troops in Afghanistan. ''The students are calling in one voice: we
don't want American bases in Afghanistan,'' said a medical student, Layek Zakim.

''Those Americans who come to our country and killed students should be arrested
and executed,'' he said, apparently referring to the death of four protesters in
Jalalabad on Wednesday, the day after the protest there began. American troops
were in the town during the unrest and were blocked from entering their base by
an angry crowd.

The soldiers fired into the air to break up the crowd, as did the Afghan police,
Colonel Yonts said, but he denied that the soldiers had harmed any of the
protesters.

Demonstrations were reported in nine or 10 Afghan towns, including several in
northern part of the country, and in the northwest Pakistani city of Peshawar.
More protests were announced for Friday and Saturday.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At one of three anti-American demonstrations yesterday in
Kabul, students set fire to a drawing of President Bush and tossed it into the
air. (Photo by David Guttenfelder/Associated Press)
A passenger vehicle turned away as protesters armed with sticks and stones
blocked a road about 25 miles southwest of Kabul in Logar Province. (Photo by
Ahmad Masood/Reuters)(pg. A10)
 An Afghan policeman in Logar Province, south of Kabul, took cover as protesters
inflamed by a report from Guantanamo Bay threw stones. (Photo by Ahmad
Masood/Reuters)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (92%); TALIBAN (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (87%); POLITICS (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); ELECTIONS (78%); RIOTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); POLITICAL PROTESTS
(78%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%);
POLICE FORCES (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (76%); CITY GOVERNMENT (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); INVESTIGATIONS
(75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); HIGH SCHOOLS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (71%); GOVERNORS (71%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ARMED
FORCES (70%); NAVIES (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); APPROPRIATIONS (69%);
RELIGION (66%); WAR CRIMES (66%); GENOCIDE (61%) Demonstrations and Riots;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Koran; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Prisoners of War; Elections; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CARE (57%) Taliban (Afghan Group);
Newsweek (Magazine)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Carlotta Gall; Condoleezza
(Sec) Rice; Gulbuddin Hekmatyar

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (96%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); PAKISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Pakistan; Kabul (Afghanistan); Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             228 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who Is a Terrorist?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 216 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Cuban Exile Could Test the U.S. Definition of Terrorist'' (front page, May
9):

The fact that Luis Posada Carriles is now seeking asylum in the United States
shows the importance of a common international posture on terrorism.

Although feted by some as a freedom fighter, Mr. Posada is charged with the 1976
bombing of a Cuban civilian airliner that killed a good portion of the Cuban Pan
American Games team just four years after the massacre at the Munich Olympics.

The call, from Kofi Annan, United Nations secretary general, for a basic
definition of terrorism provides a sound human rights framework to distinguish
the acceptable acts of the freedom fighter or national liberation movement from
acts of terrorism that can never be tolerated.

Mr. Annan supports a comprehensive treaty to define acts as terrorism that are
intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians, with the intent to
intimidate others and pressure governments.

This would protect civilians and make clear that whatever the cause, a freedom
fighter who guns down civilians will be brought to justice for terrorism, not
harbored, given a new identity, redeployed or helped to find a safe haven in
another country.

Michael McClintock
Director of Program
Human Rights First
New York, May 9, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); BOMBINGS (73%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             229 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Suspect Dies in Egypt

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, May 22


The man suspected of being a leader of a cell accused of recent attacks on
tourists in Egypt died last week after sustaining self-inflicted injuries while
in police custody, the prosecutor general's office said Saturday.

The Interior Ministry said the man, Ashraf Said Youssef, was suspected of
recruiting a suicide bomber who killed three foreign tourists in Cairo on April
7.

A security official said Mr. Youssef died last Thursday.

The prosecutor general's office said Mr. Youssef ''was afflicted, while in the
room he was detained in, by a state of agitation, during which he purposefully
hit his head on the wall of the room.'' The statement said he was admitted to a
hospital on May 11.

A government-financed human rights group said this month that at least nine
Egyptians died in detention in 2004 and that torture was common in Egyptian
jails.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (85%); BOMBINGS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%) Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human
Rights

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (88%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (96%)

REGION: Egypt

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America, A Symbol Of...

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 714 words


This Memorial Day is not a good one for the country that was once the world's
most brilliant beacon of freedom and justice.

State Department officials know better than anyone that the image of the United
States has deteriorated around the world. The U.S. is now widely viewed as a
brutal, bullying nation that countenances torture and operates hideous prison
camps at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and in other parts of the world -- camps where
inmates have been horribly abused, gruesomely humiliated and even killed.

The huge and bitter protests of Muslims against the United States last week were
touched off by reports that the Koran had been handled disrespectfully by
interrogators at Guantanamo. But the anger and rage among Muslims and others had
been building for a long time, fueled by indisputable evidence of the atrocious
treatment of detainees, terror suspects, wounded prisoners and completely
innocent civilians in America's so-called war against terror.

Amnesty International noted last week in its annual report on human rights
around the world that more than 500 detainees continue to be held ''without
charge or trial'' at Guantanamo. Locking people up without explaining why, and
without giving them a chance to prove their innocence, seems a peculiar way to
advance the cause of freedom in the world.

It's now known that many of the individuals swept up and confined at Guantanamo
and elsewhere were innocent. The administration says it has evidence it could
use to prove the guilt of detainees currently at Guantanamo, but much of the
evidence is secret and therefore cannot be revealed.

This is where the war on terror meets Never-Never Land.

President Bush's close confidante, Karen Hughes, has been chosen to lead a
high-profile State Department effort to repair America's image. The Bush crowd
apparently thinks this is a perception problem, as opposed to a potentially
catastrophic crisis that will not be eased without substantive policy changes.

This is much more than an image problem. The very idea of what it means to be
American is at stake. The United States is a country that as a matter of policy
(and in the name of freedom) ''renders'' people to regimes that specialize in
the art of torture.

''How,'' asked Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont, ''can our State Department
denounce countries for engaging in torture while the C.I.A. secretly transfers
detainees to the very same countries for interrogation?''

Ms. Hughes said in March that she would do her best ''to stand for what
President Bush called the nonnegotiable demands of human dignity.'' Someone
should tell her that there's not a lot of human dignity in the venues where
torture is inflicted.

The U.S. would regain some of its own lost dignity if a truly independent
commission were established to thoroughly investigate the interrogation and
detention operations associated with the war on terror and the war in Iraq. A
real investigation would be traumatic because it would expose behavior most
Americans would never want associated with their country. But in the long run it
would be extremely beneficial.

William Schulz, executive director of Amnesty International USA, said in an
interview last week that it's important to keep in mind how policies formulated
at the highest levels of government led inexorably to the abusive treatment of
prisoners.

''The critical point is the deliberateness of this policy,'' he said. ''The
president gave the green light. The secretary of defense issued the rules. The
Justice Department provided the rationale. And the C.I.A. tried to cover it
up.''

In the immediate aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, most of the world was ready
to stand with the U.S. in a legitimate fight against terrorists. But the Bush
administration, in its lust for war with Iraq and its willingness to jettison
every semblance of due process while employing scandalously inhumane practices
against detainees, blew that opportunity.

In much of the world, the image of the U.S. under Mr. Bush has morphed from an
idealized champion of liberty to a heavily armed thug in camouflage fatigues.
America is increasingly being seen as a dangerously arrogant military power that
is due for a comeuppance. It will take a lot more than Karen Hughes to turn that
around.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); POWS & MIAS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (70%); NAVIES (67%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Islam; Memorial Day; Torture

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (54%) Bob Herbert

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (92%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             243 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cheney Calls Guantanamo Prison Essential

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Vice President Dick Cheney strongly defended the American prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, on Monday, saying that it was essential to the administration's
efforts to combat terrorism and that detainees there had been treated better by
the United States than they could expect to be treated ''by virtually any other
government on the face of the earth.''

To bolster his remarks, made in a speech at the National Press Club, Mr. Cheney
added to the administration's previous warnings about the dangers of moving too
quickly to free the more than 500 prisoners held at Guantanamo. He provided new
details about what he said had been at least 10 released detainees who later
turned up on battlefields to try to kill American troops.

Mr. Cheney mentioned the name of Maulvi Abdul Ghaffar, a released Guantanamo
prisoner who returned to Afghanistan and became a Taliban commander and was
killed last year by Afghan forces. He also cited Mullah Shehzada, who he said
returned from the prison to organize a jail break in Afghanistan, and who was
killed last year by American forces.

The vice president's remarks were part of a growing administration campaign to
counter increasingly vocal calls on the part of human rights advocates,
Democrats and even some Republicans for the closing of the prison at Guantanamo,
because of accusations of torture and abuse.

Others, like Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, say that Guantanamo
has hurt the image of the United States around the world and that the Pentagon
has not taken responsibility for excesses there. Mr. Hagel has not said that the
administration should close the facility; so far Senator Mel Martinez of Florida
is the only prominent Republican to have made that suggestion.

Most of the detainees at Guantanamo were captured during the war in Afghanistan
in 2001 and 2002, and many of them have been held there for three years without
being charged with any crime. The Senate Judiciary Committee is planning a
hearing on Wednesday on the issue.

Mr. Cheney dismissed those who say the prison should be shut down. ''My own
personal view of it is that those who are most urgently advocating that we shut
down Guantanamo probably don't agree with our policies anyway,'' Mr. Cheney
said. He said that detainees at the prison were ''properly housed and properly
fed,'' and that their medical and religious needs were being met.

Mr. Cheney did not address a Pentagon inquiry this month that found that some
American guards and interrogators had mistreated the Koran, in some cases
intentionally.

The vice president's words were echoed in a news conference on Capitol Hill
later in the day by Representative Duncan Hunter, a California Republican who is
one of the Pentagon's most committed allies.

Mohamed al-Kahtani, believed to have been the planned 20th hijacker in the Sept.
11 terror plot, is held at Guantanamo, and Mr. Hunter said that Mr. Kahtani was
eating well and had been given the materials he needed to practice Islam.

''The guy who wanted to drive that plane into the building at the World Trade
Center is going to dine tomorrow on lemon fish with two types of vegetables, two
types of fruit, and then he will be afforded his taxpayer-funded Koran,
taxpayer-funded prayer beads and oil so he can pray, presumably to kill more
Americans,'' Mr. Hunter said.

He added that it was a ''myth'' that detainees were tortured at Guantanamo.

A growing body of evidence has shown that a significant number of prisoners were
subject to interrogations in which they were shackled to the floor for many
hours, stripped or forced to urinate and defecate on themselves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); POWS & MIAS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); TORTURE (77%); TALIBAN (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); WAR & CONFLICT
(74%); RELIGION (72%); HIJACKING (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); ARMED FORCES
(69%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL PRESS CLUB (57%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (92%); CHUCK HAGEL (79%); DUNCAN HUNTER (58%); MEL MARTINEZ
(58%) Elisabeth Bumiller; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney

STATE: NEBRASKA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             250 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo Thorny Issue For Democrats On Committee

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


A hearing before the House Armed Services Committee on Wednesday provided a
stark display of how Democrats and Republicans are reacting in different ways to
accusations about abuse at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

For Republicans, the mission was simple and direct: defend the military's
detention center at Guantanamo as humane and deserving of admiration throughout
the world.

For some Democrats, the task was more complicated: to praise the patriotism and
work of the vast majority of military personnel at Guantanamo, while raising
questions about abuse of detainees.

Representative Duncan Hunter, a California Republican who is the committee
chairman, suggested in his questioning of Brig. Gen. Jay Hood, the Guantanamo
commander, that it was probably the finest military detention facility in
history. Mr. Hunter led a hastily arranged delegation of 16 committee members to
Guantanamo on Saturday.

''What we saw was not the 'gulag of our times,' '' Mr. Hunter said, referring to
recent criticism from Amnesty International. It was, instead, ''a world-class
detention facility where detainees representing a threat to our national
security are well fed, given access to top-notch medical facilities and provided
an opportunity to obtain legal representation.''

The trip and Wednesday's hearing were planned as a response to increasing calls
to shut down the Guantanamo facility.

Representative Ike Skelton of Missouri, the panel's ranking Democrat, said that
Guantanamo was in many ways better than state and federal penitentiaries and
that he ''applauds every American service member who serves honorably at that
facility.''

But, Mr. Skelton continued, focusing on issues of food and medical treatment
missed the point, which he identified as the accusations of unfair treatment of
detainees ''noted by those who would recruit terrorists to fight against us and
by people throughout the Muslim world.''

He said that for the sake of the country's international credibility, ''an
independent commission is essential to stem the accusations and doubts of
Muslims around the world.''

Cmdr. Cary Ostergaard, who runs the detainee hospital at Guantanamo and was also
a witness, disputed reports that information in patients' medical files had been
used to help interrogators. But Commander Ostergaard said that he could discuss
only the role of medical personnel who treat detainees for illnesses and that he
had no role in assembling or overseeing the teams of military doctors who have
advised interrogators on how best to conduct their questioning.

Former interrogators interviewed for a recent article in The New York Times have
said that psychologists and psychiatrists, acting as behavioral scientists,
advised them on how to use weaknesses, like a fear of the dark, to press
detainees into cooperating. The New England Journal of Medicine reported last
week that interviews with doctors who set up the interrogations at Guantanamo
had used a model of increasing stress on detainees rather than establishing
rapport to elicit information.

General Hood, in his testimony, said it was important to remember that the vast
majority of Guantanamo detainees were ''dangerous men committed to harming
Americans.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
WITNESSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PRISONS (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HEALTH CARE (74%); NAVIES (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (72%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (71%); HOSPITALS (71%); MEDICAL
RECORDS (71%); PSYCHOLOGY (71%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (65%); TERRORISM (63%);
RELIGION (62%); BEHAVIOR & COGNITION (60%) United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: DUNCAN HUNTER (78%); IKE SKELTON (58%) Neil A Lewis

STATE: NORTHEAST USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             254 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Chile: Pinochet Under House Arrest

BYLINE: By Larry Rohter (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 95 words


Gen. Augusto Pinochet has been formally placed under house arrest, after a
Supreme Court ruling on Tuesday that he is fit to stand trial in connection with
accusations of murder and kidnapping that occurred under his 17-year
dictatorship. The 89-year-old retired general, who is also under investigation
on corruption and rights abuse charges in two separate cases, signed the court
writ ordering his confinement when it was delivered to his country estate west
of Santiago. He is to remain there under police guard while his lawyers prepare
his defense.   Larry Rohter (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOUSE ARREST (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (88%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%);
SUPREME COURTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); LAWYERS (86%); CORRUPTION (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); GENOCIDE (85%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights;
Kidnapping

PERSON: Larry Rohter; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%)

REGION: Chile; Santiago (Chile)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Prince Who Forgot History Angers Many

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 13


Britain's royal family could hardly be described as immune to stumbles and
scandals. But even by its standards, Prince Harry -- son of Prince Charles and
Diana, the Princess of Wales, grandson of Queen Elizabeth II, third in line to
the throne -- has broken new ground.

After photographs of him wearing a Nazi swastika at a private fancy-dress party
last weekend appeared in The Sun, Jewish groups from Los Angeles to Jerusalem
protested, and some people urged him to visit Auschwitz to understand why he
caused such offense.

The affront was all the deeper because the pictures appeared two weeks before
the 60th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz -- an event that is to be
observed by other members of the royal family, including the queen.

In a written statement Wednesday night, Harry said he was ''very sorry if I have
caused offense.''

''It was a poor choice of costume and I apologize,'' he said.

But he came under pressure on Thursday to offer a more direct apology. ''It
would be appropriate if we heard from him in person about how contrite he is,''
said Michael Howard, the leader of the opposition Conservatives. But the royal
family said the prince would not be making a further statement and did not plan
to attend the Holocaust commemoration.

Prime Minster Tony Blair said it was up to Buckingham Palace to resolve the
matter.

Clearly, Harry's brief apology did little to quiet the storm of criticism.
''This was a shameful act,'' said Rabbi Marvin Hier, dean and founder of the
Simon Wiesenthal human rights group in Los Angeles. Urging the prince to attend
the commemoration on Jan. 27, Rabbi Hier said, ''There he will see the results
of the hated symbol he so foolishly and brazenly chose to wear.''

There were calls, too, for the 20-year-old Harry to be barred from entering
Sandhurst, Britain's premier military academy. He is supposed to enter this
year, and the army indicated Thursday that this newest notoriety would not alter
the plan.

But above all, the debate provoked some introspection about whether the memory
of the death camps had endured across the generations.

In Jerusalem, Robert Rozett, the director of the library at Yad Vashem Holocaust
memorial, said the photographs of Harry wearing a swastika showed that ''the
lessons of the Holocaust have not really entered deeply within his understanding
and consciousness.''

The photographs showed the prince at the party -- the theme was ''native and
colonial,'' according to The Sun -- wearing a khaki shirt with German insignia
and a red, white and black swastika armband.

Prince Harry has a reputation for headline-making behavior, including alcohol
and marijuana abuse, reported cheating in an examination and an incident last
year when he was seen grappling with a photographer outside a nightclub.

The royal family, and especially Prince Philip, the queen's husband, has
committed an array of gaffes. Prince Philip reinforced his reputation for
ill-chosen utterances in 1997 when he addressed Chancellor Helmut Kohl of
Germany as Reichskanzler -- the title used by Hitler.

Not only that. As The Evening Standard, among other newspapers, noted on
Thursday, the royal family had an ambiguous relationship with Germany and the
Nazis. The House of Windsor was formed in 1917 when the royal family changed its
name from Saxe-Coburg Gotha, a name it acquired with the marriage in 1840 of
Queen Victoria and Albert of Saxe-Coburg, which was then a duchy in central
Germany.

In the 1930's, moreover, some members were widely seen as openly sympathetic to
the Nazis. In one iconic photograph, the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, smiling
broadly, were seen greeting Hitler.

Prince Harry has sought to modify his image by working last year to help AIDS
sufferers in Lesotho and being photographed recently with his elder brother,
Prince William, 22, loading relief supplies for tsunami victims. The princes'
mother died in a car crash in 1997.

One former armed forces minister, Doug Henderson, said the prince was ''not
suitable'' for the military academy, and Dickie Arbiter, a former Buckingham
Palace spokesman, said the incident showed that Prince Charles did not have
''the right discipline over his children.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The prince at the party, with a ''native and colonial'' theme.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BRITISH ROYALTY (91%); GRANDCHILDREN (90%); BRITISH MONARCHS (90%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); SCANDALS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); BRITISH
PRIME MINISTERS (79%); ANNIVERSARIES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (63%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (61%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (60%);
CANNABIS (60%); LIBRARIES (50%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities;
Concentration Camps; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

ORGANIZATION: Sun (British Newspaper)

PERSON: ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (92%); PRINCE HARRY (91%);
PRINCE CHARLES (74%); PRINCESS DIANA (73%); TONY BLAIR (59%) Alan Cowell; Harry
(Prince of Great Britain); Queen of Great Britain Elizabeth Ii

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (91%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); ISRAEL (91%); POLAND (72%); UNITED STATES (57%)

REGION: Auschwitz (Poland); Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 20, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Know Much About Algebra

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD.

E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 749 words


Lawrence Summers, the president of Harvard, has been pilloried for suggesting
that women may be biologically unsuited to succeed at mathematics.

He may have a point.

Just look at Condoleezza Rice.

She's clearly a well-educated, intelligent woman, versed in Brahms and the
Bolsheviks, who has just been rewarded for her loyalty with the most plum
assignment in the second Bush cabinet.

Yet her math skills are woefully inadequate.

She can't do simple equations. She doesn't even know that X times zero equals
zero. If you multiply 1,370 dead soldiers times zero weapons of mass
destruction, that equals zero achievement for Ms. Rice, who helped the president
and vice president bamboozle the country into war.

Was Condi out doing figure eights at the ice skating rink when she should have
been home learning her figures? She couldn't have spent much time studying
classic word problems: If two trains leave Chicago at noon, one going south at
20 miles an hour and one going north at 30 miles an hour, how far will each have
gotten by midnight?

Otherwise, she might have realized that if two cars leave the Baghdad airport at
noon on the main highway into the capital of Iraq, neither one is going to get
there with any living passengers. Our 22 months at war have not added up to that
one major highway's being secured.

It's lucky for Ms. Rice that she's serving with men who are just as lame at
numbers as she is. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz couldn't be bothered
to tally correctly the number of dead soldiers when he testified before
Congress. And his boss, Donald Rumsfeld, didn't realize that using an autopen
signature on more than 1,000 letters to the relatives of fallen troops added up
to zero solace.

Our new top diplomat has obviously not mastered fractions. When she asserted
during her confirmation hearing that 120,000 Iraqi troops had been trained,
Senator Joe Biden corrected her, saying she was off by a bit. His calculation of
trained Iraqi troops was actually 4,000 -- hers was 30 times that. Maybe she's
confusing hyperbole and hypotenuse.

Her geometry is skewed if she thinks she'll now be more powerful than Rummy and
Dick Cheney. Doesn't she know that the Pentagon has more sides than her Crawford
triangle with George and Laura?

She could at least have read ''The Da Vinci Code.'' Then she would have learned
about Fibonacci numbers, a recurring mathematical pattern in nature. When you
invade a country, you should expect an insurgency. Or, as Fibonacci might have
calculated it, if you kill one jihadist, two more arrive to take his place; if
you kill three, five more pop up; if you get five, eight more appear, and so on.

The incoming secretary of state and her colleagues are, alas, also lousy at
economics. After Bush officials promised that the postwar expenses would be
covered by Iraqi oil revenues, we find ourselves spending $1 billion a week of
our own money.

Ms. Rice and her fellow imperialists know so little about physics that they
arrogantly jumped into ''spooky action at a distance,'' turning the country they
had hoped to make into a model democracy into a training ground for
international terrorists, a nucleus for a new generation of radioactively
dangerous fanatics.

How could they forget Newton's third law: for every action, there's an equal and
opposite reaction?

The administration needs a lesson in subtraction. How do we subtract our troops
and replace them with Iraqi troops while the terrorists keep subtracting Iraqi
troops with car bombs and rocket-propelled grenades?

Condi may not know Einstein's theory of relativity, but she has a fine grasp of
Cheney's theory of moral relativity. Because they're the good guys, they can do
anything: dissembling to get into war; flattening Iraqi cities to save them;
replacing the Geneva Conventions with unconventional ways of making prisoners
talk. The only equation the Bushies know is this one: Might = Right.

It is puzzling that if you add X (no exit strategy) to Y (Why are we there?) you
get W2: George Bush's second inauguration.

At Condi's hearing, she justified the Bush administration's misadventures by
saying history would prove it right. ''I know enough about history to stand back
and to recognize that you judge decisions not at the moment, but in how it all
adds up,'' she told a skeptical Senator Biden.

Problem is, she's calculating, but she can't add. For now, Sam Cooke is right
about the Bushies. They don't know much about history.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); MATHEMATICS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (79%);
MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); WAR CRIMES (75%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); TERRORISM
(70%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (64%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (62%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (59%); ICE
SKATING (54%); WINTER SPORTS (54%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Geneva Conventions

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (90%); DICK CHENEY (78%); LAWRENCE SUMMERS (74%); JOE
BIDEN (56%) Maureen Dowd; Condoleezza Rice; George W (Pres) Bush; Dick (Vice
Pres) Cheney

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (70%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             262 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Nepal: Unpunished Killings Rise

BYLINE: By Amy Waldman (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 113 words


Unlawful killings by government forces and Maoist rebels are rising, with both
sides failing to hold the responsible parties accountable, Amnesty International
said. The killings are occurring in ''the context of a severe human rights
crisis and a breakdown in the rule of law,'' the group said. It said that while
the patterns of killings -- which include extrajudicial executions by the
security forces and attacks on civilians by the Maoists -- have been well
established, the number of such killings increased significantly in 2004, as did
the sophistication with which they were covered up. The nine-year-old conflict
has killed more than 10,000 people.   Amy Waldman (NYT)




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HOMICIDE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); RULE OF LAW
(86%) Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) Amnesty International

PERSON: Amy Waldman

COUNTRY: ASIA (92%)

REGION: Nepal

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             273 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stepping Out of the Tar Pit

BYLINE: By DAVID BROOKS.

E-mail: dabrooks@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 752 words


As I watched the images of Iraqis lining up to vote, even in the face of
terrorists who threatened to wash the streets with blood, I couldn't help
thinking of Whittaker Chambers.

Chambers broke with the Communist Party in 1938, testified against Alger Hiss in
1948 and then emerged as a melancholy but profound champion of freedom. Chambers
once wrote a letter to William F. Buckley in which he explained that a former
Communist had certain advantages in understanding the truly evil nature of his
foe.

''I sometimes feel,'' he wrote, ''that it takes a tainted mind to understand --
to really understand -- the threat of Communism. To really understand Communism
is to have touched pitch: one's view of man is forever defiled. To understand
Communism means to understand the terrible capacity of man for violence and
treachery, an apprehension of which leaves one forever tainted.''

Andre Malraux read Chambers's work and wrote to him, ''You are one of those who
did not return from hell with empty hands.''

I thought of Chambers when I heard reporters in Iraq observe that beneath the
joy and exhilaration that came with voting last Sunday, Iraqis showed something
grimmer: a stern determination to not let evil triumph.

These Iraqis are people who, like Chambers, have spent their lives in hell and
cannot have been unaffected by it. They have touched pitch and witnessed or
participated in man's capacity for violence and treachery. They must be both
damaged and toughened.

They lived most of their lives under the dense evil of Saddam's regime -- the
mass graves, the rape rooms, the chemical attacks, the wars against Iran.
Totalitarian cruelty on that scale was bound to get into their heads.

As the U.S. toppled the Baath regime, the Iraqi writer Kanan Makiya wrote about
one of his countrymen who had lost his brother and been imprisoned by Saddam.
''Try to imagine the worst and still you will not come close to the physical
pain this man has suffered. This is the human raw material you want to build
democracy for.''

And from the dense evil of Saddam, these people were thrust into the haphazard
evil of the terrorists and the occupation. The Zarqawi terrorists commit murder
in a mood of spiritual ecstasy, while the old Baathists feed their addiction to
sadism and domination. These new monsters brought beheadings to the country,
bombs in crowds of children and people with Down syndrome sent off to become
unwitting suicide bombers.

And yet what we've witnessed in Iraq is a people's zigzag efforts to climb back
from nihilism toward normalcy, from a universe in which the ballot is already
filled out for you to a universe in which you make your own mark. This is not a
small step.

When Saddam was first toppled, liberty turned immediately into anarchy. But as
Michael Rubin, who has spent much of the past two years in Iraq, observed
yesterday in The Wall Street Journal, gradually the habits of moderation have
begun to develop -- the habits of self-regulating liberty, compromise, tolerance
and power-sharing.

And then came Sunday's act of mass heroism. On the Internet and in interviews,
Iraqis tried to convey the tactile feel of their new migration to normalcy.

''Every person has realized that he's not fighting alone in this battle,'' one
voter wrote. ''I moved to mark my finger with ink. I dipped it deep as if I was
poking the eyes of all the world's tyrants.''

They proudly described liberating themselves, finally making themselves the
initiators of their own lives.

The journey back from where these people have been is not a straight shot, which
we can readily understand. In Washington, senators make facile arguments about
improving the training of Iraqi troops, trying to reduce problems of motivation
to problems of technique. Ted Kennedy gave a speech last week blithely insisting
that the terrorists are winning the war for the hearts and minds of Iraqis.
Brent Scowcroft warned of incipient civil war, denigrating the Iraqis' ability
to manage their own tensions.

In fact, these are a people who voted at higher rates in the face of death than
we do in the face of inconvenience. These are a people who have used the
campaign as a process of therapy and self-education. These people have just
built the most democratic government in the Arab world.

They will surely face more war and tension and corruption. But they did not
return from hell with empty hands. They came back with their fingers stained
with ink.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (83%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); POLITICS (77%); WRITERS (76%);
ETHICS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); DOWN SYNDROME (50%) Elections; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and
Government; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Ethics; Terrorism

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (74%) David Brooks

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             275 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Senate and Mr. Gonzales

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 527 words


The confirmation of Alberto Gonzales as attorney general yesterday was
depressing. The president deserves a great deal of leeway in choosing his own
cabinet. But beyond his other failings, Mr. Gonzales has come to represent the
administration's role in paving the way for the abuse and torture of prisoners
by American soldiers and intelligence agents. Giving him the nation's top legal
post is a terrible signal to send the rest of the world, and to American
citizens concerned with human rights.

The 60-to-36 vote for confirmation was also preceded by a depressing debate.
There was the usual comic opera of these Senate votes, with the president's
party piously denouncing all opposition as outrageous politicking and the
opposition piously denying it. But this debate had a sinister overtone as well:
in a ham-handed way, the Republicans tried to portray a vote against Mr.
Gonzales as an act of bigotry.

Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah, declaring that ''I love the Hispanic people,''
warned that Hispanic Americans were ''sensing there's something unfair going
on.'' Using that ''more in sorrow than in anger'' tone that senators reserve for
their most blatantly political comments, he added, ''I suspect there's more than
politics being played here.''

Mr. Gonzales has the kind of life story that all Americans should admire, and
that many can find in their families. The value of diversity in the cabinet is
indisputable. But it is also irrelevant here. Mr. Gonzales was a bad choice for
attorney general because of his record, not his ethnic background.

It was Mr. Gonzales who asked for the original legal advice from the Justice
Department on the treatment of prisoners in the ''war on terror.'' There was no
need to go through that exercise; the rules were clear. But Mr. Gonzales gave
the president the flexibility he wanted, first in the Justice Department memo
outlining ways to make torture seem legal, and then by offering the Orwellian
argument that the president can declare himself above the law and can order
illegal actions like detaining prisoners without a hearing and authorizing
torture.

Republican senators made much of the fact that the White House repudiated the
original memo on torture -- after it became public. But this is not just a
matter of historical interest. Mr. Gonzales testified that he agreed with the
substance of the original torture memo, and he still takes the view that the
president can declare himself to be above the law. In written responses to
senators' questions, Mr. Gonzales argued that intelligence agents could
''abuse'' prisoners as long as they did it to foreigners outside the United
States.

Republican senators argued that it was unfair to say Mr. Gonzales was personally
responsible for the specific acts of torture and degradation at Abu Ghraib. That
would be a fair defense if anyone were doing that. The Democrats simply said,
rightly, that Mr. Gonzales was one of the central architects of the
administration's policy of evading legal restrictions on the treatment of
prisoners. He should not have been rewarded with one of the most important jobs
in the cabinet.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TORTURE
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (72%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (72%); WAR ON TERROR (67%); ETHNICITY (64%); TERRORISM (62%)
Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (93%); ORRIN HATCH (58%) Alberto Gonzales; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 7, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stories From The Inside

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 729 words


''During the whole time we were at Guantanamo,'' said Shafiq Rasul, ''we were at
a high level of fear. When we first got there the level was sky-high. At the
beginning we were terrified that we might be killed at any minute. The guards
would say to us, 'We could kill you at any time.' They would say, 'The world
doesn't know you're here. Nobody knows you're here. All they know is that you're
missing, and we could kill you and no one would know.'''

The horror stories from the scandalous interrogation camp that the United States
is operating at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, are coming to light with increased
frequency. At some point the whole shameful tale of this exercise in extreme
human degradation will be told. For the time being we have to piece together
what we can from a variety of accounts that have escaped the government's
obsessively reinforced barriers of secrecy.

We know that people were kept in cells that in some cases were the equivalent of
animal cages, and that some detainees, disoriented and despairing, have been
shackled like slaves and left to soil themselves with their own urine and feces.
Detainees are frequently kicked, punched, beaten and sexually humiliated.
Extremely long periods of psychologically damaging isolation are routine.

This is all being done in the name of fighting terror. But the best evidence
seems to show that many of the people rounded up and dumped without formal
charges into Guantanamo had nothing to do with terror. They just happened to be
unfortunate enough to get caught in one of Uncle Sam's depressingly
indiscriminate sweeps. Which is what happened to Shafiq Rasul, who was released
from Guantanamo about a year ago. His story is instructive, and has not been
told widely enough.

Mr. Rasul was one of three young men, all friends, from the British town of
Tipton who were among thousands of people seized in Afghanistan in the aftermath
of Sept. 11, 2001. They had been there, he said, to distribute food and medical
supplies to impoverished Afghans.

The three were interviewed soon after their release by Michael Ratner, president
of the Center for Constitutional Rights, which has been in the forefront of
efforts to secure legal representation for Guantanamo detainees.

Under extreme duress at Guantanamo, including hundreds of hours of interrogation
and long periods of isolation, the three men confessed to having been in a
terrorist training camp in Afghanistan. They also said they were among a number
of men who could be seen in a videotape of Osama bin Laden. The tape had been
made in August 2000.

For the better part of two years, Mr. Rasul and his friends, Asif Iqbal and
Rhuhel Ahmed, had denied involvement in any terror activity whatsoever. But Mr.
Rasul said they eventually succumbed to long months of physical and
psychological abuse. Mr. Rasul had been held in isolation for several weeks (his
second sustained period of isolation) when an interrogator showed him the video
of bin Laden. He said she told him: ''I've put detainees here in isolation for
12 months and eventually they've broken. You might as well admit it now.''

''I could not bear another day of isolation, let alone the prospect of another
year,'' said Mr. Rasul. He confessed.

The three men, all British citizens, were saved by British intelligence
officials, who proved that they had been in England when the video was shot, and
during the time they were supposed to have been in Al Qaeda training camps. All
three were returned to England, where they were released from custody.

Mr. Rasul has said many times that he and his friends were freed only because
their alibis were corroborated. But they continue to worry about the many other
Guantanamo detainees who may be innocent but have no way of proving it.

The Bush administration has turned Guantanamo into a place that is devoid of due
process and the rule of law. It's a place where human beings can be imprisoned
for life without being charged or tried, without ever seeing a lawyer, and
without having their cases reviewed by a court. Congress and the courts should
be uprooting this evil practice, but freedom and justice in the United States
are on a post-9/11 downhill slide.

So we are stuck for the time being with the disgrace of Guantanamo, which will
forever be a stain on the history of the United States, like the internment of
the Japanese in World War II.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); SCANDALS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
TORTURE (71%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (69%); AL-QAEDA (69%); NAVIES (64%)
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Torture;
Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%) Bob Herbert; Shafiq Rasul; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); CUBA
(90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Great Britain; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             281 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court of First Resort

BYLINE: By Samantha Power.

Samantha Power, a lecturer at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, is
the author of ''A Problem From Hell: America and the Age of Genocide,'' which
won the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: Cambridge, Mass.


TEN years ago, I asked Bosnian civilians under siege in Sarajevo where they
would go if they could escape. Most chose one of the sand or pebble beaches
along the Adriatic. Last summer, when I traveled through the Sudanese province
of Darfur, I asked the same question of Sudanese who'd seen their homes torched,
their cattle stolen and their children butchered. The surprisingly common
answer, whether from refugees wandering the Sahara, or from farmers who had
never had electricity or running water, was this: ''The Hague.'' They had heard
there was an international court there, and they wanted to go testify.

I didn't have the heart to tell them that their attackers couldn't be tried at
the International Criminal Court because Sudan was not a party to it and because
the United States, even though it was Khartoum's fiercest critic, was likely to
block an investigation by the court.

In late January, a United Nations commission issued its findings on Darfur,
where more than 200,000 people have been killed. Much has been made about the
commission's refusal to describe the atrocities by government-backed militias as
genocide. But more striking was the commission's authoritative documentation of
some of the worst horrors of the last half-century: violations ''without any
military justification'' that ''no doubt constitute large-scale war crimes.'' In
addition, the team delivered a sealed list with the names of 51 Sudanese
suspected of war crimes and recommended just what the Darfurians had been urging
all along: investigation and prosecution in The Hague.

The Bush administration has been more forthright than any of the United Nations'
191 member states in denouncing the atrocities in Sudan -- a fact that should
shame European nations that pride themselves on their human rights pedigrees.
The United States was the first to characterize the violence as genocide and the
first, way back in June, to name potential perpetrators and call for punishment.
It has also dismissed offers by the Sudanese government to conduct the trials at
home, rightly recognizing that Khartoum is unlikely to prosecute crimes that it
has ordered and committed.

But the Bush administration can't decide what it dislikes more: genocide or the
International Criminal Court, which aims to punish it. Administration officials
have missed no opportunity to undermine the court. During President Bush's first
term, the United States suspended military aid to more than 20 countries that
refused to shield Americans from potential prosecution, including Mali (a
fledging democracy), Ecuador (a partner in drug interdiction efforts), and
Croatia (a fragile government trying to stem a nationalist tide).

In one of its most astounding moves, the administration teamed up with
Republican lawmakers in August 2002 to pass a law that includes a measure known
colloquially as the ''Hague invasion clause,'' which authorizes American troops
to use ''all means necessary and appropriate'' to liberate American servicemen
should they ever be imprisoned. That's not exactly the kind of diplomacy that
will, as Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice promised on the eve of her trip to
Europe, join the United States and its allies ''around a common agenda for the
next several years, one that is firmly rooted in our values, our shared
values.''

Since coming into force in July 2002, has the court done anything to justify the
administration's fears that Americans will be hauled before an ''unaccountable''
tribunal? For example, has its chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno Ocampo, begun
investigating the torture and murder carried out by American soldiers and
contractors in Iraq or Guantanamo Bay? No. Mr. Moreno Ocampo has explained that
these crimes don't fall within his jurisdiction.

Instead, working with Christine Chung, formerly a top federal prosecutor in New
York, Mr. Moreno Ocampo has been busy building complex cases against militia
leaders in Congo and against the Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda, which the
State Department has branded a terrorist group. Mr. Moreno Ocampo took up these
cases not on his own initiative, but because Congo and Uganda asked him to. And
now, although Mr. Moreno Ocampo has the funds and the personnel to investigate
the horrors in Darfur, he cannot act unless the United Nations Security Council
tells him to.

But the United States so mistrusts the International Criminal Court that
President Bush has instead proposed that the African Union and the United
Nations create a Sudan tribunal based at the war-crimes court run by the United
Nations in Tanzania. ''We don't want to be party to legitimizing the I.C.C.,''
Pierre-Richard Prosper, the United States ambassador for war crimes issues, said
in late January. That's an about-face from the American stance in 2002, when Mr.
Prosper criticized the very same United Nations ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia that he now hails. Citing ''problems that challenge the
integrity of the process,'' like a lack of professionalism among staff, Mr.
Prosper demanded that the interminable proceedings at those courts be wrapped up
by 2008, regardless of who was left at large. Justice at these courts, he said,
''has been costly, has lacked efficiency, has been too slow, and has been too
removed from the everyday experience of the people and the victims.''

Temporary courts suffer other disadvantages next to the permanent International
Criminal Court. Because their mandates are finite, they tend to rush indictments
and arrests, disregarding their potentially destabilizing effects on societies
still reeling from conflict. The permanent court, by contrast, can time its
arrests to advance both justice and peace.

Moreover, creating a court from scratch takes months, or even years. A new
statute would need to be devised, staff members and judges would need to be
recruited, and the African Union, which has never before overseen criminal
trials, would need a crash course.

The ad hoc court could cost as much as $150 million annually. By contrast, the
supposedly bloated international court, which is already investigating multiple
crises simultaneously, will cost roughly $87 million in 2005. Couldn't that same
$150 million be better spent on arming and transporting African Union
peacekeepers into Darfur to prevent the massacres from being committed in the
first place?

Skeptics say that international courts will never deter determined warlords.
Musa Hilal, the coordinator of the deadly Janjaweed militia in Darfur, gave me a
very different impression when I met with him soon after the Bush administration
had named him as a potential suspect. He had left Darfur and was living in
Khartoum, courting journalists in the hopes of improving his reputation. Almost
as soon as I sat down with him, he began his defense. Like his victims, he had
only one place on his mind. ''I do not belong at the Hague,'' he said. Surely
President Bush doesn't want to find himself on the side of someone his
administration considers a killer.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Luba Lukova)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); GENOCIDE
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (74%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(71%); REFUGEES (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (69%); LEGISLATION (60%); DRUG INTERDICTION (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)
International Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (74%); SAMANTHA POWER (57%) Samantha Power; George W
(Pres) Bush; George W (Pres) Bush; Musa Hilal

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (72%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA (79%); MALI (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             285 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

10,000 Peacekeepers Sought By U.S. for Southern Sudan

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 14


The United States circulated a draft Security Council resolution on Monday that
would send 10,000 peacekeepers to southern Sudan to enforce a new peace treaty
there but would avoid mention of where war crimes suspects in the violent
western Darfur region of the country should be tried.

A United Nations commission recommended last month that the Council refer Darfur
atrocities to the International Criminal Court in The Hague. But the United
States, which opposes that court, lobbied hard for referring the cases to a new
tribunal to be run by the African Union and the United Nations and to be based
at the war crimes court in Arusha, Tanzania.

That American proposal ran into objections in the Council, where the Hague court
enjoys broad support, and ambassadors said the plan would add expense and delay
in an urgent situation.

Stuart Holliday, a deputy American ambassador, said the matter would probably be
put off for consideration in a second resolution. ''We don't seek to defer
responsibility for the tough decisions,'' he said, ''but we also understand that
we don't want to hold up the agreement we can reach.''

The measure proposed by the United States on Monday would broaden restrictions
on the movement of weapons to include the Khartoum government, place travel
restrictions on those suspected of committing crimes in Darfur and order a
freeze on assets held in other countries.

It would also demand that the government stop ''offensive military flights''
over Darfur, call for an increase in human rights monitors and repeat language
from past resolutions calling for sanctions on Sudan's oil industry if the
violence continues unchecked.

The 10,000 peacekeepers and 715 police officers would be charged with helping to
secure compliance with an agreement signed on Jan. 9 ending a two-decade war in
the south. Mr. Holliday said the United States hoped that the force could
eventually assist peacemaking efforts in Darfur.

In one added paragraph, Secretary General Kofi Annan was asked to set up a
personal conduct office for the peacekeepers, in keeping with his zero tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation that was announced in the aftermath of reports of
abuse of women and girls by United Nations troops in Congo.

The Bush administration has opposed the International Criminal Court from its
inception on the ground that it could bring politically motivated actions
against Americans abroad.

Of the 15 Security Council members, nine countries have signed and ratified the
treaty creating the court, four others have signed it, China has done neither
and the United States signed under President Clinton but then revoked the action
under President Bush.

''The Americans are not in a good position,'' said one Council ambassador, who
added that many countries wanted to see the court validated with the same fervor
that the United States wanted to see it marginalized.

''No one wants to antagonize the U.S.,'' he said, ''but everyone is agreed that
there cannot be impunity, and at the end of the day there is no better solution
than the I.C.C.'' He said that in discussions, the Council had made it clear
that it was prepared to address Washington's objections by allowing Americans to
be exempt from prosecution.

A campaign in Darfur that the United Nations has called ethnic cleansing and the
United States has termed genocide has resulted in the forced removal of two
million people from their homes and the death of up to 300,000.

Mr. Holliday said the resolution focused on the government, the rebels fighting
them and the Arab militias known as janjaweed, all of them responsible for
killings, systematic rapes and the pillaging of villages. ''There are no angels
in this particular conflict,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); PEACEKEEPING (90%);
PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); LOBBYING (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CIVIL
WAR (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); GENOCIDE (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(72%); CHILD ABUSE (67%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (64%); ARMED FORCES (64%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Foreign Aid; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare  ; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); AFRICAN UNION (57%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%) United Nations; International Court of
Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%); BILL CLINTON (52%) Warren Hoge

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); NETHERLANDS (93%); AFRICA (79%);
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             286 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 16, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Advance Rights, Lead by Example

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 200 words



To the Editor:

Your Feb. 15 editorial ''Self-Inflicted Wounds,'' about the torture of
prisoners, is right on target. For the United States to torture prisoners, or
outsource torture, is not only ineffectual, ''it debases this nation at home and
abroad.''

There is another thing: One leads by example. If the United States wishes to
encourage greater respect for human rights in the world, it must set a good
example. It is doing the exact opposite, so that on Jan. 19, the Cuban
government handed formal protest notes to United States representatives in
Havana and Washington on the abuse of prisoners at the Guantanamo Naval Base,
which, as the notes pointed out, is on Cuban territory.

What chutzpah, one might say. Perhaps, but what did we expect? At a time when
the our country is calling Cuba an outpost of tyranny and demanding that it
release political prisoners, our own abuse of prisoners at Guantanamo puts the
shoe on the other foot.

One can imagine the Cubans asking, ''Are we to do as you say, or as you do?''

Wayne S. Smith
Washington, Feb. 15, 2005

The writer, a senior fellow at the Center for International Policy, was chief of
the United States Interests Section in Havana, 1979-82.






URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WRITERS (73%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             291 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Our Friends, the Torturers

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 715 words


The United States has long purported to be outraged over Syria's bad behavior,
the latest flash point being the possible Syrian involvement in the
assassination of the former Lebanese prime minister, Rafik Hariri.

From the U.S. perspective, Syria is led by a gangster regime that has, among
other things, sponsored terrorism, aided the insurgency in Iraq and engaged in
torture. So here's the question. If Syria is such a bad actor -- and it is --
why would the Bush administration seize a Canadian citizen at Kennedy Airport in
New York, put him on an executive jet, fly him in shackles to the Middle East
and then hand him over to the Syrians, who promptly tortured him?

The administration is trying to have it both ways in its so-called war on
terror. It claims to be fighting for freedom, democracy and the rule of law, and
it condemns barbaric behavior whenever it is committed by someone else. At the
same time, it is engaged in its own barbaric behavior, while going out of its
way to keep that behavior concealed from the American public and the world at
large.

The man grabbed at Kennedy Airport and thrown by American officials into a
Syrian nightmare was Maher Arar, a 34-year-old native of Syria who emigrated to
Canada as a teenager. No one, not even the Syrians who tortured him, have been
able to present any evidence linking him to terrorism.

He was taken into custody on the afternoon of Sept. 26, 2002, and was not
released until Oct. 5, 2003. He was never charged, and when he wasn't being
brutalized, he spent much of his time in an unlit, rat-infested cell that
reminded him of a grave.

Government officials know that this kind of activity is not just wrong but
reprehensible, which is why they won't admit publicly to the policy that permits
them to kidnap individuals like Mr. Arar and send them off to regimes known to
engage in torture. The policy is known as extraordinary rendition, which is an
extreme variation of a little-known but longstanding legal principle called
rendition. Rendition most commonly refers to the extrajudicial transfer of
individuals from a foreign country to the United States for the purpose of
answering criminal charges.

Think, for example, of a drug kingpin who is abducted in Colombia and brought to
the U.S. to stand trial for trafficking. The defendant is said to have been
''rendered'' to justice in the U.S.

The courts here have tended to overlook the circumstances surrounding the
seizure of such suspects. But upon arrival in the U.S., the normal rules of due
process in criminal proceedings kick in, and the suspect is entitled to a fair
trial.

In extraordinary rendition there are no rules. The person seized, presumably a
terror suspect, is thrust into a highly secret zone of utter lawlessness, with
no rights whatever. The entire point of this atrocious exercise is to transfer
the suspect to a regime skilled in the art of torture. It's as if a cop picked
up a suspect on the street and handed him over to the Mafia to extract a
confession. One's guilt or innocence is not relevant. No legal defense is
permitted. If a mistake is made, too bad.

U.S. officials knew what they were doing when they gave the signal to ship Mr.
Arar to Syria. As far back as 1996, the State Department had this to say in a
report about human rights in Syria:

''Former prisoners and detainees have reported that torture methods include
electrical shocks; pulling out fingernails; the forced insertion of objects into
the rectum; beatings, sometimes while the victim is suspended from the ceiling;
hyperextension of the spine; and the use of a chair that bends backwards to
asphyxiate the victim or fracture the spine.''

According to the State Department, torture was most likely to occur at one of
the many detention centers run by the Syrian security forces, ''particularly
while the authorities are trying to extract a confession or information about an
alleged crime or alleged accomplices.''

Extraordinary rendition is antithetical to everything Americans are supposed to
believe in. It violates American law. It violates international law. And it is a
profound violation of our own most fundamental moral imperative -- that there
are limits to the way we treat other human beings, even in a time of war and
great fear.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); AIRPORTS
(89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); RULE OF LAW (75%); DUE PROCESS (73%);
CRIMINAL LAW (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (64%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (60%) Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Maher Arar; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SYRIA (99%); IRAQ (92%); LEBANON (92%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%); COLOMBIA (79%)

REGION: Syria; Canada

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Case of Ahmed Omar Abu Ali

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 365 words


Ahmed Omar Abu Ali, the American citizen accused of plotting with Al Qaeda to
assassinate President Bush, will have his guilt judged in an American court.
What we can say now is that his case seems to be another demonstration of what
has gone wrong in the federal war on terror.

Mr. Abu Ali, 23, was arrested by Saudi officials in a crackdown after terrorist
bombings in Riyadh in 2003. But the Saudis have never shown much interest in
actually charging him with a crime. His parents claimed that he was being held
at the behest of the United States, and sued in court to get him returned to
this country. A federal judge has said that ''there has been at least some
circumstantial evidence that Abu Ali has been tortured during interrogations
with the knowledge of the United States.''

The Justice Department says Mr. Abu Ali, who went to Saudi Arabia to continue
his religious studies, got Al Qaeda training and money from terrorist associates
to buy a laptop computer and books. The indictment also says Mr. Abu Ali talked
about assassinating Mr. Bush either by getting ''close enough to the president
to shoot him on the street'' or figuring out a way to kill him with a car bomb.

If the Justice Department believed that Mr. Abu Ali was a serious terrorist, he
should have been brought back here long ago for trial. Instead, he became part
of an unknown number of prisoners who were swept up by American officials or
foreign governments working with Americans and questioned in the wake of Sept.
11. Many were then held indefinitely and, in some cases, tortured in hopes that
they would provide information.

The civil liberties issues have always been evident, but now the practical
consequences are becoming clearer as well.

In an undisciplined attempt to wring statements out of any conceivable suspect,
American officials have worked with countries like Saudi Arabia, a nation whose
attitude toward human rights is deplorable, and Syria, which is counted by
Washington as a state sponsor of terrorism. And now these officials are faced
with the problem of what to do with these prisoners, most of whom have proved to
be no use to interrogators, but who remain on America's conscience.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); ASSASSINATION (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (73%); JUDGES (73%); ARRESTS (73%); SHOOTINGS (66%); RELIGION (53%)
Terrorism; Editorials; Torture  ; Freedom and Human Rights; Assassinations and
Attempted Assassinations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist
Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%) Ahmed Omar Abu Ali; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SAUDI ARABIA (96%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             297 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New York: Albany: Senator Cleared Of Bias Charges

BYLINE: AP; Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 123 words


A state senator, accused by her former chief of staff of making racist remarks
and firing him because he is gay, has been cleared of wrongdoing.

The state's Division of Human Rights, in a ruling dated Feb. 15, found
''insufficient'' evidence to support claims made by Wayne Mahlke, who accused
Senator Ada L. Smith, Democrat of Queens, of discrimination. Mr. Mahlke worked
for Ms. Smith from April to December of 2003. He claimed the senator, who is
black, harassed him verbally and called him names like ''white trash.'' But the
Human Rights Division said its investigation determined that Mr. Mahlke's
termination was based on his ''poor behavior and performance.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); DISMISSALS (90%);
RACE & RACISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (88%);
DISCRIMINATION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (89%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             298 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Mexico: Ex-President Avoids Charges

BYLINE: By James C. McKinley Jr. (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 133 words


The Supreme Court dealt a setback to efforts to punish former officials for the
murder of leftists three decades ago as it ruled that an international genocide
treaty signed in 2002 could not be used to charge former President Luis
Echeverria in connection with a 1971 student massacre. Prosecutors said they
still held out hope the court would rule in their favor on the question of
whether Mr. Echeverria, 83, can be tried for genocide under Mexican law. Mr.
Echeverria's lawyers have maintained that the 30-year time limit for charging
someone with mass murder under Mexican law has already expired. But prosecutors
have asked the Supreme Court to consider three arguments that would extend that
limit by several years, and the court has yet to rule on those arguments.
James C. McKinley Jr. (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
(90%); LIBERALISM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); VERDICTS (88%); LAWYERS (87%); POLITICS (71%) Statutes of
Limitations; Decisions and Verdicts; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Demonstrations and Riots; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and
Legislation  ; Treaties; Politics and Government; Children and Youth

PERSON: James C Jr Mckinley; Luis Echeverria

COUNTRY: MEXICO (95%)

REGION: Mexico; Mexico

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             300 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

What About Democracy? Leaders Mute Differences, Latching On to the Affirmative

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; BUSH IN EUROPE: SUMMING UP; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 24


For all of the advance billing and anticipation, President Bush and President
Vladimir V. Putin of Russia emerged from their private meeting in Bratislava,
Slovakia on Thursday and chose to stand together and emphasize the narrowing
areas where their nations could agree.

Much was said gently, or avoided altogether, at least in public. The presidents
focused their remarks after the meeting on personal trust and on commitments to
fight terrorism and control the spread of weapons or materials terrorists might
use. While raised, Western concerns about the decline in the development of
democracy in Russia were muted after a period in which Mr. Bush heightened
expectations with soaring language on the irresistible lure of freedom and
democracy.

Mr. Bush softened much of that language, and he and Mr. Putin focused on
subjects on which they had a consensus. Their private remarks remained, for the
most part, private, but some political analysts took the public comments as
evidence that Mr. Bush had ceded an opportunity to challenge Mr. Putin
forcefully on his increasingly autocratic stand.

In his remarks on Thursday, Mr. Bush only briefly mentioned Chechnya, which has
been deeply troubling for human rights advocates, and passed over the Yukos
case, which has disquieted investors.

Reactions ranged from an acknowledgement that Mr. Bush might have pragmatically
assessed the limits to what he might accomplish to disappointment about the more
subdued discussion.

''President Bush promised to put democracy at the center of the agenda with
Russia,'' said Bruce P. Jackson, president of the Project on Transitional
Democracies, a nonprofit organization seeking to accelerate democratic reform.
''It's on the agenda, but it's still on the periphery.''

Russia and the United States have an overlapping set of interests, including
fighting the spread of militant Islamic groups and terrorism, accounting for and
securing cold-war-era nuclear material, and stemming the flow of drugs from
Afghanistan. But differences between Washington and Moscow had markedly grown in
the last year.

Russia has nipped the limited political pluralism and nascent democratic
institutions that existed here. The Kremlin has managed the seizure of much of
Yukos, the country's largest oil company and most successful private business,
and simultaneously restricted and intimidated the independent news media, and
issued veiled threats against nongovernment organizations.

Elections in Russia, most notably the presidential election in Chechnya last
summer, have been rife with intimidation and rigging, and the prospects for
future elections have been diminished by Mr. Putin's move to appoint regional
governors rather than have them stand for a popular vote.

Boris Kagarlitsky, director of the Institute for Globalization Studies in
Moscow, said he had been surprised by the suggestions that Mr. Bush would try
steering Mr. Putin toward a democratic path. How hard, he said, could Mr. Bush
really push?

Clampdowns and a pretense of democracy are hardly unique among nations with
centralized rule, and Mr. Bush has maintained or built ties with other nations,
like Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Uzbekistan, where freedom and civil liberties
fall far short of his rhetorical heights.

Dr. Kagarlitsky said several factors left Mr. Bush without ''the political
space'' to challenge Mr. Putin. He listed as examples the indefinite detention
of suspected terrorists at the American naval base in Cuba, the prison-abuse
scandal at Abu Ghraib and Mr. Bush's engagement of ruthless leaders like Islam
Karimov of Uzbekistan.

Still, Mr. Putin's weaknesses offered Mr. Bush something of an opportunity.

For one, Mr. Putin has shown a limited influence over what many of what seem
Russia's most intractable problems.

Corruption remains unchecked in almost all aspects of Russian life, a phenomenon
that undermines security (in one example last year, a suicide bomber bribed her
way aboard a passenger jet for $34, and later brought down the plane, killing
45). The judiciary and government oversight bodies have proved pliable, making
Russia a risky investment climate. Moreover, Mr. Putin's foreign policy has
snubbed the White House in several ways.

The Kremlin remains a principal sponsor of stalemated conflicts in Abkhazia,
South Ossetia and the Trans-Dniester Republic, all of which have become lawless
regions within other sovereign states. It has clumsily interfered with the
internal politics of Ukraine and Georgia, whose people and political leadership
have moved sharply westward.

And it has provided diplomatic support and what Washington regards as
potentially perilous weapons sales to Syria and Venezuela, and nuclear energy
assistance to Iran.

Glen Howard, president of the Jamestown Foundation, a nonprofit organization
that closely follows Eurasian affairs, said there was plenty to criticize about
Mr. Bush's public remarks. ''I expected an emphasis on principle and the values
we represent,'' he said.

Still, the presidents made a public commitment, if a modest one, to enhance
security of nuclear material that could be used as a terrorist bomb. ''I find it
significant that the two leaders are taking personal responsibility,'' said
Charles B. Curtis, former deputy secretary of the Department of Energy and the
president of the Nuclear Threat Initiative. ''I think this is evidence of a new
sense of purpose.''

This agreement also has clear limits. Much of it is a reaffirmation of
longstanding policy, and while it proposes accelerating security upgrades at
nuclear facilities, it does not mandate completing the work before both men's
terms expire in 2008, as American officials had hoped.

Dr. Stephen Kotkin, director of Russian studies at Princeton University, said
this suggested another underlying weakness, and demonstrated why the United
States' partnership with Russia was not as vigorous as the two presidents might
wish it to appear. ''Putin can't get his generals to cooperate on this,'' he
said. ''The absence of military reform -- institutional and conceptual -- limits
his ability to implement or follow through on any strategic agreements.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICS (78%); COLD WAR (78%); HEADS
OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); GLOBALIZATION (71%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (68%); OIL & GAS
INDUSTRY (66%); GOVERNORS (63%); RELIGION (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; United
States International Relations

COMPANY: OAO NK YUKOS (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (91%) C J Chivers; George W (Pres)
Bush; Vladimir V (Pres) Putin

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); BRATISLAVA, SLOVAKIA (88%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); SLOVAKIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%)

REGION: Russia; Russia

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             302 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leftist Chief Is Installed in Uruguay and Gets Busy on Agenda

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: MONTEVIDEO, Uruguay, March 1


Culminating a long and divisive struggle, the left took power on Tuesday for the
first time in the history of this small South American nation as Tabare Vazquez,
a 65-year-old physician, was sworn in as president.

Hundreds of thousands of people flocked to the streets here to celebrate the
sharp break with the past, many carrying Uruguayan flags or banners of the
triumphant Progressive Encounter/Broad Front/New Majority Coalition. Until Dr.
Vazquez, a Socialist, won a narrow victory in balloting last October, two
traditional parties that had become increasingly difficult to distinguish from
each other had alternated in power for more than 150 years.

''We promised change, and we will make changes, starting with the government
itself, in its attitudes and its actions,'' Dr. Vazquez said in a 25-minute
inaugural address. He said he would emphasize economic and social policies,
''especially to the benefit of those who need them to achieve a life with
dignity.''

As his first official action, Dr. Vazquez announced a sweeping ''Social
Emergency Plan'' that contains food, health, job and housing components. The
program, whose cost is estimated at $100 million, is to be aimed at the hundreds
of thousands of Uruguayans who have fallen below the poverty line as a result of
economic crises of recent years.

Dr. Vazquez's inauguration came exactly 20 years after the restoration of
democratic civilian rule in Uruguay. From 1972 through early 1985, this nation
sandwiched between Brazil and Argentina was ruled by a right-wing military
dictatorship that killed, jailed, tortured or forced into exile thousands of
Uruguayans in order to fight off what it described as a Communist threat.

In an act that was laden with symbolism and offered an example of the
''political maturity'' that visiting heads of state praised, it was Senator Jose
Mujica who presided over the swearing-in ceremony in his role as the titular
head of Congress. A founder of the Tupamaro guerrilla movement that sought to
lead a socialism revolution here, Mr. Mujica was jailed for virtually the entire
period of the military dictatorship and was also tortured.

Offering an aside from the dais, overcome with emotion, Mr. Mujica, now
committed to the parliamentary democracy he once dismissed as ''bourgeois,''
offered his ''thanks to life for having reached here.'' Other aging leaders of
the Uruguayan left were seated in the benches reserved for members of Congress,
with their eyes glistening or wiping tears from their faces.

Dr. Vazquez alluded in his inaugural speech to the widespread abuses of that
era, saying there are still ''dark zones in the area of human rights'' that his
government intends to investigate. ''For the good of all, it is possible and
necessary to clarify'' such issues, he said, so that ''the horrors of past eras
never happen again.''

The new president's second act in office was to restore diplomatic relations
with Cuba. Ties were broken in 2002 as a result of a dispute that began when Dr.
Vazquez's predecessor, Jorge Batlle Ibanez, suggested that human rights
observers be sent to Cuba to document abuses there.

Fidel Castro had been expected to arrive here today to mark the resumption of
relations with a series of rallies, speeches and other public appearances. But
Dr. Vazquez said Monday that the Cuban president had decided not to come ''for
medical reasons,'' presumably related to injuries he suffered in a fall last
year.

In his inaugural address, Dr. Vazquez vowed that Uruguay would adopt ''an
independent foreign policy,'' in contrast to the closer ties with the United
States that Mr. Batlle had sought. He said his government condemned ''all forms
of terrorism,'' favored nonintervention and peaceful resolutions of conflicts,
and would insist that international financial institutions recognize ''the
necessity and the right to development of Uruguayan society as a whole.''

''We will tolerate no outside interference in our internal affairs,'' Dr.
Vazquez said to thunderous applause.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At his swearing in, Uruguay's president, Tabare Vazquez, right,
greeted Jose Mujica, a former guerrilla leader who presided at the ceremony.
(Photo by Cezaro De Luca/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); TORTURE (86%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); POOR POPULATION (77%); POLITICS
(77%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); MILITARY RULE (69%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (68%); POVERTY
& HOMELESSNESS (51%) Politics and Government; Inaugurations

PERSON: Tabare Vazquez; Jose (Sen) Mujica; Larry Rohter

CITY: MONTEVIDEO, URUGUAY (78%)

COUNTRY: URUGUAY (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); BRAZIL (79%); ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: Uruguay

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             306 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 10, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebel's Death Stirs Debate On Strategy For Chechnya

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 9


The killing of Aslan Maskhadov, the Chechen rebel leader and president of the
republic's underground separatist government, set off a debate in Russia on
Wednesday as to whether the death was a step forward or back.

On the surface, the killing was a rare public success in Russia's Chechnya
policy, in which capturing or killing prominent rebel leaders and terrorists has
been a highly publicized goal. Politicians loyal to the Kremlin hailed it as a
demoralizing loss to the separatists that would give Russia's security forces
fresh momentum in the war.

''The elimination of a terrorist of international standing only means that there
will be much less evil now,'' said Boris Gryzlov, the speaker of the Duma,
Russia's lower house of Parliament, in remarks broadcast on national television.

Human rights organizations, however, said Mr. Maskhadov's death meant the loss
of both a willing negotiator and a moderating influence over the separatists,
many of whom have turned to terrorism in recent years. Greater violence, they
said, may now be in store.

''Maskhadov wanted peace, and he wanted to do something about it,'' said
Valentina D. Melnikova, head of the Union of the Committees of Soldiers'
Mothers, an antiwar group that counsels Russian soldiers and veterans. ''Now
that he is dead the door is open for the Islamic radical leaders and
movements.''

The separatists themselves spoke in similar terms, announcing a three-day period
of mourning but saying negotiations were now out of the question and calling for
a jihad to avenge Mr. Maskhadov's death. They ordered the rebel units to
continue their previously planned attacks in the spring and summer.

''The invaders and puppets claim to be celebrating victory,'' said one of
several postings on Web sites the rebels often use. ''A new period in the
history of the Russian-Chechen military confrontation has started.''

The divergent predictions of the effects of Mr. Maskhadov's death reflected the
longstanding split between the Kremlin and critics of the Chechen war.

Russia's government describes the second war in Chechnya, which began in 1999,
as a necessary part of multinational efforts against terrorist groups, and often
contends that the Muslim separatists are an offshoot of Al Qaeda's international
jihad.

Outside the Kremlin's circle of influence the war has been broadly condemned for
the corruption and brutality of Russian forces and the Chechen proxies they
support.

Mr. Maskhadov, 53, who in 1997 was legitimately elected president of the
so-called Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, the name that separatists have given the
tiny republic in the Caucasus, was one of the two most prominent rebel leaders.

The other, Shamil Basayev, heads an Islamic terrorist group and has claimed
responsibility for the worst acts of terrorism in post-Soviet Russia, including
the seizure in 2002 of a Moscow theater, the downing of two passenger jets and
the seizure of a public school in Beslan last fall.

Mr. Basayev's group also deploys suicide bombers, including women, not only in
the Caucasus but in Moscow. In recent years Mr. Basayev had become the Kremlin's
more visible and vicious foe.

But Mr. Maskhadov presented his Russian adversaries with a political challenge.

A former Red Army colonel, he sometimes spoke against terrorism and made
frequent overtures to the Kremlin to negotiate a political settlement to the
war. He also quarreled with Mr. Basayev and said he would prosecute him.

Moreover, he maintained a network of supporters in the West, which gave him a
mark of legitimacy that none of the other rebel commanders or terrorists could
match. Last month, his government in exile convened a meeting in London with the
Union of the Committees of Soldiers' Mothers to discuss a possible peace
settlement. The meeting attracted the attention of European diplomats, some of
whom attended.

Mr. Maskhadov was trapped by Russian commandos on Tuesday in a bunker beneath a
house in a Chechen village. Officials said Wednesday that after a standoff he
was killed by a grenade. That represented a shift from previous accounts, in
which they said he had resisted arrest and was killed after opening fire on
Russian commandos.

Because there is no clear alternative to Mr. Maskhadov, his loss, critics of the
war said, could lead to a dangerous reorganization of the Chechen fighters.

''There are a lot of moderates in the separatist movement who have no leader,''
said Tanya Lokshina, a program director at the Moscow Helsinki Group who
frequently travels to Chechnya. ''Now they have a choice: either to quit or to
join with Basayev. And I think most will join Basayev.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPARATISM & SECESSION (91%); TERRORISM (90%); POLITICS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); AL-QAEDA (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); ARMED FORCES (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); RELIGION (70%); CORRUPTION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%) Politics and Government; Terrorism

PERSON: C J Chivers; Aslan Maskhadov

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             309 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Dark Shadow of Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 78 words



To the Editor:

As ''Torture by Proxy'' points out, Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales is
using ''pretzel logic'' when he defends rendition by saying that if prisoners
are sent abroad, our Constitution no longer applies.

Torture is unacceptable, whether committed by the United States at Abu Ghraib or
outsourced to Saudi Arabia. Rendition sends prisoners to countries the State
Department criticizes for human rights abuses.

Tom Dorman
West Orange, N.J., March 10, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (73%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (91%); UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             314 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1216 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

G.I.'s Kill 24 Insurgents In Battle Near Baghdad
Iraqi insurgents ambushed an American military convoy just outside Baghdad,
igniting a battle that left 24 of the attackers dead and seven wounded. The
unusually bold assault, which wounded six American soldiers, appeared to be the
biggest against an American target since the Jan. 30 elections.   A9

Rumsfeld Blames Turkey
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld pointed to Turkey, a U.S. ally, as a
contributor to the high number of anti-American insurgents in Iraq because of
its refusal to permit U.S. troops to cross its territory during the invasion a
year ago.   A8

Annan to Push for Changes
Secretary General Kofi Annan will propose sweeping changes to the United Nations
that would expand the Security Council to reflect modern realities of global
power, restructure the discredited Human Rights Commission to keep rights
violators from becoming members and redefine terrorism to end any justifications
of its use for political resistance.   A1

Elections Set After Much Delay
Afghanistan's much delayed parliamentary elections will be held on Sept. 18,
more than a year after they were originally scheduled, though voting by smaller
districts, to select a third of the members of the upper house of Parliament,
will be postponed yet again until 2006.   A9

Peres Fears Government Future
As Israel continues to hand land over to Palestinian control, Shimon Peres, the
deputy prime minister, said he was worried about the survival of the Israeli
government in a vote on the state budget that must take place before the end of
March.   A6

U.S. Cuts Off Nicaragua
The United States has suspended military assistance to Nicaragua because it has
failed to move forward with the destruction of an arsenal of antiaircraft
missiles that the Bush administration considers a possible terrorist threat.
A3

Scientist Sold Engineering
Multi-national nuclear investigators now believe that the black market network
run by the Pakistani scientist A.Q. Khan was selling engineering secrets needed
to make nuclear warheads.   A7

NATIONAL   A10-15

Congress Passes and Bush Signs Schiavo Measure
The House gave final Congressional approval to legislation that would allow a
federal court to intervene in the case of Terri Schiavo, the brain-damaged
Florida woman whose feeding tube was disconnected. The measure was signed
quickly at the White House by President Bush.   A1

Many Americans are taking an active role in their own deaths, some with the help
of their doctors and others through actions of their own that blur the
definition of suicide. Experts say support for physician-assisted suicide, now
considered morally acceptable by more than half of Americans, is likely to
increase as baby boomers demand a say over their deaths.   A1

The White House said President Bush's dramatic early return from vacation was
necessary to save the life of Terri Schiavo, but Republicans and religious
figures said the move was also political: a powerful embrace of the ''culture of
life'' issues of religious conservatives who helped him win the White House in
2004.   A15

A Town for Sign Language
Detailed blueprints for a town in South Dakota built around the use of American
Sign Language are expected to be drawn by planners, designers and future
residents. But the idea does not come without its critics, who say such a town
may isolate the deaf more than ever.   A1

Nonprofits Question Motive
Roughly a dozen nonprofit organizations, including the N.A.A.C.P., have said
government agencies and Congressional offices have used reviews, audits,
investigations, law enforcement actions and the threat of a loss of federal
money to discourage them from activities and advocacy that in any way challenge
government policies.   A10

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Science Suffers at NASA
Scientific research programs at the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration are facing financing problems because of President Bush's push
for spaceflight and because of new procedures that no longer shield the research
from cost overruns by spaceflight programs.   A10

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Only One Solid Competitor For Proposed Stadium Site
With the deadline for bids for the West Side railyards expiring today, it
appears that the Jets, who want to use the Manhattan site for a football
stadium, have only one solid competitor: Cablevision.   B1

A Shadow Agency
A private group formed to develop 84 acres of state-owned land in Yonkers and
give it a much-needed economic boost is now being criticized as a haven where
friends of politicians can find high-paying jobs and wield huge sums of money.
B1

Big Dreams Scratched
The dreams of a flood of would-be winners evaporated when The Daily News
announced that its promotional Scratch n' Match game had directed players to
scratch off a wrong number on their game cards.   B3

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-10

Revised Penalty for Steroid Use
A revised agreement on the penalties for first-time steroids users in Major
League Baseball was reached that eliminated a loophole which allowed for a
monetary fine as another disciplinary option. The new agreement states that
suspensions will be the only disciplinary measure for players testing positive
for steroids.   D1

ARTS   E1-8

American Wins Pritzker Prize
Thom Mayne, who has been called the bad boy and angry young man of Los Angeles
architecture, was named the winner of this year's Pritzker Architecture Prize,
considered the profession's highest honor. He is the first American to win the
prize in 14 years.   E1

Aufbau Resumes Circulation
The German-Jewish publication Aufbau, which has chronicled and helped influence
New York's Jewish population for more than 70 years, was on the verge of going
under. But thanks to a generous Zurich financier and a young Swiss editor,
Aufbau has resumed publication with the bold goal of pushing Europe's
German-speaking Jews into the mainstream.   E3

BUSINESS DAY   C1-8

Apple Tries to Cut Chatter
The decision by Steven P. Jobs, Apple's co-founder, to sue Web sites that
reported on the company's product plans is not surprising to many Silicon Valley
veterans. Some say the move could serve to strengthen Mr. Jobs's marketing
magic.   C1

Papers Try Tabloid Format
Newspaper executives are considering shrinking their formats to look more like
tabloids in the hope that less will prove to be more. But advertisers are not
convinced they can get the same bang for their buck from these proposed tabloid
formats.   C1

Questioning Viacom's Strategy
Wall Street analysts are forecasting that Viacom's cable division will be
cooling off in the next several years, calling into question the timing of a
plan to split up the company.   C1

Clear Channel Battles Jam
A jury in a federal court in Chicago has been hearing evidence in Jam
Productions' lawsuit against Clear Channel, asserting that Clear Channel used
its leverage to illegally block Jam from becoming the sponsor of Supercross
racing.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Our terrorist-friendly borders; the real on-time budget; that Scalia
charm.

Columns: Bob Herbert.

OBITUARIES   B7

Philip Lamantia
The San Francisco poet who embraced Surrealism and later associated himself with
the West Coast Beat community, he was 77.   B7

Autos   D10
Metro Diary   B2
Bridge      E4
TV Listings   E7
Crossword   E4
Weather   B8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (72%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (72%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); LEGISLATION (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%);
APPROVALS (68%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%); BUDGETS (64%); BABY BOOMERS (62%);
ASSISTED SUICIDE (62%); SUICIDE (60%); ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); SHIMON PERES (56%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); TURKEY (94%); IRAQ (93%); ISRAEL (92%); NICARAGUA
(92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             315 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The C.I.A. And Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 135 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Questions Left by C.I.A. Chief on Torture Use'' (front page, March 18):

Porter Goss, the director of central intelligence, claimed in Senate testimony
that the C.I.A. is not now using torture, and that ''waterboarding'' is a
''professional interrogation'' technique. He can't have it both ways.

Waterboarding, known in Latin America as the submarino, entails forcibly pushing
a person's head under water until he believes he will drown. In practice, he
often does. Waterboarding can be nothing less than torture in violation of
United States and international law.

Mr. Goss, by justifying the practice as a form of professional interrogation,
renders dubious his broader claim that the C.I.A. is not practicing torture
today.

Reed Brody
Special Counsel
Human Rights Watch
New York, March 18, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA (69%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             320 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Coalition Forms to Oppose Parts of Antiterrorism Law

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


Battle lines were drawn Tuesday in the debate over the government's
counterterrorism powers, as an unlikely coalition of liberal civil-rights
advocates, conservative libertarians, gun-rights supporters and medical privacy
advocates voiced their objections to crucial parts of the law that expanded
those powers after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

Keeping the law intact ''will do great and irreparable harm'' to the
Constitution by allowing the government to investigate people's reading habits,
search their homes without notice and pry into their personal lives, said Bob
Barr, a former Republican congressman who is leading the coalition.

Mr. Barr voted for the law, known as the USA Patriot Act, in the House just
weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks but has become one of its leading critics, a
shift that reflects the growing unease among some conservative libertarians over
the expansion of the government's powers in fighting terrorism.

He joined with other conservatives as well as the American Civil Liberties Union
on Tuesday in announcing the creation of the coalition, which hopes to curtail
some of the law's more sweeping law-enforcement provisions.

But Bush administration officials on Tuesday affirmed their strong support for
the law as an indispensable tool in tracking, following and arresting terrorist
suspects. As one of his top legislative priorities, President Bush has prodded
Congress repeatedly to extend critical parts of the law that are set to expire
at the year's end.

The coalition of liberals and conservatives said it had no quarrel with the
majority of the expanded counterterrorism tools that the law provided, some of
which amounted to modest upgrades in the government's ability to use modern
technology in wiretapping phone calls and the like.

But the group said it would focus its efforts on urging Congress to scale back
three provisions of the law that let federal agents conduct ''sneak and peek''
searches of a home or business without immediately notifying the subject of such
searches; demand records from institutions like libraries and medical offices;
and use a broad definition of terrorism in pursuing suspects.

The group, calling itself Patriots to Restore Checks and Balances, asked Mr.
Bush in a letter Tuesday to reconsider his ''unqualified endorsement'' of the
law.

''We agree that much of the Patriot Act is necessary to provide law enforcement
with the resources they need to defeat terrorism,'' the letter said, ''but we
remain very concerned that some of its provisions go beyond its mission and
infringe on the rights of law-abiding Americans, in ways that raise serious
constitutional and practical concerns.''

Although Congressional action is still probably months away, both sides are
already girding for an intense debate. Previous efforts to curtail parts of the
law have won significant support in Congress, but the administration and
Republican leaders have ultimately beaten back the challenges. Mr. Barr said he
considered the debate ''the single most important issue'' facing Congress.

The Bush administration has offered a sharp rebuttal to growing attacks on the
law in the last two years, saying that federal agents have used their new powers
sparingly and judiciously.

Administration officials note that the Justice Department's inspector general
and other groups that have examined the law have not documented any abuses of
power.

Critics, however, counter that because most aspects of the law's use in
terrorism cases remain classified, it has been very difficult to assess how it
is being utilized.

Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales has indicated that he is open to a dialogue
on the future of the law and possible changes, and his chief spokeswoman, Tasia
Scolinos, affirmed that pledge Tuesday. ''The Department of Justice has
spearheaded the call for active discussion and meaningful dialogue on the
reauthorization of the Patriot Act,'' she said.

Justice Department officials said they believed that the coalition's apparent
acceptance of all but three elements of the law signaled that the two sides
could find room for negotiation on the remaining areas of disagreement.

But coalition members said that the Bush administration's commitment to a
dialogue struck them as somewhat half-hearted. Paul Weyrich, who is chairman of
the Free Congress Foundation and a prominent conservative who joined the
coalition, said he thought the administration, and in particular the former
attorney general, John Ashcroft, had adopted an ''absolutist'' defense of the
law.

Mr. Weyrich said he took offense at comments by Mr. Ashcroft suggesting that if
people raised concerns about the law, ''you were aiding and abetting terrorists.
I don't think my colleagues here ought to be put in that position.''

Other conservatives who voiced concerns Tuesday included Grover Norquist,
president of Americans for Taxpayer Reform; David Keane, chairman of the
American Conservative Union, and leaders of the Second Amendment Foundation and
other gun-rights groups.

Mr. Barr said that the group hoped ''to compete with the bully pulpit of the
White House'' in prompting a more complete airing of the issues.

''Missing from the debate has been a substantial discussion and analysis about
restoring the checks and balances in the Constitution'' while fighting
terrorism, he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Barr is leading a coalition of conservatives and liberals
opposed to parts of the Patriot Act. (Photo by Shaun Heasley/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS
(90%); RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS (90%); GUN CONTROL (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); PATIENT PRIVACY (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); MEDICAL
RECORDS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); WIRETAPPING (72%); LITERATURE (70%); LIBRARIANS
(66%); PHYSICIAN PRACTICES (50%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and
Legislation; Privacy; Firearms; Libraries and Librarians; Books and Literature;
Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; Art

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%) Patriots to Restore Checks
and Balances

PERSON: Eric Lichtblau; Bob Barr; George W (Pres) Bush; Neela Banerjee

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: United States; Iraq; Arlington National Cemetery; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             324 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 539 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-12

Smuggling Problem in Iraq
The interim Iraqi government is struggling to deal with a sharp rise in
smuggling, even as it grapples with the border's more heralded problem: the
movement of money and fighters that is helping to sustain the guerrilla war.   1


Military officials released details about a large escape tunnel dug by prisoners
that was discovered at a detention center, as reports of violence elsewhere in
Iraq continued, including attacks that killed two American soldiers and a
marine.   8

F.B.I. Role in Saudis' Exodus
Newly released government records reveal previously undisclosed information
about how dozens of well-connected Saudis left the Untied States on chartered
flights in the frenzied days after Sept. 11, 2001. Flights from Las Vegas and
elsewhere point to a more active role by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
8

Car Bomb in Beirut Injures Five
A car bomb exploded in a predominantly Christian neighborhood in eastern Beirut,
wounding at least five people and destroying two factories. The bomb was the
third attack on a Christian neighborhood in a week.   6

Large Protest in Taiwan
Hundreds of thousands of Taiwanese marched to denounce Beijing in one of the
largest political demonstrations ever there, the clearest sign yet of how
China's anti-secession legislation has poisoned relations across the Taiwan
Strait.   10

NATIONAL   14-23

Possible Detainee Changes
Facing criticism from foreign governments, human rights groups and the federal
courts, the Bush administration is considering changes to the special military
tribunals it established to try foreign terrorist suspects at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.   1

Life Support Fight Reverses
For years, when families and hospitals fought over how to treat critically ill
patients, families often pressed to let their loved ones die, while hospitals
tried to keep them alive. Now conflicts often pit families who want to continue
life support against doctors who believe it is time to stop.   1

The parents of Terri Schiavo appealed to Gov. Jeb Bush to intervene further in
her case. The move came after the judge who ordered the removal of the feeding
tube that has kept Ms. Schiavo alive ruled once again against a motion from her
parents seeking to have the feeding tube reinserted.   22

Christians Push for Control
Christian conservative leaders from scores of Ohio's fastest growing churches
are mounting a campaign to win control of local government posts and Republican
organizations, starting with the 2006 governor's race.   14

OBITUARIES   31-32

James Callaghan
A British Labor politician whose three years as Britain's prime minister were
defined by a tumultuous and ultimately losing battle to tame the country's
powerful trade unions, he was 92.   31

NEW YORK/REGION   25-33

Recruiters on the Front Line
Two years into the war in Iraq, the Army's recruiters find themselves on a
different kind of front line, one that often puts them in the crossfire between
the nation's ambivalence about the war and the military's insistence that new
soldiers be found.   1

Arrest in 1986 Murder
Police announced the arrest of a man in California in connection with the murder
of a Manhattan woman killed 19 years ago.   27

Chess   30
Weather   20
Cong. Vote   28

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SMUGGLING (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); FAMILY (88%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(82%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL
PROTESTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
MILITARY RECRUITING (77%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); MILITARY
COURTS (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); GOVERNORS (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); RELIGION (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
INVESTIGATIONS (71%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (71%); AIR CHARTER SERVICES
(69%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (63%); LABOR UNIONS (60%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); TAIWAN (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); LEBANON (92%); CUBA
(90%); CHINA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             325 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Arrests 15 Accused in Darfur Crimes

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 214 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan, March 28


Sudan has made its first arrests of military and security forces accused of
raping and killing civilians and of burning villages in the Darfur region of
western Sudan, Justice Minister Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin said Monday.

Mr.

Yassin said that a government committee had arrested 15 members of the police,
military and security forces in Darfur in connection with human rights abuses
and that they would immediately be sent to court.

They are accused of crimes that include ''rape, killing, burning and other
things -- different kinds of atrocities,'' he said.

The United Nations Security Council is expected to vote Wednesday on a
French-drafted resolution that would send those responsible for war crimes in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court.

Sudan rejects the notion of referring any Sudanese citizen to a court outside
Sudan, saying its own judicial system is competent to prosecute those guilty of
crimes.

''Now it is high time for us to prove ourselves and to prove how genuine we are
and how seriously the Sudanese judiciary can do the job,'' Mr. Yassin said.
''This is a start.''

Tens of thousands of people have been killed in remote Darfur in more than two
years, in response to a rebellion in the region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); GENOCIDE
(71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Ali Mohamed Osman (Min) Yassin

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); France; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             327 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Westchester Not Examining Barring of Gay Student Club

BYLINE: By ANDY NEWMAN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 749 words


The Westchester County Human Rights Commission has said it does not have the
authority to investigate the banning of a gay student group at New York Medical
College. The commission said that because the school, based in Valhalla, has
ties to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, it is exempt from the
county's antidiscrimination law.

The panel's finding, stated in a March 16 letter to the school, is the latest
episode in the controversy that erupted last year when the school refused to
recognize a student club called Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender People in
Medicine.

Fallout from the school's decision continues, however. The county health
department is considering severing ties to the college, as is Pace Law School,
which runs a master's program in law and public health with the college. And the
ban has drawn fire from gay advocates.

''The fact that it's legal to discriminate doesn't make it right or smart,''
Joel Ginsberg, executive director of the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association, a
national group based in San Francisco, said yesterday. ''Pretty soon New York
Medical College will be best known for its policy of discriminating against gay
people.''

The commission's letter, which was first reported yesterday in The Journal News
of Westchester County, was also critical of the school.

''We strongly urge you to rethink your denial,'' the commission's executive
director, Alison E. Greene, wrote, adding, ''We sincerely hope that your
inclusion of 'sexual orientation' in your 'Statement of Non-Discrimination' is
not merely lip service, but a genuine statement that reflects a policy of
treating all students fairly.''

New York Medical College, which has 1,600 students, said in a statement in
January that it opposed the club because it would ''advocate and promote
activities inconsistent with the values'' of the college. The college is run by
a board appointed by a corporation whose members are in turn appointed by the
Archbishop of New York, the archdiocese said. In 1986, the school declared
itself to be ''in the Catholic tradition.''

The school says that its curriculum includes cultural sensitivity training and
thoroughly covers health issues of concern to sexual minorities.

Ms. Greene wrote that she had found more than a dozen Catholic colleges and
universities that have officially recognized gay and lesbian student groups,
including Fordham University in the Bronx and Iona College in New Rochelle.

''These institutions of higher learning have found a way not to discriminate
against their gay and lesbian students while at the same time maintaining their
mission to operate 'in the Catholic tradition,''' she wrote.

The banned club was originally known as the Student Support Group, and operated
for several years under that name without incident. Last fall, the group's
president, Joshua Sahara, decided to rename the club Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and
Transgender People in Medicine.

Mr. Sahara's plan for the year included starting a mentoring program at a gay
and lesbian high school in Manhattan, 30 miles away, and shadowing doctors at a
clinic for sexually transmitted diseases. The school, after being informed of
the name change, denied financing and meeting space for the club.

The school's general counsel, Waldemar A. Comas, said yesterday that the
mentoring program ''was probably one of the reasons'' that the school banned the
club.

''You're talking about that you would go out from here in the middle of the
program and have a 'purely educational and mentoring' program for high school
students that are gay and lesbian,'' he said. . ''The question is how is that
connected to the educational experience here?''

Mr. Comas said that the school was also concerned that the club would engage in
activities that would conflict with the sexual privacy rights of students
outside the group. He declined to elaborate.

Mr. Sahara, a second-year student, is out of the country and could not be
reached for comment yesterday.

In January, the Westchester County health commissioner, Dr. Joshua Lipsman,
resigned from two volunteer teaching posts at the school to protest the ban.

The county offers internships to the school's students and research support for
a study the college's school of public health is conducting on the health needs
of immigrants. Dr. Lipsman said that he and the Westchester County executive,
Andrew J. Spano, who has also spoken against the ban, would decide within a few
days whether to end those ties.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joshua Sahara, a student at New York Medical College, is
president of the gay support group that the school banned after he renamed it.
(Photo by Susan Farley for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (92%); GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); EXTRA CURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (89%); CIVIC & SOCIAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (89%); APPOINTMENTS (89%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CURRICULA (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES
(77%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BUSINESS &
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); BOARD CHANGES (72%); PUBLIC HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             330 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 6, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

International War-Crimes Prosecutor Gets List of 51 Sudan Suspects

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 5


The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court received a list of 51
suspects in the ethnic killing campaign in the Darfur region of Sudan from
Secretary General Kofi Annan on Tuesday, opening the way for war crimes trials
in The Hague.

The confidential list, said to include the names of senior Sudanese government
officials, militiamen, army officers and rebel commanders, was compiled by a
United Nations commission in January. It reported then that war crimes ''no less
serious and heinous than genocide'' had been committed in Darfur, and it
recommended trial by the international court.

In the months between the list's compilation and a Security Council resolution
on Thursday that assigned the trials to the International Criminal Court, the
Council had been at odds over the United States' vehement objections to the
court. The Bush administration relented after the Council agreed on language in
the resolution that would exempt Americans from prosecution in the court.

Mr. Annan delivered the list to the court official, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, in the
same, still-sealed envelope that was presented by the commission in January. In
response, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, a former human rights lawyer from Argentina, said,
''Now, we have a common task: to end the culture of impunity.''

At the court's offices in The Hague, officials took possession of nine large
boxes containing thousands of commission files documenting the widespread rape,
murder and arson committed by marauding Arab militias held responsible for the
forced displacement of 2.4 million black African villagers and the deaths of up
to 300,000 people in Darfur.

Serge Brammertz, the deputy prosecutor for investigations, said it was too early
to say when arrest warrants and indictments might be issued, and he expressed
hope that Sudan would assist the court.

Sudan has said it will refuse to hand over any of its citizens to face trial
abroad and will instead prosecute war crimes suspects itself. President Omar
al-Bashir took a public oath on Monday, swearing ''thrice in the name of
Almighty God that I shall never hand any Sudanese national to a foreign court.''

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said he would ''carefully and independently assess'' the
proceedings that the Sudanese government says are under way in Khartoum. He also
called for help in the investigations from individuals, governments, the African
Union and the United Nations.

In Khartoum, tens of thousands of Sudanese marched Tuesday in support of a
government campaign denouncing the Security Council resolution ordering the
trial of the war crimes suspects in the international court. They stopped to
demonstrate at both the British and American Embassies and United Nations local
headquarters.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Luis Moreno-Ocampo, left, talked with Secretary General Kofi
Annan yesterday at the United Nations after receiving a list of suspects. (Photo
by Osamu Honda for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (73%); ARMIES (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); ARSON (73%); ARRESTS
(73%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: OMAR AL-BASHIR (58%) Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Luis Moreno-Ocampo; Warren
Hoge

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (93%); AFRICA (79%);
ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             338 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  West: California: Bias At Gay Club

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 90 words


The San Francisco Human Rights Commission ruled that the owner of a popular gay
nightclub had discriminated against black patrons and violated local civil
rights codes. After a 10-month investigation, the commission found that the
club, Badlands, required multiple forms of identification from some black
customers, was discriminatory in hiring practices, applied a dress code only to
black patrons and denied entry using other policies rarely applied to whites. A
lawyer for Les Natali, the club's owner, disputed the findings.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (53%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (73%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (73%)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's Selective Memory

BYLINE: By Pu Zhiqiang.

Pu Zhiqiang is a Chinese lawyer. This article was translated by Perry Link from
the Chinese.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: New Haven


EVER since June 4, 1989, when the world's cameras embarrassed the Chinese
government by recording the slaughter of unarmed protesters in Beijing, spring
has been a sensitive period in Chinese politics. Public demonstrations of all
kinds have been repressed as if they were vicious cancers. It is indeed news,
then, that people have been protesting in the streets of Chinese cities about
Japan's wartime past, its textbooks' reluctance to face history squarely, and
its proposed accession to the United Nations Security Council.

Of course, the fundamental nature of these protests is different from that of
the demonstrations of 1989, because they so far have had the tacit approval of
the authorities. The protesters have incurred essentially zero risk, and
suspense over the outcome has also been near zero. But even when protests are
government-sanctioned, they still offer the Chinese people a rare chance to let
off some steam.

If truth be told, however, China and Japan have much in common. China shares
many of Japan's flaws and has yet to master some of its important strengths.

We Chinese are outraged by Japan's World War II crimes -- the forcing of Chinese
into sexual slavery as ''comfort women,'' the 1937 massacre of unarmed civilians
in Nanking, and the experiments in biological warfare. Our indignation redoubles
when the Japanese distort or paper over this record in their museums and their
textbooks. But if we look honestly at ourselves -- at the massacres and
invasions strewn through Chinese history, or just at the suppression of
protesters in recent times -- and if we compare the behavior of the Japanese
military with that of our own soldiers, there is not much to distinguish China
from Japan.

This comparison haunts me. When I think of the forced labor in Japanese prison
camps, I am reminded of forced labor camps in China, and also of the Chinese
miners who lose their lives when forced to re-enter mines that everyone knows
are unsafe. Are the rights of China's poor today really so much better protected
than those of the wretched ''colonized slaves'' during the Japanese occupation?
There was the Nanking massacre, but was not the murder of unarmed citizens in
Beijing 16 years ago also a massacre? Is Japan's clumsy effort to cover up
history in its textbooks any worse than the gaping omissions and biased blather
in Chinese textbooks?

China's textbooks omit the story of how the Great Leap Forward of the late
1950's was actually the disastrous failure of a harebrained economic scheme by
Mao that led to the starvation of 20 million to 50 million rural Chinese. No one
really knows the numbers. Nor do we know how many were killed in the campaigns
to suppress ''counterrevolutionaries'' during the 1950's, in the Cultural
Revolution during the 1960's, or even in the Beijing massacre of 1989. Yet we
hold Japan firmly responsible for 300,000 deaths at Nanking. Does our confidence
with numbers depend on who did the killing?

China and Japan both have blood on their hands, but they have important
differences as well. Comfort women and others whom Japan has injured or insulted
can sue either Japan's government or its big companies, and they can do this in
either Japanese or Chinese courts. Japanese who want to can demonstrate in Tokyo
shouting ''Down with Japanese militarism!''

These things are very different in China. The Chinese government decides on its
own whether to give modest compensation to the widows of dead miners. Ordinary
workers and farmers are often in the position of issuing appeals to the very
people who are oppressing them. Families of Beijing massacre victims to this day
have police stationed at their doorways, lest they misbehave. And demonstrators
may shout only about approved topics. Before we in China decide we are superior
to Japan, we must address our own double standards.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TEXTBOOKS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); POLITICS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); RIOTS (76%); SLAVERY (72%); MURDER (71%); FORCED LABOR
(71%); WORLD WAR II (71%); APPROVALS (71%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (71%); MINE
WORKERS (67%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (66%); ARMED FORCES (63%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (56%) Freedom and Human Rights; Demonstrations and Riots;
Textbooks; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%)

PERSON: Pu Zhiqiang

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); JAPAN (94%)

REGION: China; Japan; China

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             341 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 1, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Hostage's Italian Driver Ignored Warning, U.S. Says

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr. and ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 30


The car carrying the Italian journalist Giuliana Sgrena that was struck with a
deadly hail of gunfire as it sped toward Baghdad International Airport on March
4 ignored warnings from American soldiers who used a spotlight, a green laser
pointer and warning shots to try to stop it as it approached a checkpoint, the
American military said in a report released Saturday evening.

The gunfire killed Nicola Calipari, an Italian intelligence agent who was in the
back seat with Ms. Sgrena. The driver and Ms. Sgrena were wounded. Lt. Gen. John
R. Vines, the ground commander in Iraq, has approved a recommendation that
soldiers involved in the shooting not be disciplined, the military said.

The report's exoneration of the soldiers, which was made public last week,
angered Italian officials and threatened to further inflame relations between
the United States and Italy, one of its staunchest allies in the war in Iraq.
The findings have created a political problem for the Italian prime minister,
Silvio Berlusconi, who faces a public upset by the incident at a time when his
own fortunes are sagging.

Italy has kept 3,000 troops in Iraq, but Mr. Berlusconi has suggested that Italy
might begin withdrawing them by September.

Italian officials have disputed preliminary accounts of the shooting, provided
last month by the United States, and Italy is pressing its own investigation.
Ms. Sgrena has also challenged the United States' account, saying the car
approached the checkpoint at a moderate speed and was not given any warnings.

Ms. Sgrena, a reporter for the left-wing daily newspaper Il Manifesto, was
abducted Feb. 4 in Baghdad and released March 4, less than one hour before she
and her rescuers made their trip to the airport. American officials have said
the checkpoint was established temporarily to help provide security for the
United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, who was meeting with the top
military commander in Iraq. Mr. Negroponte has since been appointed director of
national intelligence.

The incident helped focus attention on the risks that Iraqis face at American
checkpoints, where human rights groups say many Iraqis have been accidentally
wounded or killed.

The report, which had many blacked-out parts, is the American military's first
detailed account of the events. It asserts that the Italians ignored repeated
warnings from American soldiers as they sped onto a part of the Baghdad airport
road where soldiers are on a constant state of high alert because of the
extraordinary risk of suicide car bombs and other insurgent attacks.

According to the report, 11 bullets fired by one American soldier hit the
Italians' car, killing Mr. Calipari, after the car failed to heed the warnings.
The car was traveling about 50 miles per hour -- faster than other cars that
night -- as it approached the checkpoint and did not slow until struck by the
bullets, the report said.

The driver ''was dealing with multiple distractions including talking on the
phone while driving, the conversation in the back seat, trying to listen for
threats, driving on a wet road, focusing on tasks to be accomplished, the need
to get to the airport, and the excited and tense atmosphere in the car,'' the
report found. He shouted, ''They are attacking us'' into his phone when the
firing began, the report said, adding that it was ''highly unlikely'' that any
shots were fired after the car stopped. The fusillade lasted four seconds, it
said.

The soldier who fired the shots complied with the military's rules of
engagement, the report concluded. ''After operating the spotlight, and
perceiving the oncoming vehicle as a threat, he fired to disable it and did not
intend to harm anyone,'' it said.

The report also asserted that the United States military ''was totally unaware
of the recovery and transport of Ms. Sgrena'' until after the shooting. It said
the troops stationed at the checkpoint were on their first full day on shift
there and ''lacked experience in issuing operational orders and in battle
tracking security forces'' at checkpoints.

The report also found that a senior commander in the American-led alliance who
was at a military base near the site of the shooting, identified only as a major
general, was aware something was under way involving the journalist. Just 20
minutes before the shooting, the commander confirmed to his aide, an
unidentified captain, that an operation was under way. But the general said,
''It is best if no one knows.''

While finding that the soldiers were not culpable, the report recommended taking
steps to better inform Iraqis and other drivers about how to approach
checkpoints, echoing calls made by critics since the incident. The report also
recommended that the military use more signs and enhanced lighting to warn
drivers that they are approaching a checkpoint.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT
WOUNDS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
AIRPORTS (89%); WRITERS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); FIREARMS (89%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); LIBERAL MEDIA
(73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(70%); APPROVALS (70%); APPOINTMENTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
PRIME MINISTERS (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (60%); SUICIDE (50%) United States
Armament and Defense; Terrorism; United States International Relations; News and
News Media

PERSON: SILVIO BERLUSCONI (79%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (75%) Richard A Jr Oppel;
Robert F Worth; Giuliana Sgrena; Nicola Calipari; Silvio (Prime Min) Berlusconi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ITALY (97%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Italy; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             347 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. MAY REQUIRE CLOSER SCRUTINY TO GET A LICENSE

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD and DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1254 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


Congress is moving quickly toward setting strict rules on how states issue
driver's licenses, requiring them to verify whether each applicant for a new
license or a renewal is in this country legally.

A House and Senate conference now taking place has included the requirements,
which apply to all 50 states and other jurisdictions that issue licenses, in a
supplemental appropriations bill for Iraq, aides involved in the process said on
Monday. The draft legislation will be completed in the next few days and is all
but certain to pass.

State officials complain that the new requirements will add a costly,
complicated burden to the issuance of driver's licenses, which has been their
responsibility for almost a century. Civil rights organizations and privacy
advocates say that they are concerned that a standardized driver's license would
amount to a national identification card and that a central database would be
vulnerable to identify theft.

The proposed regulations, intended to deter terrorist attacks, would replace a
provision of the intelligence bill passed in December that called on state and
federal agencies to develop new rules for licenses. That law did not
specifically require states to check the citizenship or immigration status of
applicants.

Eleven states now grant driver's licenses to noncitizens who do not have visas.
There is no reliable estimate of how many licenses have been issued to
noncitizens, whether in the country legally or illegally.

Some of the ideas in the new measure were considered and dropped in December.
But conservative members of the House, led by Representative F. James
Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, threatened to block passage of the
intelligence bill, and won an agreement that they could try again this year.
They got a pledge from the leadership to include the driver's license measures
in a must-pass bill this year.

Under the rules being considered, before granting a driver's license, a state
would have to require proof of citizenship or legal presence, proof of an
address and proof of a Social Security number. It would need to check the legal
status of noncitizens against a national immigration database, to save copies of
any documents shown and to store a digital image of the face of each applicant.

The licenses issued must include the driver's address and a digital photograph,
and would incorporate new authentication features designed to prevent
counterfeits. The new law would also require that the licenses of legal
temporary residents expire when their visas do. The rules would also apply to
renewals, an aide involved in the conference said.

Supporters of the law say it addresses important security problems and note that
some of the Sept. 11 hijackers used driver's licenses as identification when
checking in for their flights, and that a few had expired visas.

Supporters also say the measure will help control illegal immigration. Caroline
Espinosa, a spokeswoman for NumbersUSA, a group that lobbies for tighter borders
and tougher immigration laws, said, ''This is really targeted toward national
security, but a side effect would be discouraging illegal immigrants from coming
into the United States and making it more difficult for them to open a bank
account, buy a house, rent a car or buy a car.''

State officials and some senators say the new provision, known as the Real ID
measure, imposes verification procedures -- like the authentication of birth
certificates -- that would be difficult for even the federal government to meet.

A bipartisan group of senators -- the Republicans John E. Sununu of New
Hampshire and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, and the Democrats Joseph I.
Lieberman of Connecticut and Richard J. Durbin of Illinois -- complained about
the proposal in a recent letter to the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist.

''By repealing a provision enacting a central recommendation of the 9/11
commission, in favor of unworkably rigid federal mandates,'' the letter said,
''it would jeopardize an initiative that can make the nation safer from
terrorist attack.''

Cheye Calvo, the director of the transportation committee at the National
Council of State Legislatures, predicted that unintended conflicts would emerge
from the measure, which he noted would become law without any hearings.
Referring to state motor vehicle departments, Mr. Calvo asked, ''Is the goal
here to shut down D.M.V.'s?''

Many state licensing officials, however, have long seen a need for tighter
standards and better linking of databases because many drivers whose licenses
are revoked in one state quickly get a license in another.

In mid-April, experts representing governors, state legislatures, motor vehicle
departments, police departments, the federal Departments of Transportation and
Homeland Security, the AAA and the American Civil Liberties Union, along with
information technology experts, held three days of meetings here to begin
planning how to carry out the provisions in the intelligence reform law.

''In December, they recognized the complexity of this process and they set up a
system to discuss it back and forth,'' said State Senator Michael Balboni of New
York, who was appointed by the National Council of State Legislatures to
represent the states in negotiations in Washington on how to put the bill into
effect. ''Now, suddenly, less than five months later, they come back and say,
forget all that, we're going to take this unilateral approach.''

Mr. Balboni's group said the new rules would cost the states $500 million to
adopt.

Privacy advocates have raised criticisms. Timothy D. Sparapani, the chief
lobbyist on privacy issues for the A.C.L.U., said the standardized license would
amount to a national identification card. And with the data accessible in a
single database, he said, ''this is a recipe for identity-theft disaster.''

The new rules have been propelled by an unlikely combination of factors. House
conservatives have said they will not consider an expanded temporary worker
program, a goal of President Bush and business groups, until what they call
border security measures are adopted. Strategists working with the White House
say they have accepted the need to accommodate the conservatives to win support
for a package of changes in immigration law.

The 11 states that now issue licenses to people who cannot document their
immigration status are Hawaii, Maryland, Michigan, Montana, New Mexico, North
Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin.

In July, Tennessee began issuing driver's licenses marked: ''For driving
purposes only. Not valid for identification.'' The license, given to people who
cannot supply proof that they are in the state legally, is printed vertically,
to distinguish it from most other driver's licenses, which are horizontal.

Melissa McDonald, a spokeswoman for the state motor vehicle department, said
Tennessee took the action because Gov. Phil Bredesen ''felt like we needed to
address the issue of homeland security, while still conducting written and road
tests for people who want to drive, and providing them with a document that
insurance companies would accept before writing insurance, which car owners are
required to have.''

Tennessee has issued about 22,000 such cards since July, Ms. McDonald said. The
written exam is given in Spanish, French and Korean. Utah began issuing a
similar card on March 8. Under Utah law, the card can be accepted as
identification by private entities but not government agencies.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. has pushed for new
driver's license restrictions. (Photo by Joe Cavaretta/Associated Press)(pg.
A21)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DRIVERS LICENSES (92%); LICENSES & PERMITS (91%); LEGISLATION (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS (79%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(79%); APPROPRIATIONS (79%); NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); LOBBYING (74%); COUNTERFEITING (73%); HIJACKING (73%); REFUGEES (72%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%);
CONSERVATISM (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (67%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (54%) Terrorism; Drivers
Licenses; Immigration and Refugees; Illegal Aliens; Identification Devices; Law
and Legislation  ; States (US); Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Terrorism

PERSON: F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (59%) Matthew L Wald; David D Kirkpatrick

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             352 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Belgium: Trial For 2 In Rwanda Genocide

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 103 words


Belgium began trying two Rwandan half-brothers charged with helping Hutu
militias who killed some 50,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu in 1994 by lending them
vehicles and then rewarding them with beer after the slaughter. They are being
tried under a law that allows Belgium to prosecute suspected war crimes, even if
committed by foreigners in other countries. The two, Etienne Nzabonimana, above,
54, and Samuel Ndashyikirwa, 43, both wealthy businessmen, were living in
Belgium when they were arrested in 2002. The trial is expected to last seven
weeks and call about 180 witnesses, some to be flown to Brussels from Rwanda.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%);
ARRESTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (52%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Etienne Nzabonimana; Samuel Ndashyikirwa

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (74%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (95%); BELGIUM (94%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Rwanda; Belgium  ; Brussels (Belgium)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             356 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 947 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

North Korea Fuel Claim Is Questioned by U.S.
North Korea said it had harvested a nuclear reactor for weapons fuel, but
intelligence officials said they had seen no evidence to confirm or disprove the
assertion.   A1

Attacks Kill Scores in Iraq
Insurgents struck in northern and central Iraq in a series of bombing attacks
that killed at least 79 people and wounded at least 120 others, according to
figures provided by the police and hospital officials.   A1

Bolton Defends His Tactics
John R. Bolton has told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that a policy
maker should maintain the right to ''state his own reading of the intelligence''
even when it differs from that of American intelligence agencies.   A1

Protesters Killed in Afghanistan
Four protesters were killed in Jalalabad as the police and troops struggled to
contain the worst anti-American demonstrations in Afghanistan in the more than
three years.   A1

Terror Suspects Sent to Egypt
The United States and other countries have sent terror suspects to Egypt, a
country that is believed to have used extreme interrogation methods, according
to a report released by Human Rights Watch.   A4

No Charges in Abuse Case
The Army officer whose military intelligence unit was in charge of
interrogations at the Abu Ghraib prison will not face criminal charges, two
senior Pentagon officials said.   A12

Report Cites Security Concerns
A government report released by the Government Accountability Office says the
United States must do more to protect officials and some other Americans abroad.
A15

New Family of Rodent Found
The Wildlife Conservation Society announced that scientists had discovered an
entire new family of wildlife in Laos.   A3

NATIONAL   A16-25

Plane Prompts Evacuation; Bush Unaware of Danger
A single-engine plane bearing down on Washington without clearance prompted a
frantic evacuation of the Capitol, Supreme Court and the White House, but
President Bush was not told of the threat until he finished a bicycle ride at a
Maryland wildlife center.   A1

Tolerance Program Diluted
A chaplain at the Air Force Academy said a religious tolerance program that she
helped to design within the last year to respond to charges of widespread
evangelical proselytizing at the academy was watered down after it was shown to
officers.   A24

Actor Denies Jackson Abuse
Testifying at Michael Jackson's trial on charges of child molesting, the actor
Macaulay Culkin said Mr. Jackson had never touched him inappropriately.   A18

Bush Seeks Medicaid Advisers
The Bush administration will create an advisory panel to recommend big changes
in Medicaid eligibility and benefits and in the financing of the program,
officials said.   A21

House Bill Gets Tough on Gangs
The House voted 279 to 144 to pass a bill creating the first federal penalties,
including mandatory minimum sentences, specifically for gang-related crimes.
A20

Social Security Battle Heats Up
The political struggle over Social Security is about to get hotter, as the House
Ways and Means Committee tries to energize President Bush's initiative by adding
provisions on retirement savings, long-term care and private pensions.   A21

Billions Added to Highway Bill
Members of the Senate defied the White House and added billions of dollars to a
highway measure, overwhelmingly rejecting the administration effort to keep
spending within the limits of the newly passed budget.   A25

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Governor's Chief of StaffTo Oversee Rebuilding
Governor Pataki plans to appoint his chief of staff, John P. Cahill, to take
control of the rebuilding effort in Lower Manhattfan, aides to the governor
said. Aides also said the governor plans to use hundreds of millions of public
dollars to jump-start the fund-raising effort for the Sept. 11 memorial at
ground zero; and will step up the timetable for producing a redesign of the
Freedom Tower.   A1

Crimes Against Muslims Up
Reported hate crimes against Muslims in the United States increased by more than
50 percent last year, with New York State ranking second nationally, according
to a study by an Islamic advocacy group.   B5

Equitable School Budgets
The New York City Education Department has abandoned an effort to correct
historic inequities in school budgets.   B1

Proposal to Widen Parkway
Acting Gov. Richard J. Codey of New Jersey promised additional lanes on a
17-mile stretch of the Garden State Parkway south of Toms River known for its
rush-hour backups.   B1

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-9

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

THURSDAY STYLES   G1-8

ARTS   E1-12

OBITUARIES   A25

Betty Talmadge
A former first lady of Georgia and a prominent Washington hostess, she was 81.
A25

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Cisco's Approach to Options
Cisco Systems is seeking regulatory approval for a novel financial instrument
that could allow the company to assign a lower value to stock options than under
current models, adding a twist to the continuing fight over how employee stock
options are expensed.   C1

Icahn on Blockbuster Board
Carl C. Icahn, the billionaire financier who has been engaged in an increasingly
hostile fight with the executives of Blockbuster, scored a significant victory
when he was elected to the board.   C1

Cambodia's Textile Industry
Much of Cambodia's garment industry has been holding its own since the end of a
global quota system, thanks to an unorthodox labor program backed by the United
States and intended to improve working conditions.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: United's pension debacle; rounding a square's edges; the roads are
paved with pork; Brent Staples on how hip-hop music lost its way.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E9
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E10
Weather   D12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MEDICAID (89%); WILDLIFE (86%);
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (86%); ARMIES (78%); AIR FORCES (78%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(75%); SOCIAL SECURITY (75%); LEGISLATION (75%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (74%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); BOMBINGS
(72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES
(71%); SENTENCING (70%); FOREIGN POLICY (70%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%);
GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (69%); FAMILY (69%); CHILD ABUSE (66%);
RELIGION (65%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (62%); GANGS (60%);
HOSPITALS (56%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%); US GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
(54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

CITY: JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
(94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); EGYPT (92%); LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (53%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             358 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Bosnian Muslim Families Sue Dutch Over Srebrenica Massacre

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 12


Survivors of a 1995 massacre in Bosnia appeared in a Dutch court on Thursday to
start proceedings aimed at obtaining compensation from the Dutch government
because its soldiers failed to protect them. The outcome of the civil suit could
affect the legal liability of nations providing troops for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The suit, which is still in a pretrial stage, has been brought by two Bosnian
Muslim families whose members were killed while they were in the United Nations
''safe haven'' of Srebrenica as Serbian and Bosnian Serb forces overran the
area.

The few hundred lightly armed Dutch soldiers who were part of the United Nations
forces in Bosnia said they had neither the manpower nor the weapons to defend
the estimated 30,000 Muslims who had sought refuge in the town. The Serbs killed
up to 8,000 unarmed Muslim men and boys there, an operation since defined as
genocide by the United Nations war crimes tribunal.

The large-scale slaughter with Dutch troops in the vicinity has haunted the
Netherlands. There have been several investigations into the decisions made by
its government and soldiers regarding Srebrenica.

One government resigned in 2002, saying it accepted political responsibility for
the failure of its forces to protect those seeking refuge. The United Nations
also said it had failed to protect Srebrenica in a 1999 report issued by the
secretary general.

But the Dutch lawyers representing the Muslim families said that accepting
political and moral responsibility was not enough.

''The big legal question is to establish liability, and the Dutch government and
the United Nations have both turned that down,'' said Liesbeth Zegveld, one of
the lawyers. ''There is a legal gap here. There have been grave human rights
crimes and the victims should have remedy and receive damages.''

The lawyers have tried to press their case for more than two years and have been
turned away by at least one court. But a district court in The Hague has agreed
to hold hearings to determine if there are sufficient grounds to bring a case
against the government. If it goes forward, the lawyers said, other families
from Srebrenica, some of whom live in the Netherlands, could join the suit at a
later stage.

The first hearings focused on the family of Rizo Mustafic, an electrician
working at the time for the Dutch forces. Although local employees were entitled
to be evacuated from the area along with the Dutch soldiers when the enclave
fell to the Serbs, lawyers for the Mustafic family said, Mr. Mustafic was
erroneously not placed on the evacuation list. He was forced to leave the
military compound and was separated from his family by Bosnian Serb soldiers. He
has not been seen since, nor have his remains been found.

His wife, Mehida, and his two children were granted asylum in the Netherlands,
along with numerous other Srebrenica survivors. They were in court on Thursday
but did not speak to reporters.

A lawyer for the government said the victims' families should seek compensation
from Serbia, ''the people who committed the murders,'' and not from the
Netherlands.

But investigators at the district court suggested that there were other reasons
for the hearings that went beyond monetary claims. One lawyer said that in all
previous investigations numerous witnesses had been heard. But few, if any,
survivors have had a chance to speak.

''Perhaps we would not have sued if the families had been listened to,'' Ms.
Zegveld said. ''They want to be taken seriously. That does not start with asking
for money, but with being heard.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CHILDREN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
INVESTIGATIONS (72%); RELIGION (71%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (65%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); NETHERLANDS (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); SERBIA (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Netherlands; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Bosnia
and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             360 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senators Say Bush Lags On Creating Terror Panel

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


The White House has been slow to establish an oversight board charged with
ensuring that the government's campaign against terrorism does not erode privacy
and civil rights, a bipartisan group of senators said in a letter released
Friday.

Five months after the board was created, President Bush has yet to name any
members or an executive director, and the $750,000 budget for the board proposed
by the White House is far less than the budgets of other federal panels, the
senators said.

''We urge the White House to take the steps necessary to allow the board to
begin functioning effectively as soon as possible,'' the senators said in a
letter to Andrew H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff.

The letter was signed by Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who leads the
Committee on Homeland Security, and by three Democrats: Richard J. Durbin of
Illinois, Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont.

The White House said in response to the senators' concerns that Mr. Bush
remained committed to giving the board the staffing and resources it would need
to monitor and protect civil liberties in the fight against terrorism.

Trent Duffy, a White House spokesman, declined to say when board members might
be named.

''We're working to finalize a list of people,'' Mr. Duffy said, ''and the hope
is to move quickly on this.'' He rejected charges that the effort had gone too
slowly, saying the president was ''moving at the appropriate pace, and he wants
to make sure the right people are on board.''

The Sept. 11 commission, in its final report last summer, noted the absence of
any centralized federal office to protect civil liberties in the campaign
against terrorism, and it urged the creation of such an office. Congress moved
on the idea last December as part of a broader restructuring of federal
intelligence operations, creating the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight
Board.

The move reflected a compromise that allowed the White House to retain control
of the panel and its membership. Some House Democrats, calling the plan
watered-down and ineffective, have proposed a more independent body with greater
subpoena power, but that idea appears to have stalled in Congress.

In their letter to the White House, the four senators asked for a timetable and
details on how the panel would be staffed and set up. The letter noted that the
White House's proposed budget for the board fell well below the $13 million
devoted to a civil rights office within the Department of Homeland Security, the
$39 million for the Office of the United States Trade Representative and the $4
million for the Council of Economic Advisers.

Timothy H. Edgar, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union,
said the White House's lack of action reflected a resistance to aggressive
monitoring of civil liberties in the face of public concern about the
government's use of data mining, toughened immigration controls, expanded
surveillance powers and a host of other counterterrorism measures.

''With the centralization of power in the intelligence community,'' Mr. Edgar
said in an interview, ''you need to have some agency in government that's
seriously looking at protecting civil liberties. Instead, you have a real lack
of commitment from the White House, and they're not really doing much of
anything.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); BUDGETS
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); BUDGET PLANNING & MANAGEMENT (76%); BUDGET PROPOSALS
(76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%);
SUBPOENAS (67%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (63%) Terrorism; Finances; Budgets and
Budgeting; Privacy; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%) Privacy and Civil
Liberties Oversight Board

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); SUSAN COLLINS (58%); RICHARD DURBIN (58%); PATRICK
LEAHY (58%); JOE LIEBERMAN (56%) Eric Lichtblau; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             361 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Way of the Commandos

SECTION: Section 6; Column 4; Magazine Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 106 words



Human-rights abuses against insurgents? So what? Your writer displayed his
disapproval of the brutality of the Iraqi counterinsurgency forces.

But did he spend time with the families of Iraqi bomb victims, families of
foreign nationals who got to see loved ones beheaded, thanks to the Internet?
Did he spend time with any of the thousands of our troops who were maimed by
insurgents' bombs? I suspect not.

Brutality begets brutality. Sad, but true. An eye for an eye has been a maxim
since biblical times. What's the price for a head? I hope Adnan Thabit chokes
off the insurgents using any means needed.

Patrick E. Clarke
Rockville, Md.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (94%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); ARMED FORCES (84%)
Armament, Defense and Military Forces; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: Patrick E Clarke

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (64%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (64%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             362 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Mexico: Ex-President's Indictment Planned

BYLINE: By Ginger Thompson (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 97 words


A special prosecutor investigating the worst abuses by the authoritarian party
that governed for more than seven decades said in an interview that he would
present an indictment next week against former President Luis Echeverria.

The prosecutor, Ignacio Carillo Prieto, said he would charge Mr. Echeverria with
genocide and kidnapping in connection with the massacre of student protesters in
1968. Last year, Mr. Carillo charged Mr. Echeverria with genocide in the
massacre of more than two dozen students in 1971. That case is under review by
the Supreme Court.   Ginger Thompson (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (86%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (86%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (84%); POLITICS (84%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Colleges and
Universities; Demonstrations and Riots; Politics and Government

PERSON: Ginger Thompson; Ignacio Carrillo Prieto; Luis Echeverria

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (94%)

REGION: Mexico; Mexico City (Mexico)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             366 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 104 words



To the Editor:

I used to think of our country as the champion of human rights and decency.
Behavior like that reported in your May 20 front-page article shames us all.

How can we expect the rest of the world to respect us when prisoners under our
control are routinely tortured, some even to death?

That a man could be tortured to death even though most of his interrogators
believed he was innocent is especially disheartening.

I can only hope that all those responsible for this cruel and outrageous
behavior will be brought to justice, not just those on the low end of the totem
pole.

Carol Kurtz
Livingston, N.J., May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Carol Kurtz

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             370 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 850 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Internet Posting Claims Zarqawi Is Injured
An Internet statement posted in the name of the militant Islamic group of Abu
Musab al-Zarqawi said he had been injured, but gave no details of the injury or
how it was inflicted. The posting appealed to all Muslims to pray for the
''speedy recovery'' of Mr. Zarqawi.   A8

Iraqi soldiers and special police commandos arrested 437 people they accuse of
having ties to the insurgency in Baghdad. American military officials said was
the largest such Iraqi-led operation to date.   A8

Port Security Believed Flawed
The Department of Homeland Security's effort to extend its anti-terrorism
campaign overseas by enlisting help from importers and foreign ports may have
made it easier at times to smuggle weapons of mass destruction into the United
States, Congressional officials say.   A6

Sharon Firm on Withdrawal Plan
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that despite criticism in Israel, his plan
to pull out of the Gaza Strip and part of the West Bank would proceed on
schedule.   A4

F.B.I. Tied to Abuse Claim
F.B.I. Agents interrogated two United States citizens who were being illegally
detained and who had been tortured by Pakistani authorities, a human rights
group said, but did nothing to stop the abuses.   A3

China Backs Uzbek Leader
The government of China offered unequivocal support for President Islam A.
Karimov of Uzbekistan, who is facing international criticism for the crackdown
against a prison break and antigovernment rally in the city of Andijon.   A3

NATIONAL   A14-23

House Backs More Money For Stem Cell Research
Defying both a veto threat and a stark moral challenge from President Bush, the
House passed a bill to expand federal financing for embryonic stem cell
research.   A1

Debate on Filibuster Accord
For all the euphoria that the political center had held, the compromise in the
judicial filibuster fight may have done little to de-escalate the ultimate
battle now looming: over a potential vacancy on the Supreme Court.   A1

Many Senate Republicans, angered by a bipartisan deal on judicial nominees,
warned that they were eager to challenge the agreement by pushing forward
contested candidates.   A18

Laughs for Leno at Trial
Jay Leno, called by the defense to testify in the Michael Jackson child
molesting trial, did little to help Mr. Jackson's case but did manage to enliven
the courtroom.   A16

Officers Ousted in Beating
The Milwaukee police chief fired eight officers and disciplined four others for
their roles in the racially tinged beating of a man at a party at the home of
one of the officers.   A22

Troubled Teen Under Arrest
Lionel Tate, the teenager who was sentenced to life in prison when he was 12 but
freed when his conviction was overturned, was arrested and accused of robbing a
pizza deliveryman at gunpoint, the police said.   A23

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Virus Kills 3 Organ Recipients
Three organ recipients in New England have died in the past month of a virus
spread by rodents, and officials said that three transplant patients in
Wisconsin died under similar circumstances in 2003.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Rough Academic YearFor Columbia's President
Lee C. Bollinger, who became president of Columbia University in 2002, has taken
a beating during a brutal academic year in which an eruption in the Middle East
studies department consumed the campus. As a result, he has been criticized as
detached, overly deliberative and inept at communicating his governing ideology.
A1

Decisions for Downtown
John P. Cahill, who is overseeing the development of the former World Trade
Center site, has moved quickly to assert his power in the two weeks since
Governor Pataki appointed him, taking a variety of small but significant actions
that appear intended to demonstrate that a central authority now leads downtown
development.   B1

EDUCATION   B8

SPORTSWEDNESDAY   D1-6

DINING OUT   F1-14

OBITUARIES   C18

ARTS   E1-12

Motley Crue Sues NBC
In the latest twist in the broadening battle over decency standards, the
glam-metal band Motley Crue filed suit against NBC. The suit states that the
network violated the group's free-speech rights and weakened its sales by
banning it after Vince Neil, the lead singer, used an expletive on the air in a
Dec. 31 appearance on ''The Tonight Show.''   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-17

Housing Prices Increase
Home prices rose last month at their fastest pace in 25 years, a national group
of Realtors reported, defying predictions that the real estate market was
cooling.   A1

Chinese Claim Largest Mall
The South China Mall, a giant new shopping theme park in Dongguan that is nearly
three times the size of the Mall of America in Minnesota, will soon proclaim
itself the world's largest shopping mall.   A1

Scrushy Jurors in Discord
Jurors in the federal trial of Richard M. Scrushy signaled that they were having
trouble agreeing on a verdict.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Disarmament in the Senate; an eye-catching vision treatment; growth
and the poor; justice at $2 million a year.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Matt Miller.

Crossword   E10
Weather   D7
TV Listings   E11


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); RELIGION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); PRISONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); FILIBUSTER (89%); POLITICS (88%); BIOETHICS
(87%); TERRORISM (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); SENTENCING (77%); LITIGATION (77%); APPEALS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(77%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); CORRECTIONS (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); HARBOR & PORT SECURITY (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(75%); CITY GOVERNMENT (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%);
TESTIMONY (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); VETO
(73%); SMUGGLING (71%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (71%); TORTURE (71%); ARMED FORCES
(71%); CHILD ABUSE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (69%); ROBBERY (68%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (68%); STEM
CELL RESEARCH (68%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (65%); SUPREME COURTS
(61%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (61%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (60%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (82%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (57%)

PERSON: JAY LENO (50%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); CHINA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); UZBEKISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             371 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1019 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-16

Europeans Persuade Iran To Extend Nuclear Freeze
The foreign ministers of Britain, France and Germany persuaded Iran to continue
its freeze on sensitive nuclear activities, averting a diplomatic crisis that
could have led to punitive international measures against Iran.   A1

Shiites Court Sunni Minority
Iraq's dominant Shiite religious parties, under American pressure to draw Sunni
Arabs into the drafting of a constitution, agreed to establish a constitutional
commission with as many as 15 of the 101 seats reserved for Sunni Arabs.   A16

More than 1,000 American and Iraqi troops fought street battles with insurgents
in a city west of Baghdad in an attempt to stamp out the violence that has
plagued the country's restive west.   A16

U.S. Rights Record Challenged
Amnesty International accused the Bush administration of condoning human rights
violations, thereby diminishing its moral authority.   A10

Major Blackout Hits Moscow
A blackout disrupted the lives of nearly two million residents in large sections
of Moscow and outlying areas and stranded people in subways, elevators and
trains.   A12

Abbas's Political Gamble
When the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, meets with President Bush, one of
the main issues will be the growing strength of Hamas and whether it can be
brought into the political mainstream.   A3

Egypt Votes on Amendment
Egyptians voted on an amendment to open the way for contested presidential
elections for the first time, but the voting was marred by attacks on opposition
protesters, who had called for a boycott.   A9

Uzbek Leader Visits China
President Islam A. Karimov of Uzbekistan received the trappings of a full state
visit from the president of China less than two weeks after Uzbek troops killed
protesters in the northeastern city of Andijon.   A5

NATIONAL   A18-27

Detainee Accounts Cite Guards' Abuse of Koran
A newly released batch of documents shows that detainees at Guantanamo Bay
complained repeatedly to F.B.I. agents about disrespectful handling of the Koran
by guards and in one case, said guards had flushed a Koran down a toilet.   A1

Defense Rests in Jackson Trial
Michael Jackson's lawyers concluded their defense with witnesses who depicted
his teenage accuser and the boy's mother as scam artists who concocted sexual
molesting charges after Mr. Jackson evicted them from his Neverland ranch.   A18


Runaway Bride-to-Be Indicted
Jennifer Wilbanks, whose disappearance during a jog in Duluth, Ga., days before
her wedding prompted a costly manhunt last month, was indicted by a Gwinnett
County grand jury on charges of lying to the police.   A25

Police Faulted in Boston Death
Planning and tactical errors over several months by the Boston Police Department
led to the death of a 21-year-old college student who was struck by a pepper
spray ball outside Fenway Park in October, an independent commission reported.
A18

Judicial Nominee Confirmed
After four years, hours of debate and four failed efforts to end filibusters
against Priscilla R. Owen, the Senate confirmed her for the federal appeals
court in New Orleans.   A22

Bill Limits Intelligence Chief
Despite opposition from Democrats and the White House, Republicans on the House
Intelligence Committee have approved a bill limiting the authority of the new
director of national intelligence to transfer personnel from one agency to
another.   A24

Specter Adamant on Stem Cells
Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican and chief sponsor of a bill
to expand federal financing for human stem cell research, issued a stark
challenge to President Bush, saying he had enough votes in the Senate to
override a presidential veto of the measure.   A25

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-12

Famed Bridal Store Leaving Brooklyn for Manhattan
Kleinfeld, the storied Brooklyn wedding gown emporium that has dressed
generations of American brides, is moving to Manhattan. Store officials said
they planned to shut down their Bay Ridge location and transfer operations to
20th Street near Avenue of the Americas this summer.   A1

Downtown Plans Unveiled
Governor Pataki and Mayor Bloomberg announced $800 million worth of projects for
Lower Manhattan, including cobblestone streets around the New York Stock
Exchange, a new elementary school on Beekman Street and improvements in
Chinatown.   B1

School Director Replaced
Columbia University is replacing the director of a private elementary school for
the children of faculty members created to help recruit and hold professors, two
years after the school opened.   B5

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-7

HOUSE & HOME   F1-14

THURSDAY STYLES   G1-8

OBITUARIES   C18

Ismail Merchant
The filmmaker whose collaboration with James Ivory created films with visually
sumptuous settings that told literate tales, he was 68.   C18

ARTS   E1-12

New Graduate Acting Program
New School University has announced plans to establish its own graduate acting
school, naming a pair of Broadway veterans to run it and officially severing its
ties with the Actors Studio.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-17

More Trouble for A.I.G.
The New York attorney general and the New York Insurance Department are planning
to file a civil complaint against American International Group, its former chief
executive and its former chief financial officer, accusing them of accounting
tricks, people briefed on the plans said.   C1

NBC Executive May Leave
Neal Shapiro, the president of NBC News since 2001, told his superiors at the
network that he would like to leave his post, two senior executives at NBC
Universal said. Mr. Shapiro appeared to be seeking to jump before being pushed
out of his job, said one senior network executive.   C1

Airline Merger Scrutinized
When America West and US Airways outlined the financing for their $1.5 billion
merger, it turned out that two of their lead investors were hedge funds -- both
of which have had an inconsistent relationship with the airline industry.   C3

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: The president's stem cell theology; Mr. Abbas goes to Washington;
Adam Cohen on chemical plant security.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E10
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
POWER FAILURES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INDICTMENTS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%);
MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); EVICTION (77%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (77%);
RELIGION (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
RIOTS (75%); SEX OFFENSES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ELECTIONS
(74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); HAMAS
(71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%); MISSING PERSONS (67%); CHILD SEXUAL
ABUSE (65%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (63%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (62%);
GRAND JURY (60%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%); HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (71%); MICHAEL JACKSON (63%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); GEORGIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); IRAQ (93%);
UZBEKISTAN (93%); CHINA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); GERMANY (92%); FRANCE
(92%); EUROPE (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); CUBA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             372 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Chided on Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 62 words


Amnesty International accused the Bush administration of condoning ''atrocious''
human rights violations, thereby diminishing the United States' moral authority
and setting a global example encouraging rights abuses by other nations. The
advocacy group also called the United States detention center at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, ''the gulag of our times.''

Article, Page A10.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             373 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Documents Say Detainees Cited Abuse of Koran

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


Newly released documents show that detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, complained
repeatedly to F.B.I. agents about disrespectful handling of the Koran by
military personnel and, in one case in 2002, said they had flushed a Koran down
a toilet.

The prisoners' accounts are described by the agents in detailed summaries of
interrogations at Guantanamo in 2002 and 2003. The documents were among more
than 300 pages turned over by the F.B.I. to the American Civil Liberties Union
in recent days and publicly disclosed Wednesday.

Unlike F.B.I. documents previously disclosed in a lawsuit brought by the civil
liberties union, in which agents reported that they had witnessed harsh and
possibly illegal interrogation techniques, the new documents do not say the
F.B.I. agents witnessed the episodes themselves. Rather, they are accounts of
unsubstantiated accusations made by the prisoners during interrogation.

On Wednesday, the Pentagon dismissed the reports as containing no new evidence
that abuses of the Koran had actually occurred and said that on May 14 military
investigators had interviewed the prisoner who mentioned the toilet episode to
the F.B.I. and that he was not able to substantiate the charge.

The accusation that soldiers had put a Koran in a toilet, which has been made by
former and current inmates over the past two years, stirred violence this month
that killed at least 17 people in Muslim countries after Newsweek magazine
reported that a military investigation was expected to confirm that the incident
had in fact occurred.

Newsweek retracted the report last week, saying it had relied on an American
government official who had incomplete knowledge of the situation.

None of the documents released Wednesday indicate any such confirmation that the
incident took place.

One document released Wednesday is an Aug. 1, 2002, memorandum from an agent
whose name is deleted that recounts a pair of interviews the previous month with
a prisoner whose name is also deleted.

The prisoner said that ''the guards in the detention facility do not treat him
well,'' the agent wrote. ''Their behavior is bad. About five months ago, the
guards beat the detainees. They flushed a Koran in the toilet. The guards dance
around when the detainees are trying to pray. The guards still do these
things.'' The document does not indicate whether the agent believed the account.

The documents include several other accounts of detainees' complaints about
disrespectful handling of the Koran, but none describe its being flushed in a
toilet.

Bryan Whitman, the deputy Pentagon spokesman, said Wednesday that the newly
released document, a summary of an interrogation, ''does not include any new
allegations, nor does it include any new sources for previous allegations.'' Mr.
Whitman said the source of the accusation ''is an enemy combatant.''

Since the Newsweek article was published, the Pentagon has been reviewing
records, but ''we still have found no credible allegations that a Koran was
flushed down a toilet at Guantanamo,'' Mr. Whitman said.

Until the new batch of documents was released, no previously released F.B.I.
documents were known to have mentioned abuse of the Koran of the type Newsweek
reported.

Earlier complaints came in statements of inmates after they were released from
custody or, more recently, in statements of current inmates to their lawyers.

Another memo released Wednesday, dated March 18, 2003, is an account by an agent
whose name is deleted who writes that another detainee told him of purposely
disrespectful handling of the Koran. The detainee acknowledged, according to the
memo, that he did not witness any of the incidents he had discussed.

The agent reports that the detainee said the use of the Koran as a tool in
interrogation had been a mistake. ''Interrogators who had taken the Koran from
individual detainees as a reprisal or incentive to cooperate had failed,'' the
detainee said, adding that the only result would be ''the damage caused to the
reputation of the United States once what had occurred was released to the
world.''

Jameel Jaffer, a senior lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union who is
coordinating the review of documents obtained in the group's civil suit against
the military, said the documents were part of more than 300 new pages received
last Thursday from the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He said staff members
spent days reviewing the documents.

Ken Weine, a spokesman for Newsweek, said the magazine would have no comment on
the disclosures.

The disclosures Wednesday did not support the specific assertions in the
original Newsweek item that military investigators concluded that a Koran had
been flushed down a toilet. They do, however, reinforce the contentions of human
rights advocates and lawyers for detainees that accusations of purposeful
mishandling of the Koran were common.

A former interrogator told The New York Times in a recent interview that
friction over handling of the Koran began with guards' regular searches of the
cells. ''Some of it was just ignorance,'' the former interrogator said,
insisting on anonymity because soldiers are barred from discussing camp
operations. ''They didn't realize you shouldn't handle the book roughly.''

Though complaints about the handling of the Koran were routine, the former
interrogator said, the situation eventually escalated. ''It was two things that
brought the desecration issue to a higher level,'' the former interrogator said.
''The rumor spread among detainees that a Koran had been flushed down a toilet
and that some interrogators brought Korans to the interrogation sessions and
stood on them, kicked them around.'' The former interrogator had not witnessed
those occurrences.

Erik Saar, co-author of ''Inside the Wire'' (Penguin Press, 2005) and an Arabic
language translator in 2003 in Guantanamo said in a recent interview that ''the
detainees actually liked to complain about how the Koran was handled because
they viewed it as a cause to rally around'' and one that would get the attention
of the camp's authorities.

Mr. Jaffer of the A.C.L.U. said the errors in the Newsweek report had been
improperly used to discredit other information about abusive practices at
Guantanamo ''that were not based on anonymous sources, but government documents,
reports written by F.B.I. agents.''

The new documents and 30,000 pages previously released were disclosed as part of
a suit brought by the A.C.L.U. and other groups trying to learn whether and what
kinds of coercive tactics were used at Guantanamo.

The earlier release of reports in which bureau agents recounted witnessing harsh
interrogations resulted in an investigation by an Air Force general of
interrogation practices. That report, which was completed at the end of March,
has not yet been released by the Pentagon.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Photo: ''Past Detainee Statements''Excerpts from documented
interviews with Guantanamo Bay detainees referring to the treatment of the
Koran:Excerpts are:DATED APRIL 11, 2002DATED AUGUST 1, 2002DATED AUGUST 9,
2003(pg. A22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
PRISONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (75%); EVIDENCE (74%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); NAVIES (73%); RIOTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (70%); GENOCIDE (70%) Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Prisoners of
War; Koran; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Suits and
Litigation; Demonstrations and Riots; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense

COMPANY: NEWSWEEK INC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) American Civil Liberties Union; Federal
Bureau of Investigation; Newsweek (Magazine)

INDUSTRY: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             375 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Costs of Outsourcing Interrogation: A Canadian Muslim's Long Ordeal in Syria

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE; David Johnston contributed reporting from Washington for
this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1325 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


In 2002, when the United States government seized Maher Arar as he changed
planes in New York and took him to Syria, the reason was starkly stated in a
Justice Department document: he was a member of Al Qaeda.

But no evidence of that has been made public in a judicial inquiry here into why
Mr. Arar, a Canadian who was born in Syria, was sent to his native country,
where he says he was beaten with a metal cable and held for 10 months in a tiny
cell. Instead, it increasingly appears that Mr. Arar was singled out because his
ties to other Muslims under suspicion in Ottawa were misinterpreted by jittery
Canadian and American security officers.

American officials said in recent interviews that the decision to deport Mr.
Arar to Syria was made by the Justice Department after consultation with the
F.B.I., the C.I.A. and the National Security Council, and was based on secret
information from Canadian security agencies. But a Canadian official who
reviewed that information and other evidence said nothing persuasively connected
Mr. Arar to any terrorist group.

The case of Mr. Arar, a 34-year-old telecommunications engineer and a married
father of two, has become a central example for human rights advocates who
accuse the Bush administration of betraying American values by outsourcing
interrogation to countries notorious for torture. In intensive Canadian media
coverage, Mr. Arar has been depicted as a compelling symbol of the excesses in
the campaign against terrorism.

Unable to find work as an engineer, he spends his days listening to Canadian
officials testify before the Arar Commission. ''I need to know: Why was I sent
to Syria?'' Mr. Arar asked in a recent interview here. ''Was I sent by the
Canadians and Americans so they could get information out of me using methods
that would be prohibited here?''

The Bush administration has refused to cooperate with the Canadian inquiry and
invoked a rare ''state secrets privilege'' defense against a lawsuit filed in
New York by Mr. Arar. But two current administration officials and one former
official said the still-classified Canadian information seemed sufficient to
justify putting his name on an American terrorist watch list. When he landed in
New York, American officials were still under fire for failing to ''connect the
dots'' before the September 2001 terrorist attacks. They decided it would be
irresponsible to let him go home to Canada.

''We wanted more information,'' said the former official, who sat in on
discussions of Mr. Arar's fate in 2002. ''The one way we wouldn't get it is if
we let him go.''

With insufficient evidence to hold Mr. Arar, one way to have him interrogated
was to deport him to Syria, which he had left at 17. ''It's easy to say now,
'You sent him to be tortured,''' said the former official, who, like other
people interviewed, spoke on condition of anonymity because the matter involves
classified material and is in litigation. ''This was a pragmatic decision.
People's lives were at stake.''

Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, who has denounced
the United States government's conduct in the Arar case, says he finds that
unpersuasive. ''To me this case is more than an embarrassment,'' Mr. Markey said
in an interview. ''The reason the U.S. sent Mr. Arar to Syria and not Canada is
that Syria tortures people and Canada doesn't.''

The case shows the difficulties of identifying potential terrorists and the
risks of relying on information extracted from harsh interrogations. It also
illustrates the shift in focus by the public and the media since 2002.

When Mr. Arar was detained at Kennedy Airport on Sept. 26, 2002, anxiety was
high that there could be a repeat of the 2001 attacks.

Today, after a year of revelations about prisoner abuse in Iraq and elsewhere --
and no new attacks on American soil -- the media's attention is on excesses in
the battle against terrorism.

Advocates have challenged the C.I.A.'s seizure of terrorism suspects abroad --
intelligence officials estimate the number to be 100 to 150 people -- and their
forced transfer to detention in other countries, including some that practice
torture, in a pattern that resembles Mr. Arar's case.

Mr. Arar, who before his detention worked for a Boston company and often
traveled between Canada and the United States, said his experience had shaken
his faith in the legal system. ''If there are suspicions about people, you don't
send them to be tortured based on hearsay,'' he said. ''This is why the U.S. and
Canada and the Western democracies are different from the rest of the world.''

He said he was appalled by the Sept. 11 attacks and never had any ties to
terrorists. He said Islam prohibited violence against innocents. ''I have
nothing to hide,'' he said.

[Last Tuesday, Mr. Arar demanded that Canadian officials make public major
documents in his case.]

In 2002, Mr. Arar was put on an American watch list, the National Automated
Immigration Lookout System, as ''a member of a known terrorist organization,''
Al Qaeda. American and Canadian officials said the placement was based on his
connections to others among Ottawa's 40,000 Muslims.

Riad Saloojee, executive director of the Canadian Council on American-Islamic
Relations, said many of Ottawa's Muslims knew one another because they attended
the city's one central mosque or went to the same social events. ''You've seen
them at a picnic, or an Islamic lecture, or a sporting event,'' he said. ''It's
not a particularly long chain.''

At one end of this chain are a few people proved to have terrorist links. Mr.
Saloojee, for instance, said he was once introduced at Ottawa's airport to Ahmed
Said Khadr, a Canadian and senior Qaeda leader who was killed in a 2003 gunfight
with Pakistani forces. Had security officers seen them meet, perhaps he would
have come under suspicion, Mr. Saloojee said. ''If that's the standard, then
there's always going to be six degrees of separation between you and a
terrorist,'' he said.

Mr. Arar said he was ''less than a casual acquaintance'' of one person under
official scrutiny: Ahmad El-Maati, whom he had met briefly while having his car
fixed at an Ottawa garage. Mr. El-Maati's brother, Amer El-Maati, is a wanted
Qaeda member. Last year, John Ashcroft, then the attorney general, described
Amer El-Maati as a pilot who had discussed crashing a hijacked plane into an
American building.

Ahmad El-Maati, a Kuwaiti who immigrated to Canada in 1981, was detained while
in Syria in November 2001. According to an affidavit he filed with the Arar
Commission last year, he was tortured, falsely confessed to a nonexistent plot
to blow up the Canadian Parliament and named Mr. Arar as an acquaintance.

Mr. Arar had already been spotted by a Canadian surveillance team while walking
in the rain in 2001 with another Ottawa man, Abdullah Almalki, who was later
detained in Syria and subjected to gruesome treatment. Far from plotting
terrorism, Mr. Arar said, he had been asking Mr. Almalki to introduce him to a
friendly salesman for a discount on ink cartridges. (Mr. Almalki and Mr.
El-Maati are both free in Canada and face no charges, their lawyers say.)

Mr. Arar got the discount, but he also got on the watch list. When his name
popped up at J.F.K. -- he had taken a circuitous route home from Tunisia to use
frequent-flier miles -- he was held for 13 days while American agencies
considered his fate.

Before taking Mr. Arar to Jordan on a chartered jet and delivering him to Syrian
agents, the United States received assurances from Syria that Mr. Arar would not
be tortured, Mr. Ashcroft said later. Mr. Arar, along with several rights
groups, questions why American officials would accept such assurances from a
government it has denounced annually for the most extreme abuses.

Syria freed Mr. Arar in October 2003. An American diplomat said his Syrian
counterpart told him that an investigation found ''nothing there.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maher Arar, born in Syria, said he was subjected to beatings
there. (Photo by Ian Austen for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%);
WAR ON TERROR (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); JUDICIAL REVIEW
(77%); TORTURE (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%);
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(69%); LITIGATION (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; Islam; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%); AL-QAEDA (58%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (56%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: Scott Shane; Maher Arar; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); ONTARIO, CANADA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (96%); SYRIA (92%)

REGION: Canada; Syria; Ottawa (Ontario)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             383 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 792 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

North Korea Will Resume Talks, U.S. And China Say
The United States and China said that North Korea has committed itself to
eventually returning to multinational negotiations over its nuclear program, but
officials said the North had set no date.   A6

Car Bombs Kill 20 Iraqis
Insurgents set off three simultaneous suicide car bombs at checkpoints around a
town in northern Iraq, killing at least 20 Iraqis and wounding 30 others, a
police chief said.   A8

Bush and Blair Defend Policy
President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain defended themselves
against a British government memorandum that reported that American intelligence
was being ''fixed'' around the policy of removing Saddam Hussein from Iraq.   A7


Series of Attacks in Afghanistan
The bombing of a mosque that killed at least 20 people was part of a series of
attacks aimed at disrupting the political process in Afghanistan, a government
spokesman said.   A8

Attack by Palestinian Backfires
A mortar shell fired by Palestinian militants in Gaza struck a greenhouse in the
Israeli settlement of Ganei Tal, killing two Palestinians and a Chinese laborer.
A3

Uzbek Riot Called 'Massacre'
Uzbekistan's crackdown on a mass protest has been labeled a massacre in a report
by a prominent human rights group, which says responsibility for much of the
death lies with the Uzbek government.   A4

Bolivia Reels From Protests
Thousands streamed into the Bolivian capital, La Paz, as Indian protests against
the ruling elite gained force even after President Carlos Mesa offered his
resignation.   A8

NATIONAL   A9-16

Security Rules for Recruits Are Under C.I.A. Review
The Central Intelligence Agency is reviewing security procedures that have led
the agency to turn away large numbers of Arabic-language linguists and other
potential recruits with skills avidly sought by the agency, intelligence
officials say.   A1

Army Misses Recruitment Goal
Even after reducing its recruiting target for May, the Army still missed it by
about 25 percent, Army officials said.   A9

Vote Nears for Bush Nominee
The Senate voted 65 to 32 to end debate on the nomination of Janice Rogers Brown
to a federal appeals court, setting the stage for a final vote in a bipartisan
compromise on judicial confirmations.   A14

Terror Prosecution Faulted
Defense lawyers for three Muslim men accused of helping a former professor, Sami
al-Arian, finance Palestinian terror attacks told a Florida jury that
prosecutors had built prominent case on vague innuendo and faulty evidence.
A16

Student Faces Deportation
A 17-year-old Chinese student who was smuggled in the United States at 14 now
faces deportation and torture for failing to follow instructions from his
smugglers, who were to be paid $60,000 by his father.   A16

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Official Edited Climate Data
A White House official who once led the oil industry's fight against limits on
greenhouse gases has repeatedly edited government climate reports in ways that
play down links between such emissions and global warming, according to internal
documents.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Bloomberg Ignored Albany To His Peril, Critics Say
Mayor Bloomberg did not win state leaders' support for his West Side stadium
plan because he and his aides failed to build a political coalition in Albany
early enough to sway key lawmakers, according to critics of the plan.   A1

State Restores Estate Tax
The Connecticut legislature approved a two-year, $31 billion budget that
increases funds for health care, education and other social services in part by
restoring an estate tax on properties valued at $2 million or more.   B1

EDUCATION   B9

SPORTSWEDNESDAY   D1-8

ARTS   E1-10

DINING OUT   F1-12

OBITUARIES   A17

Anne Bancroft
The stage and film star whose signature triumphs during her 50-year career
ranged from the saintly Annie Sullivan in ''The Miracle Worker'' to the
seductive Mrs. Robinson, above with Dustin Hoffman's Ben Braddock, in ''The
Graduate,'' she was 73.   A17

BUSINESS DAY   C1-19

G.M. to Cut 25,000 Jobs
General Motors said that it would cut about 25,000 jobs from its blue-collar
work force in the United States by the end of 2008.   A1

Cost Overruns on Weapons
As prices soar, the number of new weapons that the United States military can
afford shrinks, even with the biggest budget in decades.   A1

Feeling Isolated at Pfizer
Peter Rost, a Pfizer Vice President who has criticizing the pharmaceutical
industry over the price of drugs, has found himself increasingly isolated at the
office.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Crumbs for Africa; the court and marijuana; after the stadium; Brent
Staples on the hip-hop media -- a world where crime really pays.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Stacy Schiff.

Crossword   E8
Weather   B10
TV Listings   E9


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ARMIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SMUGGLING
(89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); MILITARY RECRUITING (86%); US PRESIDENTS
(78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); CITY GOVERNMENT
(77%); POLITICS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);
DEPORTATION (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); JURY TRIALS (72%); POLICE FORCES
(72%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (71%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (70%); PRIME
MINISTERS (70%); TORTURE (70%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); LAWYERS (68%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (67%); HUMANITIES &
SOCIAL SCIENCE (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (60%); APPEALS COURTS (50%); RESIGNATIONS (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

PERSON: JANICE R BROWN (77%); TONY BLAIR (70%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (70%); GEORGE W
BUSH (56%)

CITY: LA PAZ, BOLIVIA (50%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); IRAQ (94%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(93%); UZBEKISTAN (93%); BOLIVIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             392 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 15, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Argentina: 'Dirty War' Amnesty Struck Down

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 101 words


The Supreme Court ruled that laws granting amnesty for atrocities committed
during the military dictatorship of 1976 to 1983, the so-called dirty war, are
unconstitutional, opening the possibility that hundreds of current and former
military officers could be brought to court. The justices struck down laws
passed in 1986 forbidding charges against military officers involved in
disappearances, torture and other crimes, a court spokesman said. Rights groups
say up to 30,000 people disappeared during the military's crackdown on leftist
dissidents.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RULE (90%); AMNESTY (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); LEGISLATION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); VERDICTS (88%); TORTURE (88%); GENOCIDE
(86%); IMMUNITY (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (85%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (85%); LIBERALISM (85%) Immunity From Prosecution; Law and Legislation;
Armament, Defense and Military Forces; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government; Decisions and
Verdicts

REGION: Argentina

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             394 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

When the Army Comes to School

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 163 words



To the Editor:

Two points should be added to Bob Herbert's column about the desperation of
military recruiters seeking prospective soldiers on high school campuses.

The No Child Left Behind Act, which authorizes such recruitment, requires
schools to notify students and parents that they have a right to opt out by
instructing the school not to give any contact information about their child to
recruiters.

Also, the New York State Court of Appeals has ruled that while a district must
give military recruiters the same access to student directory information as any
other employer, access may be denied if a school has a nondiscrimination policy
that recognizes sexual orientation as a protected category under the New York
State Human Rights Law.

Since the military does discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation, it
could be denied access on that ground alone.

Barbara Bernstein
Executive Director, Nassau Chapter
New York Civil Liberties Union
Mineola, N.Y., June 16, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ACADEMIC STANDARDS (90%); US NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND ACT (90%); MILITARY
RECRUITING (90%); EDUCATION LAW (90%); ARMIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (88%); HIGH SCHOOLS (88%);
SCHOOL PERFORMANCE (88%); ARMED FORCES (88%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%); GAYS & LESBIANS (85%);
DISCRIMINATION (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(69%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (54%); APPEALS COURTS (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS (52%)
United States Armament and Defense; Draft and Recruitment (Military); Education
and Schools

ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK COURT OF APPEALS (57%) New York Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Barbara Bernstein; Bob Herbert

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             397 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo's Long Shadow

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis.

Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


WHEN Vice President Dick Cheney said last week that detainees at the American
prison camp in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, were treated better than they would be ''by
virtually any other government on the face of the earth,'' he was carrying on
what has become a campaign to whitewash the record of abuses at Guantanamo.

Right-wing commentators have been sounding the theme. Columnist Charles
Krauthammer said the treatment of the Guantanamo prisoners had been ''remarkably
humane and tolerant.''

Yes, and there is no elephant in the room.

Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation observed what went on in
Guantanamo. One reported on July 29, 2004: ''On a couple of occasions, I entered
interview rooms to find a detainee chained hand and foot in a fetal position to
the floor, with no chair, food or water. Most times they had urinated or
defecated on themselves and had been left there for 18, 24 hours or more.''

Time magazine published an extended article last week on an official log of
interrogations of one Guantanamo detainee over 50 days from November 2002 to
January 2003. The detainee was Mohamed al-Kahtani, a Saudi who is suspected of
being the planned 20th hijacker on Sept. 11, 2001, but who was unable to enter
the United States.

Mr. Kahtani was interrogated for as long as 20 hours at a stretch, according to
the detailed log. At one point he was put on an intravenous drip and given 3 1/2
bags of fluid. When he asked to urinate, guards told him that he must first
answer questions. He answered them. The interrogator, not satisfied with the
answers, told him to urinate in his pants, which he did. Thirty minutes later,
the log noted, Mr. Kahtani was ''beginning to understand the futility of his
situation.''

F.B.I. agents, reporting earlier on the treatment of Mr. Kahtani, said a dog was
used ''in an aggressive manner to intimidate'' him. At one point, according to
the log, Mr. Kahtani's interrogator told him that he needed to learn, like a
dog, to show respect: ''Began teaching detainee lessons such as stay, come and
bark to elevate his social status to that of a dog. Detainee became very
agitated.''

At a minimum, the treatment of Mr. Kahtani was an exercise in degradation and
humiliation. Such treatment is forbidden by three sources of law that the United
States respected for decades -- until the administration of George W. Bush.

The Geneva Conventions, which protect people captured in conflict, prohibit
''outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading
treatment.'' The scope of that clause's legal obligation has been debated, but
previous American governments abided by it. President Bush decided that the
Geneva Conventions did not apply to the suspected Al Qaeda and Taliban members
who are detained at Guantanamo.

The United Nations Convention Against Torture, also ratified by the United
States, requires signatories to ''prevent in any territory under its
jurisdiction cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.'' The Bush administration
declared that this provision did not apply to the treatment of non-Americans
held outside the United States.

Finally, there is the Uniform Code of Military Justice. It makes cruelty,
oppression or ''maltreatment'' of prisoners a crime. Armed services lawyers
worried that some methods of interrogation might violate the Uniform Code and
federal criminal statutes, exposing interrogators to prosecution. A Pentagon
memorandum obtained by ABC News said a meeting of top military lawyers on March
8, 2003, concluded that ''we need a presidential letter'' approving
controversial methods, to give interrogators immunity.

The idea that a president can legalize the unlawful evidently came from a series
of memorandums written by Justice Department officials. They argued, among other
things, that President Bush's authority as commander in chief to set
interrogation methods could trump treaties and federal law.

Although President Bush decided to deny detainees at Guantanamo the protection
of the Geneva Conventions, he did order that they must be treated ''humanely.''
The Pentagon, responding to the Time magazine article on the treatment of Mr.
Kahtani, said, ''The Department of Defense remains committed to the unequivocal
standard of humane treatment for all detainees, and Kahtani's interrogation plan
was guided by that strict standard.''

In the view of the administration, then, it is ''humane'' to give a detainee 3
1/2 bags of I.V. fluid and then make him urinate on himself, force him to bark
like a dog, or chain him to the floor for 18 hours.

No one can seriously doubt now that cruelties and indignities have been
inflicted on prisoners at Guantanamo. Nor is there any doubt that worse has
happened elsewhere -- prisoners beaten to death by American soldiers, untold
others held in secret locations by the Central Intelligence Agency, others
rendered to be tortured by governments such as Uzbekistan's.

Since the widespread outrage over the photographs from Abu Ghraib prison in
Iraq, Americans have seemingly ceased to care. It was reported yesterday that
Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the former American commander in Iraq during the
Abu Ghraib scandal, is being considered for promotion. Many people would say the
mistreatment of Mohamed al-Kahtani, or of suspects who might well be innocent,
is justified in a war with terrorists. Morality is outweighed by necessity.

The moral cost is not so easily put aside. We Americans have a sense of
ourselves as a moral people. We have led the way in the fight for human rights
in the world. Mistreating prisoners makes the world see our moral claims as
hypocrisy.

Beyond morality, there is the essential role of law in a democracy, especially
in American democracy. This country has no ancient mythology to hold it
together, no kings or queens. We have had the law to revere. No government, we
tell ourselves, is above the law.

Over many years the United States has worked to persuade and compel governments
around the world to abide by the rules. By spurning our own rules, we put that
effort at risk. What Justice Louis Brandeis said about law at home applies
internationally as well: ''If the government becomes a law-breaker, it breeds
contempt for law.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); PRISONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); POWS
& MIAS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW OF
WAR (89%); TERRORISM (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WRITERS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); MAMMALS
(75%); DOGS (75%); HIJACKING (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (62%); AL-QAEDA (60%)
Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Geneva Conventions; Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba); Torture; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
Federal Bureau of Investigation  ; United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); DICK CHENEY (73%) Anthony Lewis; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             398 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Colombia Law Grants Concessions to Paramilitaries

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO; Monica Trujillo contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, June 22


Colombia's Congress on Wednesday approved a law governing the disarmament of the
country's death squads, which permits the demobilization of thousands of
fighters but grants generous concessions to paramilitary commanders accused of
atrocities and cocaine trafficking.

The Justice and Peace Law, an underpinning of President Alvaro Uribe's goal of
pacifying Colombia, was hailed by government officials as a way to lay the
groundwork for removing one of the three illegal armed groups battling in
Colombia. ''We are proud of this instrument,'' said Luis Carlos Restrepo, the
country's peace commissioner.

But congressional leaders say that in exchange for disarming up to 20,000
fighters, paramilitary commanders are shielded from serious punishment or
extradition on drug charges to the United States. The law, passed by Congress on
Tuesday and by bicameral committees on Wednesday, will be signed into law by Mr.
Uribe within days.

''This is a law that brings no justice, no peace,'' said Senator Jimmy Chamorro.
''It should be called what it really is, a law of impunity and immunity.''

Washington has listed 18 paramilitary commanders as among Colombia's top cocaine
kingpins, and American counternarcotics officials say the paramilitary group,
the United Self-Defense Forces, is responsible for trafficking most of the
cocaine reaching American cities. The group, founded by landowners and drug
traffickers to battle Marxist rebels, is also blacklisted by the State
Department as a terrorist organization accused of assassinating politicians and
killing thousands of peasants.

''This gives benefits to people who have committed the worst crimes, and we get
nothing in return,'' said Gina Parody, a leading congresswoman and ally of Mr.
Uribe who nevertheless proposed much tougher legislation. ''The message we are
sending to Colombian society is that crime does pay.''

The law highlights the contradictory nature of United States policy in Colombia,
which has received more than $3 billion in mostly military aid since 2000 to
destroy drug crops and weaken guerrillas.

The law shields the paramilitary commanders from extradition on drug charges by
allowing them to confess to trafficking, giving them double-jeopardy protection.
It also categorizes ''paramilitarism'' and related crimes as political crimes,
which under the Constitution would safeguard the commanders from extradition on
the related crime of trafficking.

The Bush administration and its representative in Colombia, Ambassador William
Wood, have strongly supported the law and Mr. Uribe, who has made disarming the
paramilitaries a cornerstone in his campaign to win re-election.

But some influential members of the United States Congress have raised dire
warnings.

''We want to see the armed groups demobilize, but this law rewards some of
Colombia's worst terrorists and drug traffickers without any assurance that
their criminal organizations will be dismantled,'' said Senator Patrick J.
Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who is the ranking member on the foreign operations
subcommittee and works on Colombia policy.

In a letter to Mr. Uribe last month, Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Republican
who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said he was concerned that
the law ''would leave intact the complex mafia-like structures'' by failing to
require commanders to disclose knowledge of the organization's operations or
financing.

The law contrasts sharply with how other South American nations are now dealing
with rights violators in the aftermath of civil conflicts.

In Argentina, the Supreme Court last week ruled that 19-year-old laws granting
amnesty to military officers who committed atrocities during that country's
so-called dirty war are unconstitutional. In Chile, hundreds of former military
officers have been charged with crimes committed during Gen. Augusto Pinochet's
rule.

Here, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights in Colombia, Michael
Fruhling, as well as human rights groups and members of Colombia's Congress,
said Mr. Uribe had settled on disarmament at too high a price after a year of
official negotiations in a 142-square-mile safe haven where paramilitary
commanders operated freely. Critics say the law would do little to compensate
victims, recoup land under paramilitary control or disclose the truth about
atrocities.

''If you do not clear up what happened and reveal the illegal structures that
exist, you not only do not have justice or offer reparations for victims, but
you also do not have the elements to dismantle these illegal structures,'' Mr.
Fruhling said.

The biggest concern in Washington is that commanders who are, in essence, drug
traffickers will remain largely free to continue moving cocaine. The United
States has issued extradition orders on at least six commanders, including the
most powerful leader, Diego Fernando Murillo, a former underworld hit man wanted
by federal prosecutors in New York.

''They are very much involved in drug trafficking activities,'' an American
counternarcotics official said. ''If you ask me whether we have heard of a
reduction of drug trafficking by those very people who were sitting at the
negotiating table, I would say, 'No.'''

The government says that with the negotiations, hundreds of lives have been
saved as more than 5,200 paramilitaries have disarmed since late 2003.

But under the law, commanders do not have to guarantee that all their fighters
will disarm, or that those fighters adhere to a cease-fire. Critics also say the
law does not require a complete and honest confession from commanders in return
for sentencing-reduction benefits.

Commanders can, in theory, be charged with crimes, but investigations are
restricted and punishment is light -- as little as 22 months and possibly on
farms, not in prisons.

''This law tries to simulate truth, justice and reparations, but what it really
offers is impunity,'' said Ivan Cepeda, whose father, Senator Manuel Cepeda, was
killed by paramilitary gunmen in 1994.

Victims' families outraged by the law included Leonel Sanchez, whose son, Jairo
Hernando Sanchez, 29, was kidnapped and killed by paramilitaries in 2003.

''It is grave that this law protects them from war crimes, crimes where so many
poor people died,'' said Mr. Sanchez, 57.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pictures of victims of paramilitary groups in Bolivar Square in
Bogota protest a law that ties disarmament to an amnesty. (Photo by Carlos
Villalon for The New York Times)
 Paramilitary fighters of a United Self-Defense Forces faction arrive in a
hamlet in northwest Colombia for a ceremony to lay down their arms. (Photo by
Javier Galeano/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (94%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (91%);
COCAINE (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); DRUG POLICY (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); POLITICS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ASSASSINATION (77%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (72%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (72%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (69%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (69%); CIVIL WAR (69%); FARM
LABOR (67%); DRUG CROP ERADICATION (66%); CITY LIFE (65%); DOUBLE JEOPARDY (65%)
Law and Legislation; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Drug Abuse and Traffic;
Cocaine and Crack Cocaine; Extradition; United States International Relations;
Foreign Aid

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (79%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) Juan Forero; George W (Pres)
Bush

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Colombia; Colombia

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             401 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

INTERROGATORS CITE DOCTORS' AID AT GUANTANAMO

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


Military doctors at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have aided interrogators in conducting
and refining coercive interrogations of detainees, including providing advice on
how to increase stress levels and exploit fears, according to new, detailed
accounts given by former interrogators.

The accounts, in interviews with The New York Times, come as mental health
professionals are debating whether psychiatrists and psychologists at the prison
camp have violated professional ethics codes. The Pentagon and mental health
professionals have been examining the ethical issues involved.

The former interrogators said the military doctors' role was to advise them and
their fellow interrogators on ways of increasing psychological duress on
detainees, sometimes by exploiting their fears, in the hopes of making them more
cooperative and willing to provide information. In one example, interrogators
were told that a detainee's medical files showed he had a severe phobia of the
dark and suggested ways in which that could be manipulated to induce him to
cooperate.

In addition, the authors of an article published by The New England Journal of
Medicine this week said their interviews with doctors who helped devise and
supervise the interrogation regimen at Guantanamo showed that the program was
explicitly designed to increase fear and distress among detainees as a means to
obtaining intelligence.

The accounts shed light on how interrogations were conducted and raise new
questions about the boundaries of medical ethics in the nation's fight against
terrorism.

Bryan Whitman, a senior Pentagon spokesman, declined to address the specifics in
the accounts. But he suggested that the doctors advising interrogators were not
covered by ethics strictures because they were not treating patients but rather
were acting as behavioral scientists.

He said that while some health care personnel are responsible for ''humane
treatment of detainees,'' some medical professionals ''may have other roles,''
like serving as behavioral scientists assessing the character of interrogation
subjects.

The military refused to give The Times permission to interview medical personnel
at the isolated Guantanamo camp about their practices, and the medical journal,
in an article that criticized the program, did not name the officials
interviewed by its authors. The handful of former interrogators who spoke to The
Times about the practices at Guantanamo spoke on condition of anonymity; some
said they had welcomed the doctors' help.

Pentagon officials said in interviews that the practices at Guantanamo violated
no ethics guidelines, and they disputed the conclusions of the medical journal's
article, which was posted on the journal's Web site on Wednesday.

Several ethics experts outside the military said there were serious questions
involving the conduct of the doctors, especially those in units known as
Behavioral Science Consultation Teams, BSCT, colloquially referred to as
''biscuit'' teams, which advise interrogators.

''Their purpose was to help us break them,'' one former interrogator told The
Times earlier this year.

The interrogator said in a more recent interview that a biscuit team doctor,
having read the medical file of a detainee, suggested that the inmate's longing
for his mother could be exploited to persuade him to cooperate.

Dr. Stephen Xenakis, a psychiatrist and former Army brigadier general in the
medical corps, said in an interview that ''this behavior is not consistent with
our medical responsibility or any of the codes that guide our conduct as
doctors.''

The use of psychologists and psychiatrists in interrogations prompted the
Pentagon to issue a policy statement last week that officials said was supposed
to ensure that doctors did not participate in unethical behavior.

While the American Psychiatric Association has guidelines that specifically
prohibit the kinds of behaviors described by the former interrogators for their
members who are medical doctors, the rules for psychologists are less clear.

Dr. Spencer Eth, a professor of psychiatry at New York Medical College and
chairman of the ethics committee of the American Psychiatric Association, said
in an interview that there was no way that psychiatrists at Guantanamo could
ethically counsel interrogators on ways to increase distress on detainees.

But in a statement issued in December, the American Psychological Association
said the issue of involvement of its members in ''national security endeavors''
was new.

Dr. Stephen Behnke, who heads the group's ethics division, said in an interview
this week that a committee of 10 members, including some from the military, was
meeting in Washington this weekend to discuss the issue.

Dr. Behnke emphasized that the codes did not necessarily allow participation by
psychologists in such roles, but rather that the issue had not been dealt with
directly before.

''A question has arisen that we in the profession have to address and that is
where we are now: is it ethical or is it not ethical?'' he said.

Dr. William Winkenwerder Jr., assistant secretary of defense for health matters,
said the new Pentagon guidelines made clear that doctors might not engage in
unethical conduct. But in a briefing for reporters last week, he declined to say
whether the guidelines would prohibit some of the activities described by former
interrogators and others. He said the medical personnel ''were not driving the
interrogations'' but were there as consultants.

The guidelines include prohibitions against doctors' participating in abusive
treatment, but they all make an exception for ''lawful'' interrogations. As the
military maintains that its interrogations are lawful and that prisoners at
Guantanamo are not covered by the Geneva Conventions, those provisions would
seem to allow the behavior described by interrogators and the medical journal.
The article in the medical journal, by two researchers who interviewed doctors
who worked on the biscuit program, says, ''Since late 2002, psychiatrists and
psychologists have been part of a strategy that employs extreme stress, combined
with behavior-shaping rewards, to extract actionable intelligence.''

The article was written by Dr. M. Gregg Bloche, who teaches at Georgetown
University Law School and is a fellow at the Brookings Institution, and Jonathan
H. Marks, a British lawyer who is a fellow in bioethics at Georgetown and Johns
Hopkins Universities.

Dr. Bloche said in an interview that the use of health professionals in devising
abusive interrogation strategies was unethical and led to their involvement in
violations of international law. Dr. Winkenwerder said on Thursday that the
article was ''an outrageous distortion'' of the medical situation at Guantanamo,
according to Reuters news agency.

The article also challenges assertions of military authorities that they have
generally maintained the confidentiality of medical records.

The Winkenwerder guidelines make it clear that detainees should have no
expectation of privacy, but that medical records may be shared with people who
are not in a medical provider relationship with the detainee only under strict
circumstances.

Dr. Bloche said such an assertion was contrary to what he had discovered in his
research. It is also in conflict with accounts of former interrogators who
previously told The Times that they were free to examine any detainee's medical
files. After April 2003, when Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld tightened
rules on detainee treatment, one interrogator said the records had to be
obtained through biscuit team doctors who always obliged.

The former interrogator said the biscuit team doctors usually observed
interrogations from behind a one-way mirror, but sometimes were also in the room
with the detainee and interrogator.

                             --------------------


U.N. Inquiry on Guantanamo

  (By The New York Times) UNITED NATIONS, June 23 -- A four-member team of
United Nations human rights experts accused the United States on Thursday of
stalling on requests over the past three years to visit detainees at Guantanamo
and said it would begin its own investigation without American assistance.

''Such requests were based on information from reliable sources of serious
allegations of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees,
arbitrary detention, violations of their right to health and their due process
rights,'' the four, all independent authorities who serve the United Nations as
fact-finders on rights abuses, said in a statement.

Pierre-Richard Prosper, the United States ambassador for war crimes, said the
United States had been unable to meet the fact-finders' deadline to answer its
request but intended to keep the matter open.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (91%); MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (91%); MENTAL HEALTH (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); BEHAVIOR & COGNITION (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); MILITARY BASES (79%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); PRISONS
(78%); MEDICAL RECORDS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PSYCHIATRY (78%); MEDICAL
ETHICS (78%); PHOBIAS (77%); MENTAL ILLNESS (77%); HUMAN SUBJECTS (76%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (76%); NAVIES (74%); WRITERS (72%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%)
Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights; Ethics;
Medicine and Health; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE (82%) New England Journal of
Medicine

PERSON: Neil A Lewis; Bryan G (Dep) Whitman

STATE: NORTHEAST USA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             404 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogating Ourselves

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 239 words



I suspect that we Americans may not be as conflicted about ''torture lite'' as
your writer may imagine. When we feel threatened by enemies and/or criminals, we
have little problem striking a moral balance on the leeway granted to the police
and the military in these areas.

The actual rules are usually unspoken: we expect those on the front line to take
the necessary steps to protect us while maintaining community standards of human
decency and respect.

Today, it is more important to regulate the selection, training and oversight of
interrogators than to codify their specific interrogation tactics. Videotaping
and basic standards are useful, but our primary interest is ensuring that
interrogators are fair-minded, balanced individuals who know how and when to use
a variety of interrogation methods appropriately. We want to trust them to
represent our values and not resort to excessive violence and abuse. The
allegations at Abu Ghraib are alarming not simply because torture tactics were
used against Iraqi detainees per se but because of the perception that the
torturers were out of control, capricious and abusive without warrant.

The problem is that we are rapidly losing trust in our government's moral
compass on human rights. Denials and dissembling evasions of accountability hint
at corrupt or incompetent leadership. And that is the real unsettling feeling we
are reluctant to admit.

Robert Blount-Lyon
Chatham, N.J.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
CORRUPTION (77%) Freedom and Human Rights; Public Opinion

PERSON: robert blount-lyon

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (53%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             406 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Doctors' Conduct at Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 181 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Interrogators Cite Doctors' Aid at Guantanamo'' (front page, June 24):

The Pentagon claims that new guidelines preserve an ethical role for health
personnel in interrogations. In fact, rather than simply adopting
well-established standards set by the major medical associations (including the
American Medical Association) and the United Nations, Pentagon officials have
revised them.

They have introduced specious distinctions that permit health professionals to
take part in coercive interrogations, to open medical files to interrogators and
even to be present during abusive interrogations, all of which are prohibited
under universally accepted standards.

This approach follows the Bush administration's response to the Geneva
Conventions, the Convention Against Torture and United States criminal laws
against torture: if existing standards and law become an inconvenience to
coercive interrogation, it reinterprets and rewrites them, and then claims to
abide by them.

Leonard S. Rubenstein
Executive Director
Physicians for Human Rights
Washington, June 24, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LAW OF WAR (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS (87%); TORTURE (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CRIMINAL LAW
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);
PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             414 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

We'll Win This War -- On '24'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1831 words


DOES anyone still remember the war on terror? Tonight it is lobbed back onto the
TV screen like a hand grenade with the new season of ''24,'' Fox's
all-cliffhangers, all-the-time series about Jack Bauer, the relentless American
intelligence agent played by Kiefer Sutherland. You will find no plot surprises
divulged here. But tune in, and you'll return, not necessarily nostalgically, to
the do-or-die post-9/11 battle that has been all but forgotten as we remain
trapped in its nominally connected sequel, the war against Saddam Hussein.

This show is having none of President Bush's notion that Iraq is ''the central
front in the war on terror.'' In ''24,'' the central front of that war is the
American home front, not Mosul. ''We weren't thinking of the war in Iraq when we
came up with this story,'' said Joel Surnow, the show's co-creator, when I spoke
with him last week. On ''24,'' they're thinking about Islamic terrorism instead
of Baathist insurgents, about homeland security instead of the prospects for an
election in the Sunni triangle.

In the America of ''24,'' as in the real one, government bureaucrats are busier
fighting each other than Al Qaeda. Trains are unprotected from terrorists, and
so is the Internet. The handsome Turkish family next door in sun-dappled
Southern California is a sleeper cell the F.B.I. didn't find. The secretary of
defense must not only contend with terrorists but also with a glib antiwar son
who, in his view, has succumbed to ''sixth-grade Michael Moore logic.'' Dad,
amusingly enough, is played by William Devane, the actor who first became famous
30 years ago impersonating John F. Kennedy in a television drama (''The Missiles
of October'') about a colder war where the battle lines were clearly drawn.

In its own way, ''24'' is as provocative as a Moore manifesto. It shows but does
not moralize about the use of abuse and torture by Americans interrogating
terrorists; the results cut both ways in the four hours of the season I've seen,
and there's a hint, as vibrant as an orange jumpsuit, that American criminality
at Guantanamo may guarantee ugly payback in the O.C. as well as in the Middle
East. The Council on American-Islamic Relations, meanwhile, has already
protested this season's portrayal of Muslims. Though Mr. Surnow says that later
episodes will include positive Muslim characters, he makes no apologies for
focusing on the bad guys (and one very bad woman, played by the Iranian actress
Shohreh Aghdashloo, of ''The House of Sand and Fog''). He regrets that he
''pulled punches'' a couple of seasons back by using generic terrorists of murky
provenance with indefinable accents. ''This year we deal with it,'' he says.
''This is what we fear -- Islamic terrorism. This is what we are fighting.''

Richard Clarke, the former American counterterrorism chief who once helped lead
that fight, has yet to catch up with ''24.'' But in coincidental tandem with its
premiere, he is giving it some competition: for the cover of the
January-February issue of The Atlantic Monthly, he has written his own
distressing piece of fiction about the war he feels has been sabotaged if not
lost by mismanagement, complacency and the squandering of resources in Iraq.

Titled ''Ten Years Later,'' it takes the form of a 10th-anniversary 9/11 lecture
given by Professor Roger McBride at the Kennedy School of Government. This
professor, like Jack in ''24,'' does not buy into what Jonathan Raban, writing
in The New York Review of Books, calls ''the pretense of fighting terrorists
abroad to prevent them from attacking us at home.'' As McBride looks back at our
decade from the vantage point of 2011, he finds that we have prevented little by
fighting in Iraq. He sees an America that has endured horrors at home strikingly
similar to those on Fox's show: assaults on rail transportation, a computer
virus that wipes out the nation's cyber infrastructure, the rise of ''Al Qaeda
of North America'' and the panicky instigation of new Patriot Acts that remake
America into Philip Roth's nightmare of a fascistic Lindbergh presidency.

This fictional lecture is heavily footnoted with actual sources and hard,
detailed information about our current security shortfalls. The reader learns
that Mr. Clarke is not indulging in idle fantasy when he speculates that the
next terrorist assault on American economic might is less likely to involve
airplanes and financial district skyscrapers than backpacks and Winnebagos
wreaking havoc at the Mouseworld theme park in Florida, the Lion's Grand casino
in Las Vegas and the Mall of the States in Minnesota. But why would Mr. Clarke
choose fiction as a vehicle for this dark, fact-based scenario?

''In both the Clinton and Bush administrations, the only time I was really
effective in getting senior officers to pay attention was when I had tabletop
war games,'' he said in an interview. ''That did more than any briefing paper I
might write.'' Few critics of the American fight against terrorism, both before
and since 9/11, have had more of a public forum than Mr. Clarke, who gave
dramatic, widely televised testimony before the 9/11 commission and published
one of 2004's biggest sellers, ''Against All Enemies.'' Yet he still feels, not
without reason, that his message has failed to land. ''On 9/11 my staff was
consoling me,'' he says. ''They said, 'You didn't stop it but at least
everything you wanted to get done will get done. It will just happen.' For a
while it did. Then it petered out. It's sad. We had the window of opportunity
and just didn't know how to use it.''

His next attempt to make himself heard will also be fiction: a novel steeped in
national security and foreign policy, scheduled to be published in October.
Though it may not have sex scenes -- ''it's one of those things I'm debating''
-- Mr. Clarke sees popular fiction, which can outsell nonfiction by several
multiples, as a way of reaching a still larger audience. He has also contributed
some ideas to the script of ''Dirty War,'' an HBO-BBC docudrama (to be shown
Jan. 24 on HBO) that ''24''-style portrays a self-satisfied British government
as woefully ill-equipped to either prevent or respond to Islamic terrorists'
detonation of a dirty bomb in central London.

''Pop culture is frequently ahead of where the news media are on these things,''
he says. And ahead of the government as well. Condoleezza Rice famously said in
2002, ''I don't think anybody could have predicted that these people would take
an airplane and slam it into the World Trade Center.'' As we've since learned
from several investigations, threat reports circulated within the American
government predicted such airplane scenarios repeatedly before 9/11; one 1998
threat specifically targeted the twin towers. But fiction had been there earlier
still. Mr. Clarke, like many others, cites the prescience of Tom Clancy's 1994
novel, ''Debt of Honor,'' in which a Boeing 747 is crashed into the Capitol by a
Japanese airman during a joint session of Congress, and the 1996 movie
''Executive Decision,'' in which Kurt Russell battles Islamic terrorists who
have seized control of another 747 so they can detonate a biological weapon in
Washington.

Mr. Clarke says that friends who have read early copies of his Atlantic piece
are e-mailing him to say, ''See, it's already happening.'' But in his view we've
hardly seen anything yet. ''Madrid -- 3/11 -- could happen today in any of our
major cities,'' he says. ''There was security for the trains going from
Washington to New York for the Republican National Convention, but what about
the rest of the year?'' Private security, he adds, is just as porous as
government security: ''When I go to an office building, I routinely sign in as
Benjamin Franklin and no one ever objects. I show them my driver's license,
which doesn't say 'Benjamin Franklin,' and they don't care.''

Care must begin at the top, of course. In retrospect, Bernie Kerik's short-lived
nomination as the new homeland security czar -- ''mind-blowing,'' as Mr. Clarke
puts it -- shows just how little concern there is. If homeland security were a
top priority for the White House, someone would have discovered that the man
selected to run the most sprawling new federal bureaucracy since the Defense
Department in 1947 could not even manage his own personal finances, let alone
his sex life. Were homeland security still a top priority for the country, the
Kerik implosion might have whipped up some of the public outcry once sparked by
the whistle-blowing F.B.I. agent Coleen Rowley (who quietly retired last month).
But like duct tape and color-coded terror alerts before it, the Kerik nomination
instead turned instantly into a Leno-Letterman gag that allowed us to dispel any
lingering 9/11 fears with laughter.

Lost amid all those yuks was the full weight of last month's farewell confession
of defeat by Tommy Thompson, the outgoing secretary of health and human
services: ''I, for the life of me, cannot understand why terrorists have not,
you know, attacked our food supply, because it is so easy to do.'' He was
followed out the administration's door in December by the Homeland Security
Department's inspector general, Clark Kent Ervin (an actual official, despite
his semifictional name), a Bush appointee whose history with the president goes
back to the governor's office in Texas. Asked by Mimi Hall of USA Today what was
wrong with his department, he replied, ''It's difficult to figure out where to
start,'' then described a dysfunctional agency that has failed to plug most
holes in the nation's security net but has succeeded triumphantly in wasting
taxpayers' money on bonuses and perks. His specific complaints overlap and
confirm those in Mr. Clarke's ''fiction'' for The Atlantic.

But Mr. Ervin's final shots were barely noticed in the merriment that followed
revelations of Mr. Kerik's ground zero love nest. He may now elucidate them
further in a planned book, but you have to wonder if even best-selling
nonfiction books written with the you-are-there zing of popular fiction -- a
description that fits both ''Against All Enemies'' and ''The 9/11 Commission
Report'' -- can wake up a country that has been so successfully distracted from
the war initially declared after 9/11. As Mr. Clarke's Professor McBride says,
''The several years without an attack on U.S. soil lulled some Americans into
thinking that the war on terror was taking place only overseas.'' According to a
roundup by the political newsletter Hotline, when some 20 Washington pundits
made year-end talk-show predictions for the year to come, only one (Evan Thomas
of Newsweek) foresaw the possibility of a domestic terrorist attack.

By common consent, 2004 was the year that Jon Stewart's fake news became more
reliable for many viewers than real news. As 2005 begins, we must confront the
prospect that a fictional TV action hero is more engaged with the war on terror
than those in Washington who actually have his job.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: William Devane as the secretary of defense, and Kim Raver as his
daughter, confronting terrorists in Los Angeles on ''24.'' (Photo by Mitch
Haaseth/Fox)(pg. 22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); ACTORS &
ACTRESSES (89%); RELIGION (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); TELEVISION DRAMAS
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); IRAQ
WAR (78%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (66%); TORTURE (60%) Terrorism; Freedom and
Human Rights; Television; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: KIEFER SUTHERLAND (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); FRANK RICH (59%); GEORGE
W BUSH (58%); MICHAEL GRADE (58%) Frank Rich

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (54%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (92%); TURKEY (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             439 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Speech Misheard Round the World

BYLINE: By Orlando Patterson.

Orlando Patterson, a professor of sociology at Harvard, is the author of
''Freedom in the Making of Western Culture'' and a forthcoming book on the
meaning of freedom in the United States.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


SINCE 9/11, President Bush and his advisers have engaged in a series of
arguments concerning the relation between freedom, tyranny and terrorism. The
president's inaugural paean to freedom was the culmination of these arguments.

The stratagem began immediately after 9/11 with the president's claims that the
terrorist attacks were a deliberate assault on America's freedom. The next stage
of the argument came after no weapons of mass destruction were found in Iraq,
thus eliminating the reason for the war, and it took the form of a bogus
syllogism: all terrorists are tyrants who hate freedom. Saddam Hussein is a
tyrant who hates freedom. Therefore Saddam Hussein is a terrorist whose downfall
was a victory in the war against terrorism.

When this bogus syllogism began to lose public appeal, it was shored up with
another flawed argument that was repeated during the campaign: tyranny breeds
terrorism. Freedom is opposed to tyranny. Therefore the promotion of freedom is
the best means of fighting terrorism.

Promoting freedom, of course, is a noble and highly desirable pursuit. If
America were to make the global diffusion of freedom a central pillar of its
foreign policy, it would be cause for joy. The way the present administration
has gone about this task, however, is likely to have the opposite effect.
Moreover, what the president means by freedom may get lost in translation to the
rest of the world.

The administration's notion of freedom has been especially convenient, and its
promotion of it especially cynical. In the first place, there is no evidence to
support, and no good reason to believe, that Al Qaeda's attack on America was
primarily motivated by a hatred of freedom. Osama bin Laden is clearly no lover
of freedom, but this is an irrelevance. The attack on America was motivated by
religious and cultural fanaticism.

Second, while it may be implicitly true that all terrorists are tyrants, it does
not follow that all tyrants are terrorists. The United States, of all nations,
should know this. Over the past century it has supported a succession of
tyrannical states with murderous records of oppression against their own people,
none of which were terrorist states -- Argentina and Brazil under military rule,
Augusto Pinochet's Chile, South Africa under apartheid, to list but a few.
Today, one of America's closest allies in the fight against tyranny is
tyrannical Pakistan, and one of its biggest trading partners is the
authoritarian Communist regime of China.

Third, while the goal of promoting democracy is laudable, there is no evidence
that free states are less likely to breed terrorists. Sadly, the very freedoms
guaranteed under the rule of law are likely to shelter terrorists, especially
within states making the transition from authoritarian to democratic rule.
Transitional democratic states, like Russia today, are more violent than the
authoritarian ones they replaced.

And even advanced democratic regimes have been known to breed terrorists, the
best example being the United States itself. For more than half a century a
terrorist organization, the Ku Klux Klan, flourished in this country. According
to the F.B.I., three of every four terrorist acts in the United States from 1980
to 2000 were committed by Americans.

The president speaks eloquently and no doubt sincerely of freedom both abroad
and at home. But it is plain for the world to see that there is a discrepancy
between his words and his actions.

He claims that freedom must be chosen and defended by citizens, yet his
administration is in the process of imposing democracy at the point of a gun in
Iraq. At home, he seeks to ''make our society more prosperous and just and
equal,'' yet during his first term there has been a great redistribution of
income from working people to the wealthy as well as declining real income and
job security for many Americans. Furthermore, he has presided over the erosion
of civil liberties stemming from the Patriot Act.

Is this pure hypocrisy -- or is there another explanation for the discrepancy,
and for Mr. Bush's perplexing sincerity? There is no gainsaying an element of
hypocrisy here. But it is perhaps no greater than usual in speeches of this
nature. The problem is that what the president means by freedom, and what the
world hears when he says it, are not the same.

In the 20th century two versions of freedom emerged in America. The modern
liberal version emphasizes civil liberties, political participation and social
justice. It is the version formally extolled by the federal government, debated
by philosophers and taught in schools; it still informs the American judicial
system. And it is the version most treasured by foreigners who struggle for
freedom in their own countries.

But most ordinary Americans view freedom in quite different terms. In their
minds, freedom has been radically privatized. Its most striking feature is what
is left out: politics, civic participation and the celebration of traditional
rights, for instance. Freedom is largely a personal matter having to do with
relations with others and success in the world.

Freedom, in this conception, means doing what one wants and getting one's way.
It is measured in terms of one's independence and autonomy, on the one hand, and
one's influence and power, on the other. It is experienced most powerfully in
mobility -- both socioeconomic and geographic.

In many ways this is the triumph of the classic 19th-century version of freedom,
the version that philosophers and historians preached but society never quite
achieved. This 19th-century freedom must now coexist with the more modern
version of freedom. It does so by acknowledging the latter but not necessarily
including it.

It is not that Americans have rejected the formal model of freedom -- ask any
American if he believes in democracy and a free press and he will genuinely
endorse both. Rather it is that such abstract notions of freedom are far removed
from their notion of what freedom means and how it is experienced.

The genius of President Bush is that he has acquired an exquisite grasp of this
development in American political culture, and he can play both versions of
freedom to his advantage. Because he so easily empathizes with the ordinary
American's privatized view of freedom, the president was relatively immune from
criticism that he disregarded more traditional measures of freedom like civil
liberties. In the privatized conception of freedom that he and his followers
share, the abuses of the Patriot Act play little or no part. (There are times,
of course, when the president must voice support for the modern liberal version
of freedom. The inaugural is such a day, ''prescribed by law and marked by
ceremony,'' as he ruefully noted.)

Yet while these inconsistencies may not bother the president's followers or harm
his standing in America, they matter to the rest of the world. Few foreigners
are even aware of America's hybrid conception of freedom, much less accepting of
it. In most of the rest of the world, the president's inaugural address was
heard merely as hypocrisy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (73%);
GLOBALIZATION (71%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); MILITARY
RULE (65%); RELIGION (50%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Inaugurations;
United States International Relations; World Trade Center (NYC); Airlines and
Airplanes; Terrorism; Hijacking; Pentagon Building

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) Orlando
(Prof) Patterson; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (92%); BRAZIL (79%); ARGENTINA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); CHILE (79%)

REGION: Iraq; New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             441 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A.C.L.U. Presents Accusations of Serious Abuse of Iraqi Civilians

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ: DETAINEES; Pg.
10

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


The American Civil Liberties Union released documents on Monday describing
complaints of serious abuse of Iraqi civilians, including reports of electric
shocks and forced sodomy, and accused the military of not thoroughly
investigating the cases.

The documents list dozens of allegations of abuse at American detention centers
-- the use of cigarettes to burn prisoners, aggressive dogs, electric shocks,
sexual humiliation and beatings -- that began at about the same time such acts
were occurring at Abu Ghraib prison.

But it is not always clear whether every case described is a new incident; many
details, including the names of victims and of the accused, were blacked out
before the documents were provided to the A.C.L.U. as part of its litigation.

Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer for the organization, said gaps in the files made it
difficult to draw any definite conclusions about a particular case. ''But
overall there does seem to be a clear pattern here, and that is that it is
difficult to say the government was aggressive in investigating these
allegations of abuse,'' he said.

Lt. Col. Pamela Hart, an Army spokeswoman, declined to discuss any particular
case mentioned in the documents. But she said, ''The Army has aggressively
investigated all credible allegations of detainee abuse and we've held soldiers
accountable for their actions.''

The documents list several sites where abuses are reported to have taken place,
many of them at the detention center at Adhamiya Palace, one of Saddam Hussein's
villas in Baghdad. The documents contain allegations from detainees about being
abused and statements from American contractors who said they saw the effects of
beatings.

In one case, a detainee said that while at Adhamiya Palace, his nose was pinched
while water was poured down his throat, a wooden stick was inserted forcefully
into his anus and electric shock was applied to his genitals. Some of the
allegations were directed against Iraqi policemen. One contractor who said he
was assigned to screen detainees brought to Abu Ghraib said that many who had
come from Adhamiya arrived with serious injuries, including one boy with a
bleeding rectum. He said the boy had told him that an Iraqi policeman had
sodomized him with a soda bottle and that American soldiers were present.

Most of the previously undisclosed allegations concern the early months of last
year, while some are said to have occurred as recently as July. The more than
4,000 pages of documents were released by the Army in response to a lawsuit
brought by the American Civil Liberties Union and other groups that have accused
American forces of serious abuse, even torture, in treating detainees.

The new documents show that some allegations of assault were investigated and
soldiers were disciplined. Mr. Jaffer, of the A.C.L.U., said that in the more
than 50 cases mentioned, military investigators had ruled in all but a few that
there was insufficient evidence to proceed.

The new accusations generally concern the behavior of American Special Forces,
as opposed to prison guards or interrogators, who have been accused at Abu
Ghraib.

The files released on Monday concerned only cases that had been resolved by
military investigators; there may be other cases still under investigation.

Colonel Hart said that more than 300 criminal investigators had looked into
accusations of mistreatment of detainees and that more than 100 military members
had been disciplined. ''The Army's record of investigating detainee abuse
continues to be thorough and fair,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); CORRECTIONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); SMOKING (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); DOGS (71%);
TERRORISM (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Suits and Litigation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%) American Civil Liberties
Union

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Neil A Lewis

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             447 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

21st-Century Slavery

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 98 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's column about the shameful sex trafficking in Asia (''After
the Brothel,'' Jan. 26) was compelling.

I am curious, however, about his calling for us to become involved in solving
the problem -- as 19th-century Americans did when they helped to end slavery in
our own country.

Ending slavery that existed on our own soil is one thing. But can we really
expect America to solve this problem all over the world?

I am a liberal Democrat, but the idea of spreading freedom around the globe
seems a little too idealistic.

Lauren Rosenblum
Washington
Jan. 26, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LIBERALISM
(88%); SEX TRAFFICKING (88%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (51%) Prostitution; United States
International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Slavery

PERSON: Lauren Rosenblum; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); ASIA (88%); THAILAND (79%)

REGION: Cambodia; Thailand

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Defying Threats, Millions of Iraqis Flock to Polls

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS; Reporting for this article was contributed by John F.
Burns from Baghdad, James Glanz from Basra, Edward Wong from Najaf, and
Christine Hauser from Mosul.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE IRAQI ELECTION: ELECTION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1826 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 30


Defying death threats, mortars and suicide bombers, Iraqis turned out in great
numbers on Sunday to vote in this country's first free elections in 50 years,
offering a powerful, if uneven, endorsement of democratic rule 22 months after
Saddam Hussein was overthrown.

Voters in Shiite and Kurdish areas turned out in especially large numbers, and
at the day's end election officials here estimated that the nationwide turnout
could exceed 60 percent. The turnout in the Sunni-dominated areas like Falluja
and Mosul, where the guerrilla insurgency rages and where many Sunni leaders had
called for a boycott, appeared to be substantially lower.

Still, election officials said voting in the Sunni-dominated provinces had
appeared to exceed initial expectations, and in some cases might reach 40
percent. In Mosul, a Sunni-majority city and the scene of heavy fighting in
recent weeks, Western reporters saw voters in Sunni neighborhoods lined up
outside polling stations.

It was unclear how the results would affect Sunni resentment, one of the most
daunting challenges to Iraq's future.

In the Shiite-dominated cities of southern Iraq, and through much of Baghdad,
Iraqis streamed to polling places, eager to give the country's largest group
real political power for the first time. They did so despite relentless
insurgent attacks that left 44 people dead, including nine suicide bombers.

In some polling centers, the mood turned joyous, with Iraqis celebrating their
newfound democratic freedoms in street parties that, until the elections, were
virtually unknown in this war-ravaged land.

As the sun went down, some Iraqis ran to the polling centers. Some election
workers kept polls open late for them.

Election officials here said that a more accurate picture of the turnout would
be known later in the week, as the votes were counted, and that the election
results themselves were probably several days away.

Voters chose from among 111 parties for members of provincial parliaments as
well as a 275-member national assembly, which will be empowered to write the
country's constitution. That is scheduled to be followed by a referendum on the
constitution, followed by another round of elections in December.

One group of candidates that appeared to do well was the United Iraqi Alliance,
a large coalition of Shiite parties brought together by Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani, the country's powerful religious leader. One senior aide in that
alliance said the party had been told by American and British officials that it
appeared to have captured more than 50 percent of the vote.

The slate of candidates led by Ayad Allawi, the prime minister, also appeared to
have done well.

At least for now, the large turnout appeared to vindicate the strategy to hold
elections sooner rather than later, over the objections of many Sunni leaders
and in the face of the ferocious insurgency. That strategy, advocated by
Ayatollah Sistani and President Bush, drew criticism that it would further
divide the country and that, in any case, the Iraqis were not ready.

In polling places throughout the country, ordinary Iraqis not only braved
significant violence to go to the polls, but also demonstrated that they
understood the stakes, and that they knew what to do.

''We feel now that we are human beings living in this country,'' Muhammad
Abdul-Ridha, 25, a Najaf goldsmith, said after dropping his ballot into the box.
''Now I feel I have a responsibility, I have a vote. Things will go right if
people leave us alone to do what we want to do. If they leave the Iraqi people
to decide for themselves, things will get better.''

The mood among many Iraqi leaders, and those who set up the electoral
infrastructure, was jubilant. Some said the success of the vote, in a nation so
traumatized by tyranny and war, had put to rest any notion that the Iraqi
people, or indeed the Arab world as a whole, were incapable of grasping their
political destiny.

''We have established the principles upon which a democracy can be built,'' said
Fareed Ayar, the spokesman for Iraq's electoral commission.

In many parts of the country, the turnout seemed to rebuke the violent campaign
to sabotage the balloting and the threats by insurgents to kill Iraqis who
voted.

With vehicular traffic banned and American and Iraqi forces imposing especially
tight security, the attacks on Sunday were carried out in some cases by men
wearing explosive vests who rushed polling centers and blew themselves up.

In the Shiite and Kurdish areas, the strategy clearly failed. In Shiite
neighborhoods in Baghdad, including Sadr City, many Iraqis cast their ballots to
the sounds of exploding shells.

In some cases, the violence seemed to goad the Iraqis on. In the predominantly
Shiite neighborhood of Khadamiya in northern Baghdad, where nearly 100 people
were killed in a terror attacks last year, the turnout was said to approach 80
percent.

In the Sunni areas, the picture was mixed. With most Sunni leaders calling for a
boycott and the insurgents vowing to kill voters, officials said they were
expecting a low turnout in the three Iraqi provinces where the Sunnis are a
majority.

For Iraqi and American officials, the prospect of a broad Sunni boycott has
proved to be the most troubling aspect of the elections. The fear has been that
a big turnout by Shiites and Kurds, coupled with a near-total Sunni boycott,
could accelerate the feeling of alienation felt by Sunnis and set the stage here
for civil war.

On the other hand, a substantial turnout in the Sunni areas would be regarded as
a huge blow to the insurgents, who claim popular support but often rely on
threats and violence to cow Sunnis.

The dire predictions appeared to be borne out in some areas of the Sunni
Triangle, the area north and west of Baghdad where the insurgency burns with the
greatest intensity. In the town of Baji in northern Iraq, election officials did
not show up. In Ramadi, where Iraqi officials set up a pair of polling places
just outside the city, a total of just 300 ballots were cast, many of them by
police officers and soldiers.

But Iraqi and American officials, convinced that people in the Sunni areas would
vote if they could, said there were signs that more voters than expected had
turned out.

In the weeks leading up to the vote, election officials took several
extraordinary measures to make voting easier in Sunni areas. They allowed voters
in some of those areas to register on election day, and permitted voters to
travel outside their neighborhoods to cast ballots. In some of the smaller
villages around Ramadi, where many city residents were encouraged to vote,
election workers reported that they had run out of ballots. In the refugee camps
outside Falluja, set up after heavy fighting there in November, Iraqi officials
reported steady voting.

''In Anbar, the number of votes were very good compared to our estimates,'' Mr.
Ayar, the election commission spokesman, said of that province, without telling
what those estimates were. ''We did not expect a lot of turnout, but we found a
lot of people standing in line in Anbar.''

Adnan Pachachi, the former Iraqi foreign minister and one of the country's most
prominent Sunni candidates, said his own reports suggested that participation by
Sunnis might have reached as high as 40 percent. If that holds, he said, it
would amount to a repudiation of the violent way.

''The insurgency has been exposed -- they have no popular support of any kind,''
Mr. Pachachi said. ''I think this election will weaken the insurgency.''

But in Mosul, a Sunni-majority city and the country's third largest, the reports
were mixed and contradictory. Some officials reported lines of voters stretching
outside polling places in the city's Arab districts, with others saying the
insurgents were managing to keep voters away.

In November, more than 4,000 police officers in Mosul fled their posts when they
were attacked by insurgents, and earlier this month, the city's entire election
commission resigned.

Yet for all of that, there were some signs that Sunnis in Mosul were turning out
to vote. Western reporters returning from American military patrols in the
city's Arab neighborhoods reported seeing lines of voters streaming into polling
places.

Mr. Ayar said initial reports suggested that the turnout in Mosul appeared to
mirror that in Anbar Province -- that it was much was higher than expected.

Still, there were troubling signs that in some pockets of Mosul's Arab
districts, the insurgents were successfully keeping voters away.

''Young gunmen are shooting from the streets and on the rooftops just to scare
people away,'' said Khasro Goran, Mosul's deputy governor. ''There is an imam
who called from the mosque for people not to vote.''

Even if the most optimistic projections for Sunni turnout are met, the biggest
challenge likely to face the new government will be persuading the Sunnis to
join the political mainstream.

On Sunday, some of Iraq's most prominent Shiite leaders said they were prepared
to boost Sunni representation in the new government. They said they would also
recruit a number of Sunni leaders to help draft the country's constitution.

In the days leading up the election, some Sunni leaders, including those
believed to be close to the insurgents, have indicated a willingness to join in
the effort.

''The Shiites will form of a majority, but there has to be a prominent presence
of Sunnis in the government,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, Iraq's national security
adviser and a confidant of Ayatollah Sistani. ''Now is the time for the Shiites
to exercise statesmanship.''

In many ways, the day belonged to Iraq's Shiites, the long-suppressed majority
that suffered especially harsh treatment under Mr. Hussein. In Shiite cities
across southern Iraq, the voters streamed forth, thrilling themselves and
confounding their own predictions.

In Basra, the country's second-largest, predominantly Shiite city, one explosion
after another echoed down the streets. Even so, as the day wore on, the number
of voters swelled, and local officials began to appear to congratulate the
Iraqis and themselves.

Abdul Sahib Al-Battat, the local elections chief, swept into the polling center
at the Black Gold primary school, with a full entourage in tow. One by one, he
inspected the voting stations with a military crispness.

Asked how the day had gone, Mr. Battat said in Arabic: ''Bekhair. Gebeer.
Bekhair. Shamel.'' Roughly translated: ''Excellent. Big. Excellent. All of it.''

Some Iraqis found in Sunday's election a victory that may ultimately loom larger
than that of April 9, 2003, when Mr. Hussein's rule collapsed. The victory then
was largely of American making, and one that, despite their relief that the
tyrant was gone, many Iraqis felt they could never build on.

''The election was a victory of our own making,'' said Mr. Rubaie, the security
adviser. ''Today, the Iraqi people voted with their own blood.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An Iraqi voter cast her ballot in a classroom used as a polling
station in the Karada neighborhood of Baghdad, the capital. The mood turned
joyous at many of the polling stations. (Photo by Joao Silva for The New York
Times)(pg. A10)
BAGHDAD -- A man with his daughter on his shoulders at a polling place at a
school. Her sign read: Peace Iraq. (Photo by Joao Silva for The New York Times)
KIRKUK -- His gun ready for trouble, an Iraqi policeman rode past lines of
voters outside a polling station. (Photo by Lynsey Addario for The New York
Times)
RAMADI -- A lone voter studied the complex ballot before marking his choice. In
some places, turnout was light.
NAJAF -- Women proudly showed their fingers, marked with ink by election
workers, after casting ballots. (Photo by Max Becherer/Polaris, for The New York
Times)
 Villagers, watched by soldiers, walked to a polling station in Anbar Province,
a Sunni area where turnout was higher than expected. (Photo by Erik de
Castro/Reuters)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(90%); POLITICS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); REFERENDUMS (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
BOYCOTTS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); RELIGION (72%) Elections;
Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government; Legislatures and Parliaments;
Constitutions; Bombs and Explosives; Boycotts; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare;
Terrorism; Threats and Threatening Messages; Kurds

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) Dexter Filkins

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Falluja (Iraq); Mosul (Iraq); Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             453 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Acts Of Bravery

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 755 words


You'd have to be pretty hardhearted not to be moved by the courage of the
millions of Iraqis who insisted on turning out to vote yesterday despite the
very real threat that they would be walking into mayhem and violent death at the
polls.

At polling stations across the country there were women in veils holding the
hands of children, and men on crutches, and people who had been maimed during
the terrible years of Saddam, and old people. Among those lined up to vote in
Baghdad was Samir Hassan, a 32-year-old man who lost a leg in the blast of a car
bomb last year. He told a reporter, ''I would have crawled here if I had to.''

In a war with very few feel-good moments, yesterday's election would qualify as
one. But as with any positive development in Iraq, this one was riddled with
caveats. For one thing, dozens of people were, in fact, killed in election day
attacks. And shortly after the polls closed, a British military transport plane
crashed northwest of Baghdad.

So there was no respite from the carnage.

And we should keep in mind that despite the feelings of pride and accomplishment
experienced by so many of the voters, yesterday's election was hardly a textbook
example of democracy in action. A real democracy requires an informed
electorate. What we saw yesterday was an uncommonly brave electorate. But it was
woefully uninformed.

Much of the electorate was voting blind. Half or more of those who went to the
polls believed they were voting for a president. They weren't. They were
electing a transitional national assembly that will have as its primary task the
drafting of a constitution. The Washington Post noted that because of the
extreme violence that preceded the election ''almost none of the 7,700
candidates for the National Assembly campaigned publicly or even announced their
names.''

As John F. Burns put it in The Times yesterday:

''Half a dozen candidates have been assassinated. As a result, the names of all
others have not been made public; they were available in the last days of the
campaign on Web sites inaccessible to most Iraqis, few of whom own computers.''

''Democracy,'' according to ''The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World,''
''refers to a form of government in which, in contradistinction to monarchies
and aristocracies, the people rule.''

That is not the case in Iraq and is not likely to be the case soon. In much of
Iraq the people exist in a kind of hell on earth, at the mercy of American
forces on the one hand and a variety of enraged insurgents on the other. Despite
the pretty words coming out of the Bush administration, the goals of the U.S.
and the goals of most ordinary Iraqis are not, by a long stretch, the same.

The desire of the U.S., as embodied by the Bush administration, is to exercise
as much control as possible over the Middle East and its crucial oil reserves.
There is very little concern here about the plight of ordinary Iraqis, which is
why the horrendous casualties being suffered by Iraqi civilians, including women
and children, get so little attention.

What most ordinary Iraqis have been expressing, not surprisingly, is a desire
for a reasonably decent quality of life. They are a long way from that.

In large swaths of the country, death at the hands of insurgents seems always
just moments away. It's also extremely easy for innocent Iraqis to get blown
away by Americans. That can occur if drivers get too close -- or try to pass --
an American military convoy. Or if confusion arising from language barriers, or
ignorance of the rules, or just plain nervousness results in an unfortunate move
by a vehicle at a checkpoint. Or if someone objects too vociferously to
degrading treatment by U.S. forces. Or if someone is simply suspected, wrongly,
of being an insurgent.

Crime in many areas is completely out of control. Kidnapping for ransom,
including the kidnapping of children, is ubiquitous. Carjackings are
commonplace. Rape and murder are widespread.

In a country with the second-largest oil reserves in the world, drivers have to
wait in line for hours at a time for gasoline. Electric power is available just
a handful of hours a day. Unemployment rates are sky high. With many women
destitute, prostitution is a growth industry.

Iraqis may have voted yesterday. But they live in occupied territory, and the
occupiers have other things on their minds than the basic wishes of the Iraqi
people. That's not democracy. That's a recipe for more war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
VOTERS & VOTING (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICS
(88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); MEDIA VIOLENCE (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (73%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (67%); AIRCRAFT
ACCIDENTS (67%); ASSASSINATION (65%) Elections; Politics and Government; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and
Human Rights; Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline; Reserves (Natural Resources);
Terrorism

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (53%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (53%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (53%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (53%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (53%)

PERSON: Bob Herbert

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             457 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why Should We Shield The Killers?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 765 words


Two weeks ago, President Bush gave an impassioned speech to the world about the
need to stand for human freedom.

But this week, administration officials are skulking in the corridors of the
United Nations, trying desperately to block a prosecution of Sudanese officials
for crimes against humanity.

It's not that Mr. Bush sympathizes with the slaughter in Darfur. In fact, I take
my hat off to Mr. Bush for doing more than most other world leaders to address
ethnic cleansing there -- even if it's not nearly enough. Mr. Bush has certainly
done far more than Bill Clinton did during the Rwandan genocide.

But Mr. Bush's sympathy for Sudanese parents who are having their children
tossed into bonfires shrivels next to his hostility to the organization that the
U.N. wants to trust with the prosecution: the International Criminal Court.
Administration officials so despise the court that they have become, in effect,
the best hope of Sudanese officials seeking to avoid accountability for what Mr.
Bush himself has called genocide.

Mr. Bush's worry is that if the International Criminal Court is legitimized,
American officials could someday be dragged before it. The court's supporters
counter that safeguards make that impossible. Reasonable people can differ about
the court, but for Mr. Bush to put his ideological opposition to it over the
welfare of the 10,000 people still dying every month in Darfur -- that's just
madness.

The issue arises partly because the Bush administration, to its credit, pushed
the U.N. to investigate Darfur and to seek accountability for the killers. The
result was a U.N. commission's 176-page report, released this week, that
documents a series of crimes against humanity: people in Darfur crucified or
thrown into fires, victims having their eyes gouged out or being dragged on the
ground by camels, women and girls kept naked in rape camps, huts burned with
children inside, and women forced to hand over their baby sons to be killed.

''It is undeniable that mass killings occurred in Darfur and that the killings
were perpetrated by the government forces'' and by a government-sponsored
militia, the report said.

The U.N. commission then pulled its punches by concluding that Sudan had not
pursued a deliberate policy of genocide -- but it added: ''The crimes against
humanity and war crimes that have been committed in Darfur may be no less
serious and heinous than genocide.'' As a result, the commission ''strongly
recommends'' that the Security Council refer the matter to the International
Criminal Court for prosecution, saying that is ''the only credible way of
bringing alleged perpetrators to justice.''

At a practical level, it's also a way to pressure Sudan's leaders to stop a
campaign of terror in Darfur that has already claimed at least 218,000 lives,
according to a new British study.

Prosecution by the International Criminal Court has strong European support, but
the Bush administration is aghast and desperately suggests prosecution instead
by a court associated with the war crimes tribunal for Rwanda. Alas, that
tribunal could take another year and 120,000 more deaths to start a Darfur
prosecution.

''The I.C.C. could start tomorrow saving lives,'' said Kenneth Roth, the
executive director of Human Rights Watch. ''With the Rwanda tribunal route,
you're talking about another year of killing.''

The Bush administration is also struggling to find other Security Council
members who would join it in voting against the referral to the International
Criminal Court. I hope other countries stand firm, because my conversations with
diplomats suggest that if the U.S. stood alone in opposition, the Bush
administration would be too ashamed to exercise its veto and might abstain
instead.

Kofi Annan called this week for consideration of sanctions against Sudan, and
his voice as a leading African carries particular weight with that country's
leaders. So, Mr. Bush, what about you? Will you push harder for a coalition for
sanctions -- forcing China to veto them if it so chooses? Will you impose a
no-fly zone to stop Sudan's air force from strafing civilians?

After reading a report on Bill Clinton's passivity during the Rwandan genocide,
Mr. Bush scrawled in the margin: ''not on my watch.'' Now the Save Darfur
Coalition (www.savedarfur.org) has made green plastic bracelets reading, ''Not
on My Watch -- Save Darfur.'' Mr. Bush might wear one to his State of the Union
address tonight -- and find the courage not just to denounce evil, but also to
confront it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CHILDREN (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); WOMEN
(74%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) United
Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); BILL CLINTON (58%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             460 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 3, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nominee Says U.S. Agents Abused Power After 9/11

BYLINE: By ERIC LIPTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


After the Sept. 11 attacks, federal authorities acted at times in a ''wholly
unacceptable'' way, arresting immigrants on questionable tips, not always
providing speedy access to lawyers and, in certain cases, abusing the detainees,
the nominee for homeland security secretary acknowledged on Wednesday.

''I understand it was an emotional time,'' the nominee, Michael Chertoff, who
led the criminal division of the Justice Department at the time, said at his
Senate confirmation hearing. ''But training has to be in place so people
understand that you don't give in to emotions; people are being detained not to
be mistreated or punished.''

In the weeks after the attacks, Judge Chertoff was among the proponents of a
crackdown that swept hundreds of people into detention, an approach that he
vigorously defended in Congressional testimony at the time.

The admissions came on Wednesday during a three-and-a-half-hour hearing that
ended with clear signs that Judge Chertoff, who now sits the United States Court
of Appeals for the Third Circuit, would be confirmed, despite questions about
the treatment of detainees or his role in reviewing a Bush administration
memorandum related to torture.

Judge Chertoff carefully and calmly answered the questions presented to him
during a nonconfrontational hearing.

He did not repudiate the Justice Department detention policies he helped
establish. Instead he said the directives were not always carried out
appropriately.

''Dealing in a crisis, particularly an unexpected crisis, fashioning a response
with the tools that we have at hand, there are inevitably going to be
imperfections,'' he said. ''And the critical thing is to learn from things that
experience teaches us.''

The confirmation hearing served as an opportunity for members of the Senate
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee to survey the department's
shortcomings, including what they said was an irrational formula used to
distribute antiterrorism grants. They also cited insufficient progress at
protecting the nation's ports, transit systems, trains and food supply from
possible terrorist attacks. While complimenting Tom Ridge, who has stepped down
as secretary, they also called the Department of Homeland Security a
dysfunctional bureaucracy with little strategic vision.

Judge Chertoff said he would push to distribute homeland security grants based
on risk, instead of on population or even political formulas. He also said he
wanted to make information on drivers' licenses less vulnerable to forgery or
abuse and expressed a willingness to revise the department's color-coded system
of terror alerts.

The hearing was dominated by questions about Judge Chertoff's actions during his
tenure at the Department of Justice, where he served as assistant attorney
general, from June 2001 until June 2003. Judge Chertoff said that while the
arrests were made based on legitimate immigration violations, federal agents at
times might have detained immigrants based on questionable tips, held them in
jail for too long or even abused them -- accusations that were raised by a
Department of Justice inspector general.

Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, said after the hearing that he was
impressed with Judge Chertoff's willingness to acknowledge that mistakes were
made, but that he still had some questions about whether the judge knew about
the abuse of terrorism suspects detained at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Several civil liberties groups went further, saying that Judge Chertoff's
testimony was both incomplete and misleading.

''He made no apology to the hundreds of innocent people and their families who
were jailed simply because they were Arabs or Muslims,'' said Kate Martin, a
lawyer from the Center for National Security Studies, which sued the federal
government over the arrests after Sept. 11.

Judge Chertoff acknowledged that he had reviewed a 2002 memorandum detailing
interrogation methods for terror suspects. Using a refrain that he relied upon
frequently during his testimony, he said he could not recall if the version he
read suggested that pain would need to rise to a level that might cause ''injury
such as death, organ failure, or serious impairment of bodily functions'' before
it might be defined as torture.

Judge Chertoff said that in his review of the document, he declined to offer
advice on the propriety of any particular interrogation method.

''You are dealing in an area where there's potential criminal liability,'' he
said, recalling his advice.

The hearing ended with Senator Mark Dayton, a Democrat from Minnesota who had
asked some of the most pointed questions, announcing that he would support Judge
Chertoff's nomination. A committee vote is expected on Monday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); TERRORISM (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); ARRESTS (89%); REFUGEES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TORTURE (77%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%);
TESTIMONY (71%); APPEALS COURTS (52%); COUNTERFEITING (50%); DRIVERS LICENSES
(50%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Immigration and Refugees; Airlines
and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(83%) Homeland Security Department

PERSON: Eric Lipton; Michael (Judge) Chertoff

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             480 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Darfur's Babies of Rape Are on Trial From Birth

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1496 words

DATELINE: GENEINA, Sudan


Fatouma spends her days under the plastic tarp covering her tent, seated on a
straw mat, staring at the squirming creature in her arms.

She examines over and over again the perfectly formed fingers and toes, 10 of
each, and the tiny limbs, still curled in the form they took before leaving her
belly five days before, and now encircled with amulets to ward off evil.

Everything about this baby, the 16-year-old mother declared, is perfect. Almost
everything.

''She is a janjaweed,'' Fatouma said softly, referring to the fearsome Arab
militiamen who have terrorized this region. ''When people see her light skin and
her soft hair, they will know she is a janjaweed.''

Fatouma's child is among the scores of babies produced by one of the most
horrific aspects of the conflict in Darfur, the vast, arid region of western
Sudan: the use of rape against women and girls in a brutal battle over land and
ethnicity that has killed tens of thousands and driven 2 million people from
their homes.

Interviews with traditional midwives and aid organizations here indicated that
there are probably two dozen such babies just in Al Riyadh, the displaced
people's camp where Fatouma lives. It is one of scores of places where ethnic
Africans have fled in Darfur and eastern Chad from attacks by government forces
and their allied Arab militias.

A recent United Nations investigation into war crimes in Darfur laid out, in
page after graphic page, evidence of widespread and systematic rape in the
two-year conflict. In one incident, a woman in Wadi Tina was raped 14 times by
different men in January 2003. In March 2004, 150 soldiers and janjaweed
abducted and raped 16 girls in Kutum, the report said. In Kailek, it said girls
as young as 10 were raped by militants.

The fruit of these attacks is now being born in Darfur, and will inevitably
become a long-term legacy of the conflict. In a society where deep taboos
surrounding rape persist and identity is passed, according to Muslim tradition,
from father to child, the fate of these children and their mothers is uncertain.

''She will stay with us for now,'' Adoum Muhammad Abdulla, the sheik of
Fatouma's village, said of the days-old infant. ''We will treat her like our
own. But we will watch carefully when she grows up, to see if she becomes like a
janjaweed. If she behaves like janjaweed, she cannot stay among us.''

The fact that he and the new mothers call the children janjaweed, a local insult
that means ''devil on horseback,'' underscores just how bitter the division
between those who identify themselves as Africans and those who see themselves
as Arabs has become, and points to the potential difficulty of acceptance and
integration in the years ahead.

In a conflict that began over land but has been fueled by ethnic strife, these
children will carry a heavy burden. Long after the fighting ends, they will
endure as living reminders of war.

''To them, every Arab is a janjaweed,'' said one foreign health worker in
Geneina who has worked with rape victims. The worker insisted on anonymity
because the government has penalized aid organizations that speak out on the
topic. ''The hatred and animosity will be very difficult to overcome.''

Some women have reported that their attackers have used racial epithets and
declared that they wanted to make more Arab babies, leading some to conclude
that the use of rape is part of a campaign of ethnic cleansing. But the United
Nations investigation found that while rape was clearly being used to demoralize
and humiliate the population, it did not conclude that it was genocidal in
nature.

In Fatouma's case, the child she has borne marks her forever as a victim, and
may spoil her chances at marriage, at having more children, at having a normal
life if her family ever returns to its village, which was burned to the ground
by Arab militants more than a year ago.

For her daughter, who remained nameless until the seventh day after her birth,
as tradition here dictates, the future is even more uncertain.

''One day I hope I will be married,'' Fatouma said, casting her eyes down. ''I
hope I find a husband who will love me and my daughter.''

Like so many women and girls here, Fatouma's ordeal began with a trip out of the
relative safety of the displaced people's camp where she lives to search for
firewood. Many women earn money by gathering firewood to sell in the market,
which makes them vulnerable to attack by militants who roam freely around the
camps. ''The janjaweed chased us, but I couldn't run fast enough,'' Fatouma
said. ''They caught me, and they beat me.''

Five men held her captive overnight, she said, raping her repeatedly under a
tree. In the morning she ran away, stumbling into a nearby displaced people's
camp, where she spent the night, then found her way back to Al Riyadh.

''When my mother saw me, she cried and she said, 'Look how they beat you,'''

Fatouma said pointing to a dark scar below her right eye. She told her mother,
Tama, what had happened, though she herself was confused.

''They did bad things to me,'' she said, her eyes cast down. ''Very bad
things.''

A few months later she began to feel a strange pain. At first she tried to
ignore it, but as the swelling continued she started punching at the movement in
her belly with her fists. Tama, suspecting that her daughter was pregnant,
ordered her to stop, and took her to a health clinic. A test confirmed the
truth.

''I cried for a long time,'' Fatouma said.

From the next tent, Tama whispered to a visitor: ''She is so small. Look at what
they did to my daughter. She is just a child.''

When the labor pangs began Fatouma was wholly unprepared for the pain.

''I was so afraid, I thought I would die,'' Fatouma said.

After a night agony, a midwife placed a squirming baby girl in her arms.

Sudden motherhood has overwhelmed Fatouma. Her gray T-shirt was stained with
ragged concentric circles of breast milk, and she had trouble figuring out how
to feed and clean the infant.''I am very happy to be a mother,'' she said, after
a long afternoon of sitting in her tent, staring at her daughter. ''I will love
her with all my heart.''

But if her neighbors are any guide, Fatouma's prospects are dim. Ashta, a
30-year-old woman who lives on the other side of Al Riyadh camp, also spends her
days alone in a bare tent with her 2-month-old son, Faisal. She absentmindedly
rocks him, trying to quell his constant crying. He was born nine months after
Ashta was attacked by a group of militants.

''Faisal changed my life,'' Ashta said. ''Because of him I am sick. Because of
him my life is ruined.''

Ashta's husband, who has been in Libya for eight years, working as a cow herder,
has cast her off, abandoning her and their two children. She lives in a tent
next to her brother, who has taken her in.

She said she was raped as she fled her village, Bemiche. Two of her brothers
were killed in the attack, and as she wandered in the desert looking for water,
a group of bandits set upon her, she said.

One man ''beat me with sticks, and said if I tell anyone they would kill me,''
Ashta said.

She does not know what to make of the child she has borne. She has no
expectation of remarrying and stoically faces a long life of loneliness and
hardship.

''Without a man you cannot have anything in life,'' Ashta said. ''Your children
suffer. Now we don't even have a bed to sleep on. We have no future.''

Ashta's brother, Mohammad, said he refuses to blame his sister for what happened
to her, despite taboos about rape.

''It is not her fault,'' he said. ''She is a victim of war. We will take care of
the child. It is very difficult to love a janjaweed, but we will try to accept
him as our own.''

While a Sudanese government report on atrocities in Darfur acknowledges that
violence against women has taken place, Jamal Ibrahim, the Foreign Ministry
spokesman, said in an interview that accounts of rape in Darfur have been wildly
exaggerated.

''Human rights organizations and aid groups have to justify their work somehow,
so they make these fictions,'' Mr. Ibrahim said. ''If it has happened it is in
isolated cases. This kind of thing is not part of our culture.''

But in displaced people's camps, accounts of rape are common, and families
struggle to deal with the legacy of sexual violence.

Kaltouma Adam Mohammed, a traditional midwife who said she had has delivered
eight babies to women who were raped, said that while rape is traditionally seen
as a great shame on a family, in the context of this war families are more
likely to forgive and accept the mother and child.

''I tell them: 'Sometimes we feel like we have the janjaweed here with us, but
it is just a child. He doesn't know anything about this war. We cannot hate this
child,''' she said. ''We don't know what will happen when these children grow
up. If they are like their fathers, they must leave us. But we will try to love
them, to accept them. It is God's will that it be so.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: ''She is a janjaweed,'' Fatouma, 16, said of her daughter, who
she said was born after Fatouma was raped by an Arab militiaman. ''When people
see her light skin and her soft hair, they will know she is a janjaweed.''
(Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A10)
 Ashta, 30, with her 2-month-old son, Faisal, at Al Riyadh camp in Darfur. She
said Faisal was born nine months after she was raped by militants. (Photo by
Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A1)Map of Sudan highlighting Al
Riyadh camp: Al Riyadh camp houses two dozen babies conceived in rapes. (pg.
A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (76%);
WOMEN (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); DISPLACED PERSONS (73%); ETHNICITY (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%);
MIDWIVES (71%); GENOCIDE (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); INVESTIGATIONS
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (68%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (67%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (66%) Sex Crimes; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) United Nations

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (91%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             482 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture, American Style

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 739 words


Maher Arar is a 34-year-old native of Syria who emigrated to Canada as a
teenager. On Sept. 26, 2002, as he was returning from a family vacation in
Tunisia, he was seized by American authorities at Kennedy Airport in New York,
where he was in the process of changing planes.

Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen, was not charged with a crime. But, as Jane Mayer
tells us in a compelling and deeply disturbing article in the current issue of
The New Yorker, he ''was placed in handcuffs and leg irons by plainclothes
officials and transferred to an executive jet.''

In an instant, Mr. Arar was swept into an increasingly common nightmare,
courtesy of the United States of America. The plane that took off with him from
Kennedy ''flew to Washington, continued to Portland, Maine, stopped in Rome,
Italy, then landed in Amman, Jordan.''

Any rights Mr. Arar might have thought he had, either as a Canadian citizen or a
human being, had been left behind. At times during the trip, Mr. Arar heard the
pilots and crew identify themselves in radio communications as members of ''the
Special Removal Unit.'' He was being taken, on the orders of the U.S.
government, to Syria, where he would be tortured.

The title of Ms. Mayer's article is ''Outsourcing Torture.'' It's a detailed
account of the frightening and extremely secretive U.S. program known as
''extraordinary rendition.''

This is one of the great euphemisms of our time. Extraordinary rendition is the
name that's been given to the policy of seizing individuals without even the
semblance of due process and sending them off to be interrogated by regimes
known to practice torture. In terms of bad behavior, it stands side by side with
contract killings.

Our henchmen in places like Syria, Egypt, Morocco, Uzbekistan and Jordan are
torturing terror suspects at the behest of a nation -- the United States -- that
just went through a national election in which the issue of moral values was
supposed to have been decisive. How in the world did we become a country in
which gays' getting married is considered an abomination, but torture is O.K.?

As Ms. Mayer pointed out: ''Terrorism suspects in Europe, Africa, Asia and the
Middle East have often been abducted by hooded or masked American agents, then
forced onto a Gulfstream V jet, like the one described by Arar. . . . Upon
arriving in foreign countries, rendered suspects often vanish. Detainees are not
provided with lawyers, and many families are not informed of their
whereabouts.''

Mr. Arar was seized because his name had turned up on a watch list of terror
suspects. He was reported to have been a co-worker of a man in Canada whose
brother was a suspected terrorist.

''Although he initially tried to assert his innocence, he eventually confessed
to anything his tormentors wanted him to say,'' Ms. Mayer wrote.

The confession under torture was worthless. Syrian officials reported back to
the United States that they could find no links between Mr. Arar and terrorism.
He was released in October 2003 without ever being charged and is now back in
Canada.

Barbara Olshansky is the assistant legal director of the Center for
Constitutional Rights, which is representing Mr. Arar in a lawsuit against the
U.S. I asked her to describe Mr. Arar's physical and emotional state following
his release from custody.

She sounded shaken by the memory. ''He's not a big guy,'' she said. ''He had
lost more than 40 pounds. His pallor was terrible, and his eyes were sunken. He
looked like someone who was kind of dead inside.''

Any government that commits, condones, promotes or fosters torture is a
malignant force in the world. And those who refuse to raise their voices against
something as clearly evil as torture are enablers, if not collaborators.

There is a widespread but mistaken notion in the U.S. that everybody seized by
the government in its so-called war on terror is in fact somehow connected to
terrorist activity. That is just wildly wrong.

Tony Blair knows a little about that sort of thing. Just two days ago the
British prime minister formally apologized to 11 people who were wrongfully
convicted and imprisoned for bombings in England by the Irish Republican Army
three decades ago.

Jettisoning the rule of law to permit such acts of evil as kidnapping and
torture is not a defensible policy for a civilized nation. It's wrong. And
nothing good can come from it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORISM (89%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (85%); OUTSOURCING (77%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS
(77%); FAMILY (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ELECTIONS (69%) Terrorism; Torture; Kidnapping; Freedom and
Human Rights; Terrorism

PERSON: Bob Herbert

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (79%); ROME, ITALY (78%); PORTLAND, ME, USA (56%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); MAINE, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (95%); SYRIA (93%); TUNISIA (92%);
UZBEKISTAN (92%); MOROCCO (91%); JORDAN (90%); AFRICA (79%); ASIA (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%); ITALY (78%)

REGION: Syria; Egypt; Morocco; Uzbekistan; Jordan

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             487 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 14, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Hails Surrendered War-Crime Suspect

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 988 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Feb. 11


When a retired Serbian general, Vladimir Lazarevic, agreed to surrender to the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague last month, he was treated here
like a national hero.

Serbia's prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, described General Lazarevic's
decision as ''patriotic, highly moral and honorable.'' The leader of the Serbian
Orthodox Church gave him an audience and praised him as a defender of the
nation. When General Lazarevic eventually flew to The Hague, he was accompanied
by Serbia's justice minister.

The pomp surrounding the former general's surrender left a sour taste in the
mouth of rights groups. He is accused, as the commander of Yugoslav troops in
Kosovo in 1999, of overseeing the expulsion of 800,000 refugees and the killing
of at least 700 people. Government officials here, on the other hand,
characterized the surrender as the start of an era of cooperation with the
tribunal, paving the way toward better relations with the rest of the world.

Politicians in Serbia's coalition government said they expected an agreement
with the court by the end of the month on the fate of two other generals who had
been charged under the same indictment as General Lazarevic.

They say the treatment given to General Lazarevic and promised to the other
generals is the most effective way of securing their surrender for trial.

The spirit of the government's strategy may not match the principles set out by
the tribunal. But diplomats here said it was proof that the policy of the United
States and the European Union on the tribunal -- to threaten penalties against
countries that do not support the court -- was working.

The same policy has led Croatia's governing nationalist party to jettison its
opposition to the court and surrender all but one of its war crimes suspects in
the past year, a move that could help lead to negotiations on European Union
membership this spring.

While the surrenders of General Lazarevic and of another war crimes suspect in
October suggest that the government here is trying to emulate Croatia's example,
government ministers at federal and state levels -- Mr. Kostunica foremost among
them -- have said they will not consider a tougher approach and do not intend to
arrest any war crimes suspects by force.

At least 11 men wanted by The Hague tribunal are still believed to be at large
in Serbia or Montenegro, which is in a loose federation with Serbia, including
the court's two most wanted suspects, the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serbs,
Radovan Karadzic, and his military commander, Ratko Mladic.

The Serbian position stems from a decade of war as the former Yugoslavia split
apart, in which much of the world accused the Serbs of responsibility for the
bloodshed and the Serbs contended that they were only defending themselves from
other hostile groups.

But Serbia's current leadership understands that its reluctance to cooperate
with The Hague has had financial and political costs. Serbia is just now
undergoing a feasibility study by the European Union for membership, while
Bulgaria and Romania -- countries that most Serbs used to regard as their poorer
and less sophisticated neighbors -- have a date for possible European Union
membership. Though Serbia's economy grew about 6 percent last year, government
ministers and foreign business people alike say the rate of economic growth and
investment could have been greater if not for the friction with The Hague.

''The Hague is a sort of sword at our throats,'' said Velimir Ilic, Serbia's
minister for capital investment, who was one of the leaders of the popular
protests that led to the removal from office of Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav leader who is now on trial in The Hague, charged with war crimes. Many
foreign companies, Mr. Ilic said, were unwilling to make long-term commitments
in Serbia while cooperation with the court remained unresolved.

Mike Ahern, the president of the Foreign Investors Council, an association of
foreign businesses in the region, said ''Serbia needs Chinese growth rates in
order to catch up'' with its neighbors.

But the government's reliance on Mr. Milosevic's Serbian Socialist Party and the
country's large nationalist opposition for support in Parliament mean that
Serbia cannot proceed any faster on war crimes, leading politicians here
maintain.

''If the generals had been extradited by force, the government would have
fallen,'' said Rasim Ljajic, Serbia's minister for human rights and for
cooperation with the court at The Hague.

''We need a period of political stability,'' he said, after six elections at
state and federal levels in four years.

Were the government to fall, he said, Serbia's ultranationalist party -- the
Serbian Radical Party, the largest bloc in the Serbian Parliament with 82 seats
-- would very likely be the one to form a new government, jeopardizing any hopes
of European integration.

Senior federal and state ministers maintain that pressure from the outside over
war criminals is encouraging support for nationalists.

''If the First World War ended in a way that had not humiliated Germany, Hitler
would never have had a reason to come to power,'' said Zoran Sami, the speaker
of Parliament and a close associate of Mr. Kostunica. He warned that the West's
strategy on Serbia was having a similar effect.

But advocates of cooperation with The Hague say the government's reluctance to
hand over suspects is based on ideology and not fear of electoral defeat.

''Saying it's only due to having a minority government is an excuse,'' said
Zarko Korac, a member of the opposition Democratic Party in the Serbian
Parliament.

Mr. Ahern said, ''There is a false pride that is keeping the country back.''

But neither the countries applying the pressure nor Serbia appear likely to
change their policies soon. Asked about the situation, a senior Western diplomat
here said he was ''cautiously pessimistic.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CIVIL
WAR (78%); POLITICS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%);
ARMED FORCES (74%); REFUGEES (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); RELIGION (56%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; United
States International Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (59%) United Nations;
European Union

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Vojislav (Prime Min) Kostunica; Vladimir (Gen) Lazarevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE
(93%); CROATIA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             489 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Guard, America

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 251 words


In the name of foiling potential terrorists, the House has passed a misbegotten
immigration control bill that would make it harder for persecuted immigrants to
get political asylum in this country. One of the nation's bedrock principles --
sanctuary -- would be badly crimped by the measure, which would also block
states from granting driver's licenses to illegal immigrants.

Eleven states grant such licenses as a way to encourage highway safety and
accident insurance coverage.

The House measure, called the Real ID bill, has been denounced as a human rights
retreat by the Catholic bishops conference and other champions of immigrant
rights. It would require political asylum applicants to offer greater evidence
of persecution and give judges less power to reverse asylum denials by
immigration officials. The bill drew a last-minute endorsement from the White
House, which is seeking to curry favor for President Bush's proposal to create
guest worker visas. But even administration officials expressed misgivings about
the asylum strictures.

The bill would also undermine work by federal agencies and the states to come up
with national standards for securing driver's licenses. That effort -- which was
ordered up by Congress -- is a far more sensible approach than the hurriedly
cobbled-together House measure, which was passed without benefit of committee
hearings.

The Senate must defeat this measure: being anti-terrorist doesn't have to walk
hand in hand with being anti-immigrant.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (92%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT
VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); US STATE IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
US REAL ID ACT OF 2005 (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); LICENSES & PERMITS
(76%); DRIVERS LICENSES (76%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%);
RELIGION (70%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (55%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (55%)
Terrorism; Editorials; Immigration and Refugees; Asylum (Political); Law and
Legislation

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             490 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Self-Inflicted Wounds

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 554 words


New evidence about the torture of prisoners by American soldiers and
intelligence agents -- and by foreign governments working secretly for the
United States -- is appalling for all the obvious reasons. This kind of
brutality violates both American law and international treaties. It endangers
American soldiers who may in the future find themselves captives of a hostile
nation. It debases the nation at home and abroad.

Now it is also becoming increasingly clear that this extensive, random prisoner
abuse is a wretched failure that does nothing to aid the war on terror.

Report after report shows that a vast majority of those swept up in American
anti-terrorism campaigns were innocent. Those who may have been guilty produced
little if any useful information -- and now cannot be put on trial and punished
because they were illegally detained and tortured. Others simply lied under
duress, providing an ample supply of disinformation purchased at the cost of
American self-respect. Military doctrine says that interrogation becomes
pointless after a few days, while torture produces false confessions.

Jane Mayer wrote recently in The New Yorker about Maher Arar, a Syrian-born
citizen of Canada arrested by American agents on vague suspicions of terrorist
ties. He says he was was shipped to Syria, a country routinely denounced by
Washington for its brutality, and tortured for a year. Ms. Mayer wrote that Mr.
Arar ''eventually confessed to anything his tormentors wanted him to say,'' but
the Syrians said they had found no terrorist link.

In Sunday's Times, Raymond Bonner wrote about Mamdouh Habib, accused of helping
to train some of the 9/11 hijackers. Even if he is guilty, he'll never be
charged. Mr. Habib says he was beaten by American jailors at Guantanamo Bay,
where a female interrogator threw what seemed to be menstrual blood at him. He
was then shipped to Egypt, where, he said, he was beaten and burned.

These accounts cannot be dismissed as tales concocted by the nation's enemies;
they fit right into patterns documented by witnesses, the International Red
Cross and the American government's own investigations. The Bush administration
still clings to the policy of ''extraordinary rendition,'' the bureaucratic
euphemism for sending prisoners to countries where the public and the press
don't kick up a fuss about torture. The new attorney general, Alberto Gonzales,
defended it in his recent confirmation hearings in the Senate.

What's been going on here is not what supporters of the administration's
policies depict: an awful but necessary and skilled inquiry reserved for the
worst terrorists, who hold secrets that could cost innocent lives. That's the
stuff of 21st-century fiction, where Kiefer Sutherland saves mankind with a
well-placed pistol butt. This is about a system that was hastily conceived,
ineptly formulated, incompetently administered and now out of control. It lowers
the humanity of the people who practice it, and the citizens who condone it.

An Israeli judge, Aharon Barak, summed it up six years ago when he ruled that
abuses of Palestinian prisoners were illegal. ''This is the destiny of a
democracy,'' he said, ''as not all means are acceptable to it, and not all
practices employed by its enemies are open before it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); WAR ON
TERROR (75%); LAWYERS (75%); HIJACKING (70%); NAVIES (70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (57%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Terrorism;
Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (58%); KIEFER SUTHERLAND (50%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SYRIA (92%); CUBA (90%); CANADA (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             492 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 16, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Australia: Security Chief Says Detainee Was In Eqypt

BYLINE: By Raymond Bonner (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 125 words


The head of Australia's security agency, Dennis Richardson, conceded that
Mahmoud Habib, the terror suspect recently freed after 40 months in American
custody, was detained in Egypt for part of that time. Washington and Cairo have
consistently denied that. Mr. Habib, who trained at Qaeda camps, was picked up
in Pakistan in 2002 and turned over to the Americans, who, he has said, took him
to Egypt, where he was interrogated and tortured for six months before being
taken to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. In an appearance before a parliamentary
committee, Mr. Richardson dismissed Mr. Habib's charges that he had been
tortured in Pakistan or Guantanamo as ''humbug,'' but left open the possibility
that he had been tortured in Egypt.   Raymond Bonner (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%) Terrorism; Security and Warning
Systems; United States International Relations; Torture; Freedom and Human
Rights

PERSON: Raymond Bonner; Dennis Richardson; Mahmoud Habib

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); EGYPT (94%); PAKISTAN (93%); AUSTRALIA (90%); CUBA
(86%)

REGION: Australia; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             494 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 918 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-17

Bush Argues With Europe On Hezbollah Classification
The Bush administration is arguing with European governments over whether the
Lebanese-based Shiite group Hezbollah should be listed in Europe as a terrorist
organization. The disagreement presents another challenge for President Bush on
his coming trip to Europe to mend ruptures over the Iraq war.   A1

Indian-Pakistani Relations
India and Pakistan agreed to establish a bus service to allow travel between the
two capitals of divided, disputed Kashmir. The move signals a tangible
breakthrough in peace talks between the two nuclear powers. A series of measures
have been designed to thaw relations, including the reopening of consulates in
the two countries.   A7

Hostage Pleads From Iraq
An Italian reporter being held hostage in Iraq pleaded for her life in a crudely
made videotape. The hostage, Guiliana Sgrena, called for foreigners to leave
Iraq and emphasized her antiwar reporting.   A10

Progress in Israeli Withdrawal
Israel's Parliament approved $870 million in compensation for Jewish settlers
who are to be evacuated from the Gaza Strip in the summer, helping the pullout
plan over one of the final legislative hurdles. And in a surprise development,
the chief of staff of Israel's army, Lt. Gen. Moshe Yaalon, will be replaced,
rather than having his tenure extended for a fourth year.   A5

Mexico City Mayor Fights Back
The Mexican Congress is moving closer to a vote that could lead to the arrest of
Mayor Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador of Mexico City, and scramble his ambitions to
become president. Mr. Lopez said he planned to take his case to the streets with
a series of demonstrations that could begin Friday. He said he would start his
presidential campaign from jail, if forced to do so.   A6

Threat on the Mexican Border
Top government officials, in an assessment of threats to American security, told
Congress that new intelligence information strongly suggested that Al Qaeda had
considered infiltrating the United States through the Mexican border.   A16

Iran Accuses U.S. of Spying
Iran said American pilotless spy planes had been seen over its nuclear sites,
and threatened to shoot them down if they came within range. Also, explosions in
southern Iran that were later said to be from construction work jolted world
financial markets, causing stocks to briefly fall.   A16

U.N. Pressures U.S. on Darfur
The United Nations' top human rights official said that any delay in prosecuting
war crimes from the Darfur region would risk lives and end the hope of forging
eventual peace, a statement that intensified pressure on the United States to
put aside its opposition to the International Criminal Court.   A9

NATIONAL   A16-27

For Public Television, An Uncertain Future
Public television is suffering from an identity crisis, say executives inside
and outside PBS, and it goes far deeper than the announcement by Pat Mitchell
that she will step down next year as the beleaguered network's president.   A1

Snowmobiling in Yellowstone
Interior Secretary Gale A. Norton rode a snowmobile past 150 miles of hills,
steaming rivers and indifferent bison in Yellowstone National Park, giving an
unusual endorsement to the machines that some consider a blight and others a
blessing.   A18

U.S. Fights Obscenity Ruling
In a case representing a major test of the Bush administration's campaign
against pornography, the Justice Department said it would appeal a recent
decision by a federal judge that declared federal obscenity laws to be
unconstitutional.   A25

Negotiating Medicaid's Future
Congress, governors and the secretary of health and human services began
negotiations on the future of Medicaid, with a view to making fundamental
changes in the program to control its costs.   A27

Senator Battles Hodgkin's
Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the
Judiciary Committee, said he had received a diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease.
A26

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Developers Wary of Bidding On West Side Site
A day after the Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced that it would
allow anyone to bid on the development rights to the West Side railyards, which
the Jets want for a stadium, some of the city's developers said they were
reluctant to make an offer on the rights without being assured they could get
the zoning that would allow them to build apartment houses and office buildings.
B1

HOUSE & HOME   F1-14

CIRCUITS   G1-8

OBITUARIES   C15

ARTS   E1-10

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-8

N.H.L. Cancels Season
The National Hockey League season ended before it began when Commissioner Gary
Bettman canceled all of the remaining games this season after a five-month
lockout of players. It is the first time that a North American professional team
sport's entire season was lost over a labor dispute.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Greenspan on Accounts
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, gave his blessing to the creation
of individual investment accounts in Social Security but expressed unease that
the change could lead to trillions of dollars in additional government
borrowing.   A1

Mr. Greenspan strongly suggested that the central bank would keep raising
short-term interest rates without any pause in the months ahead.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Half a step on drug safety; the need for a federal shield; Saudi
Arabia's meager election; an opening on the West Side.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Bridge   E8
Crossword   E6
Public Lives   B4
TV Listings   E10
Weather   A22

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); ESPIONAGE (86%); CITY GOVERNMENT (86%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
LEGISLATION (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (74%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (72%); MAYORS (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); IRAQ WAR (72%);
BANKING & FINANCE (71%); MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (71%); PEACE PROCESS (71%);
APPROVALS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); JEWS & JUDAISM (67%); UNMANNED MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (66%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (61%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%);
MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (56%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (93%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (92%)

STATE: KASHMIR (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (94%); MEXICO (94%); IRAQ
(94%); ISRAEL (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); PAKISTAN (92%); LEBANON
(92%); ASIA (79%); SUDAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             496 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Defense

BYLINE: By Andrew P. Napolitano.

Andrew P. Napolitano, a former judge of the Superior Court of New Jersey, is an
analyst for Fox News and the author of ''Constitutional Chaos: What Happens When
the Government Breaks Its Own Laws.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 676 words


THE conviction of Lynne F. Stewart for providing material aid to terrorism and
for lying to the government is another perverse victory in the Justice
Department's assault on the Constitution.

Ms. Stewart, the lawyer who was convicted last week of five felonies, will be
disbarred and faces up to 30 years in jail. She represented Sheikh Omar Abdel
Rahman, not exactly a sympathetic character. He is the leader of the Islamic
Group, a terrorist organization that plotted the assassination of President
Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and masterminded the 1993 bombing of the World Trade
Center.

He was sentenced in 1996 to life in prison. When Ms. Stewart sought to visit her
client in jail, prison officials required her to sign an affirmation that she
would abide by special rules requiring that she communicate with the sheikh only
about legal matters. The rules also forbade her from passing messages to third
parties, like the news media. Yet the jury found that Ms. Stewart frequently
made gibberish comments in English to distract prison officials who were trying
to record the conversation between the sheikh and his interpreter, and that she
''smuggled'' messages from her jailed client to his followers.

But if the federal government had followed the law, Ms. Stewart would never have
been required to agree to these rules to begin with. Just after 9/11, Attorney
General John Ashcroft gave himself the power to bypass the lawyer-client
privilege, which every court in the United States has upheld, and eavesdrop on
conversations between prisoners and their lawyers if he had reason to believe
they were being used to ''further facilitate acts of violence or terrorism.''
The regulation became effective immediately.

In the good old days, only Congress could write federal criminal laws. After
9/11, however, the attorney general was allowed to do so. Where in the
Constitution does it allow that?

Mr. Ashcroft's rules, with their criminal penalties, violate the Sixth
Amendment, which grants all persons the right to consult with a lawyer in
confidence. Ms. Stewart can't effectively represent her clients -- no lawyer can
-- if the government listens to and records privileged conversations between
lawyers and their clients. The threat of a government prosecution would loom
over their meetings.

These rules also violate the First Amendment's right to free speech. Especially
in a controversial case, a defense lawyer is right to advocate for her client in
the press, just as the government uses the press to put forward its case. Unless
there is a court order that bars both sides from speaking to reporters, it
should be up to the lawyer to decide whether to help her client through the news
media.

Ms. Stewart's constitutional right to speak to the news media about a matter of
public interest is absolute and should prevent the government from prosecuting
her. And since when does announcing someone else's opinion about a cease-fire --
as Ms. Stewart did, saying the sheik no longer supported one that had been
observed in Egypt -- amount to advocating an act of terrorism?

In truth, the federal government prosecuted Lynne Stewart because it wants to
intimidate defense lawyers into either refusing to represent accused terrorists
or into providing less than zealous representation. After she was convicted, Ms.
Stewart said, ''You can't lock up the lawyers, you can't tell the lawyers how to
do their jobs.''

No doubt the outcome of this case will have a chilling effect on lawyers who
might represent unpopular clients. Since 9/11 the federal government's message
has been clear: if you defend someone we say is a terrorist, we may declare you
to be one of them, and you will lose everything.

The Stewart conviction is a travesty. She faces up to 30 years in prison for
speaking gibberish to her client and the truth to the press. It is devastating
for lawyers and for any American who may ever need a lawyer. Shouldn't the
Justice Department be defending our constitutional freedoms rather than
assaulting them?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); CORRECTIONS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); PRISONS (89%); ATTORNEY CLIENT PRIVILEGE (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (78%); SENTENCING (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); FELONIES (78%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (77%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%); CORRECTIONS
WORKERS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (75%);
BOMBINGS (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); ASSASSINATION (71%); RELIGION (56%)
Terrorism; Legal Profession; Attorney-Client Privilege; Sixth Amendment (US
Constitution); Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (55%) Andrew P Napolitano; Lynne F Stewart; Omar (Sheik)
Abdel Rahman; John (Atty Gen) Ashcroft

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); EGYPT (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             504 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush's Words: 'Clear Vision'

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 529 words


Following are excerpts from President Bush's speech yesterday in Brussels, as
provided by the White House. The full transcript is on the Web at
nytimes.com/world.

 Our greatest opportunity and immediate goal is peace in the Middle East. After
many false starts, and dashed hopes, and stolen lives, a settlement of the
conflict between Israelis and Palestinians is now within reach. America and
Europe have made a moral commitment: We will not stand by as another generation
in the Holy Land grows up in an atmosphere of violence and hopelessness. America
and Europe also share a strategic interest: By helping to build a lasting peace,
we will remove an unsettled grievance that is used to stir hatred and violence
across the Middle East.

Our efforts are guided by a clear vision: We're determined to see two democratic
states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

All the parties have responsibilities to meet. Arab states must end incitement
in their own media, cut off public and private funding for terrorism, stop their
support for extremist education, and establish normal relations with Israel.
Palestinian leaders must confront and dismantle terrorist groups, fight
corruption, encourage free enterprise, and rest true authority with the people.
Only a democracy can serve the hopes of Palestinians, and make Israel secure,
and raise the flag of a free Palestine. A successful Palestinian democracy
should be Israel's top goal as well. So Israel must freeze settlement activity,
help Palestinians build a thriving economy and ensure that a new Palestinian
state is truly viable, with contiguous territory on the West Bank. A state of
scattered territories will not work. As Palestinian leaders assume
responsibility for Gaza and increasingly larger territory, we will help them
build the economic and political and security institutions needed to govern
effectively. And as that democracy rises, the United States and Europe will help
the parties implement the road map to peace.

Our shared commitment to democratic progress is being tested in Lebanon, a once
thriving country that now suffers under the influence of an oppressive neighbor.
Just as the Syrian regime must take stronger action to stop those who support
violence and subversion in Iraq, and must end its support for terrorist groups
seeking to destroy the hope of peace between Israelis and Palestinians, Syria
must also end its occupation of Lebanon.

I also believe that Russia's future lies within the family of Europe and the
trans-Atlantic community. America supports W.T.O. membership for Russia, because
meeting W.T.O. standards will strengthen the gains of freedom and prosperity in
that country. Yet, for Russia to make progress as a European nation, the Russian
government must renew a commitment to democracy and the rule of law. We
recognize that reform will not happen overnight. We must always remind Russia,
however, that our alliance stands for a free press, a vital opposition, the
sharing of power, and the rule of law, and the United States and all European
countries should place democratic reform at the heart of their dialogue with
Russia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%); TRANSCRIPTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); RULE OF LAW (68%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (67%); CORRUPTION (51%)
United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Palestinians

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) George W (Pres) Bush; Vladimir V (Pres) Putin

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (98%); UNITED STATES
(95%); EUROPE (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); LEBANON (93%);
SYRIA (92%); IRAQ (79%); FRANCE (79%); BELGIUM (73%)

REGION: Russia; Israel; Syria; Lebanon; France

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             513 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thrown to the Wolves

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: Ottawa


If John Ashcroft was right, then I was staring into the malevolent, duplicitous
eyes of pure evil, the eyes of a man with the mass murder of Americans on his
mind. But all I could really see was a polite, unassuming, neatly dressed guy
who looked like a suburban Little League coach.

If Mr. Ashcroft was right, then Maher Arar should have been in a U.S. prison,
not talking to me in an office in downtown Ottawa. But there he was, a
34-year-old man who now wears a perpetually sad expression, talking about his
recent experiences -- a real-life story with the hideous aura of a
hallucination. Mr. Arar's 3-year-old son, Houd, loudly crunched potato chips
while his father was being interviewed.

''I still have nightmares about being in Syria, being beaten, being in jail,''
said Mr. Arar. ''They feel very real. When I wake up, I feel very relieved to
find myself in my room.''

In the fall of 2002 Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen, suddenly found himself caught
up in the cruel mockery of justice that the Bush administration has substituted
for the rule of law in the post-Sept. 11 world. While attempting to change
planes at Kennedy Airport on his way home to Canada from a family vacation in
Tunisia, he was seized by American authorities, interrogated and thrown into
jail. He was not charged with anything, and he never would be charged with
anything, but his life would be ruined.

Mr. Arar was surreptitiously flown out of the United States to Jordan and then
driven to Syria, where he was kept like a nocturnal animal in an unlit,
underground, rat-infested cell that was the size of a grave. From time to time
he was tortured.

He wept. He begged not to be beaten anymore. He signed whatever confessions he
was told to sign. He prayed.

Among the worst moments, he said, were the times he could hear babies crying in
a nearby cell where women were imprisoned. He recalled hearing one woman
pleading with a guard for several days for milk for her child.

He could hear other prisoners screaming as they were tortured.

''I used to ask God to help them,'' he said.

The Justice Department has alleged, without disclosing any evidence whatsoever,
that Mr. Arar is a member of, or somehow linked to, Al Qaeda. If that's so, how
can the administration possibly allow him to roam free? The Syrians, who
tortured him, have concluded that Mr. Arar is not linked in any way to
terrorism.

And the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, a sometimes-clownish outfit that seems to
have helped set this entire fiasco in motion by forwarding bad information to
American authorities, is being criticized heavily in Canada for failing to
follow its own rules on the handling and dissemination of raw classified
information.

Official documents in Canada suggest that Mr. Arar was never the target of a
terror investigation there. One former Canadian official, commenting on the Arar
case, was quoted in a local newspaper as saying ''accidents will happen'' in the
war on terror.

Whatever may have happened in Canada, nothing can excuse the behavior of the
United States in this episode. Mr. Arar was deliberately dispatched by U.S.
officials to Syria, a country that -- as they knew -- practices torture. And if
Canadian officials hadn't intervened, he most likely would not have been heard
from again.

Mr. Arar is the most visible victim of the reprehensible U.S. policy known as
extraordinary rendition, in which individuals are abducted by American
authorities and transferred, without any legal rights whatever, to a regime
skilled in the art of torture. The fact that some of the people swallowed up by
this policy may in fact have been hard-core terrorists does not make it any less
repugnant.

Mr. Arar, who is married and also has an 8-year-old daughter, said the pain from
some of the beatings he endured lasted for six months.

''It was so scary,'' he said. ''After a while I became like an animal.''

A lawsuit on Mr. Arar's behalf has been filed against the United States by the
Center for Constitutional Rights in New York. Barbara Olshansky, a lawyer with
the center, noted yesterday that the government is arguing that none of Mr.
Arar's claims can even be adjudicated because they ''would involve the
revelation of state secrets.''

This is a government that feels it is answerable to no one.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (83%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); RULE OF
LAW (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); PRISONS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%);
LITIGATION (76%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (74%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (66%); POLICE FORCES (64%); AL-QAEDA
(63%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (60%) Terrorism; Torture; Suits and
Litigation; United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Maher Arar

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (72%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CANADA (92%); SYRIA (90%); TUNISIA (79%); JORDAN
(71%)

REGION: Canada; Syria

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             515 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 27, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 406 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-18

Egyptian Election Changes
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt proposed sweeping changes in the way his
country selects its leader, asking Parliament to amend the constitution to allow
for direct, multiparty presidential elections later this year for the first time
in the nation's history.   1

Worry Over Inquiries at C.I.A.
There is widening unease within the Central Intelligence Agency over the
possibility that career officers could be prosecuted or otherwise punished for
their conduct during interrogations and detention of terrorism suspects,
according to current and former government officials.   1

A Changing Netherlands
Dutch people are leaving, saying they feel a pessimism about their crowded
country and the social tensions that have come with the waves of newcomers, most
of them Muslims.   16

Islamic Jihad Claims Bombing
The radical Palestinian faction Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for a
suicide bombing in Tel Aviv that threatened a fragile truce, and the group
suggested that more such attacks were likely. Meanwhile, Israeli and Palestinian
security forces each made arrests in the West Bank.   13

New Investigation in Mexico
Prosecutors in Mexico City have reopened the investigation into the death of
Digna Ochoa, a human rights lawyer who was shot dead in her office in 2001 after
receiving many threats.   8

NATIONAL   20-29

Arrest in Serial Killings
The authorities in Wichita, Kan., announced the arrest of a suspect in the
deaths of at least 10 people. In a long series of taunting messages to police,
the killer called himself B.T.K. for his preferred method: bind, torture, kill.
1

Social Security Skepticism
Congressional Republicans will return to work chastened by public skepticism
over President Bush's plan for private accounts in Social Security.   22

Fighting Medicaid Cuts
Alarmed by soaring Medicaid costs, the nation's governors say they they
adamantly oppose budget cuts sought by the White House and Republican leaders of
Congress.   27

NEW YORK/REGION   31-39

Health Care Behind Bars
An examination of Prison Health Services, a for-profit corporation that moved
into New York State in the last decade, reveals repeated instances of medical
care that has been flawed and sometimes lethal.   1

OBITUARIES   39-40

Henry A. Grunwald
A refugee from war-torn Austria who became Time Magazine's top editor before
returning to Vienna as United States ambassador, he was 82.   39

Chess   28
Weather   41

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HOMICIDE
(90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); MEDICAID (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(86%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (86%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); BOMBINGS (75%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%);
RELIGION (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (73%); DEATHS
(73%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); HISTORY (72%); TORTURE (71%); PRISONS (70%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); HEALTH CARE (67%); REFUGEES (67%); BUDGETS (63%); BUDGET
CUTS (63%); GOVERNORS (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: PRISON HEALTH SERVICES INC (52%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%); HEZBOLLAH (83%); AL-ISLAMI
AL-JIHAD (83%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: WICHITA, KS, USA (79%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%);
MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); MEXICO (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ISRAEL (79%); AUSTRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             519 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 927 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Lebanese Premier Resigns As Protesters Fill Streets
Lebanon's prime minister, Omar Karami, resigned from office, dissolving the
country's pro-Syrian government and setting the stage for an intense struggle
over the relationship between Syria and Lebanon. The surprise resignation came
as the streets of Beirut were filled with tens of thousands of protesters and
hours after a grueling no-confidence debate in the Lebanese Parliament.   A1

Bomb Attack in Iraq Kills 122
A suicide bomber steered a sedan full of explosives into a thick crowd of Iraqi
police and army recruits in Hilla, 60 miles south of Baghdad, killing at least
122, Iraqi officials said, in the deadliest single bombing since the American
invasion nearly two years ago.   A1

The State Department detailed an array of human rights abuses last year by the
newly sovereign Iraqi government, including torture, rape and illegal
detentions.   A1

An Iraqi investigative judge presented the first charges for crimes against
humanity in the coming trials of five senior officials of Saddam Hussein's
government to a judicial panel, setting the stage for the trials to begin.   A12


Rice Pressing Palestinians
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, traveling to an international conference on
aiding the Palestinian authority, warned Palestinian leaders that they had
better come prepared to show a clear resolve to break up terrorist groups.   A10


Two Elections in Central Asia
Preliminary results in parliamentary elections in Tajikistan gave an
unexpectedly lopsided victory to the ruling party, drawing a failing grade from
the world's largest election-monitoring body and a storm of protests. The
election in neighboring Kyrgyzstan received a less severe but still negative
assessment from Western monitors.   A8

NATIONAL   A13-16

Jackson Abuse Trial Opens; Prosecution Lays Out Case
The prosecution opened its case against Michael Jackson, saying he used alcohol
and pornography to seduce a young boy who was recovering from cancer.   A1

Bush Loses Combatant Ruling
A federal district judge in South Carolina ruled that President Bush had greatly
overstepped his authority by detaining an American citizen without charges for
nearly three years as an enemy combatant.   A14

Attorney General Offers Agenda
Laying out his priorities for the first time since taking office, Attorney
General Alberto R. Gonzales urged Congress to speed the process for deporting
illegal immigrants and extend the federal government's counterterrorism powers.
A14

Research Financing Faulted
More than 700 scientists sent a petition to the director of the National
Institutes of Health protesting what they said was the shift of tens of millions
of dollars in federal research money since 2001 away from public health
problems.   A14

No Agreement on Medicaid
President Bush told governors that he wanted to work with them to rein in the
soaring cost of Medicaid, but governors said they were far from reaching an
agreement with the White House.   A14

Doubts on Social Security Plan
Senator Charles E. Grassley, the chairman of the Finance Committee, said that if
public opinion did not begin soon to swing in favor of President Bush's Social
Security plan, it would be an indication that the plan was in trouble.   A14

Rights of Ship Passengers
The Supreme Court heard arguments on whether the Americans With Disabilities Act
applies aboard passenger ships with foreign flags that call at United States
ports.   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-9

Lapses Found in Care Of Juvenile Offenders
Court records and interviews suggest that Prison Health Services poorly served
many of the children in New York City's juvenile justice system during its
four-year term.   A1

Subway Shuttle Derails
A 42nd Street subway shuttle overshot the end of its track at Grand Central
Terminal and smashed into a concrete block when the shuttle's operator lost
control of the four-car train, transit officials said.   B1

Belt Tightens in New Jersey
Acting Gov. Richard J. Codey plans to propose a budget that would cut state
spending next year by $600 million, mainly by suspending a popular property tax
rebate program for homeowners.   B1

The New Jersey Senate passed a bill limiting the influence of campaign cash on
the awarding of government contracts.   B6

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Health & Fitness   F5

FASHION   B10

ARTS   E1-10

SPORTSTUESDAY   D1-6

EDUCATION   A13

Little Advance in College Hiring
Minorities and women have made little progress in breaking into the faculty
ranks of the Ivy League, according to a new report, culled from a federal
database by a graduate student group at Yale University.   A13

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Ebbers Takes the Stand
Bernard J. Ebbers, the former chief executive of WorldCom, took the stand in his
own defense. He rebutted the testimony of the prosecution's star witness, Scott
D. Sullivan, who contended Mr. Ebbers had directed the fraud that brought down
the company.   C1

Entrepreneur Accused
Walter Anderson, a telecommunications entrepreneur who once tried to mount a
rescue of Russia's Mir space station, has been arrested and charged with evading
taxes by hiding at least $450 million of income through offshore corporations.
C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Mideast climate change; Mr. Gates goes to Washington; a museum grew
in Queens.

Columns: Paul Krugman, David Brooks.

OBITUARIES   A17

Mario Luzi
The celebrated Italian poet who caused a storm earlier this yearwhen he compared
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi to Mussolini, he was 90.   A17

Crossword   E10
Public Lives   B4
TV Listings   E9
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); MEDICAID (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
SCIENCE NEWS (76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (76%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); PETITIONS (73%);
TORTURE (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); JUDGES (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); POLICE
FORCES (70%); ELECTION MONITORING (69%); GOVERNMENT RESEARCH FUNDING (68%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (63%); SCIENCE FUNDING (63%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (61%);
PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (61%); ARMIES (56%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (77%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%);
ALBERTO GONZALES (53%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LEBANON (97%); IRAQ (94%); SYRIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); UNITED STATES (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%);
KYRGYZSTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             521 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Still Troubled After All These Years

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 354 words


According to the timetable established by the Security Council, an international
review this summer is supposed to determine whether the troubled Kosovo region
has reached sufficient standards of governance and interethnic harmony to start
talks on independence. It has not. The government is headed by a former
guerrilla leader suspected of war crimes, and less than a year ago, Albanians
went on an anti-Serb rampage that left 19 dead and 900 wounded.

After the NATO air campaign in 1999, which drove Serbian forces from Kosovo,
successive United Nations administrators avoided defining Kosovo's status. Then
in 2002, the United Nations laid down the ''standards before status'' policy,
under which Kosovo was to meet certain standards of democracy and behavior
before talk of independence began. But the Serb population boycotted the
provincial government, while the majority Albanians failed to seize the chance
to show they can govern.

With the summer deadline looming, Soren Jessen-Petersen, the U.N. envoy, told
the Security Council last week that it was time to set a clear timetable on
Kosovo's status. He's off base. The situation in Kosovo and Serbia is not what
it was at the end of the war. Slobodan Milosevic no longer wields tyrannical
power; he's a prisoner in the Hague. The Kosovo Albanians, meanwhile, have
trampled the rights of the Serb minority.

Under such conditions, setting an independence timetable would reward bad faith.
The six-nation contact group -- the United States, Britain, France, Germany,
Italy and Russia -- should forcefully set out what Kosovo needs to accomplish.
Work should begin immediately on a settlement, which would, at least
temporarily, include a semiautonomous zone for the Serbs. That would choke off
the Serb minority's hopes of seizing control again. The Albanians should need no
further incentive to behave properly.

The West belatedly took the lead in halting Serb atrocities. It would be a shame
if it now allowed Kosovo to go from a region in which Serbs persecuted Albanians
to a troubled microstate in which Albanians persecute Serbs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(72%); POLITICS (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (56%) Editorials; Freedom and Human
Rights; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); ALBANIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); GERMANY (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             531 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 10, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blair Rejects Demands for Milder Laws to Control Terror Suspects

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 9


In a bitter political duel over new antiterrorism legislation, Prime Minister
Tony Blair said Wednesday that he would make no further concessions to
opposition demands for milder laws to control terrorist suspects.

The dispute provoked a showdown in Parliament between Mr. Blair and Michael
Howard, leader of the Conservatives, with each man accusing the other of seeking
political gain by appearing tough on terrorism before elections expected in May.

Parts of the current antiterrorism laws expire Monday. Charles Clarke, the home
secretary, warned that without new laws, 11 foreigners being held without trial
or charge at Belmarsh Prison would be freed. They reportedly include Abu Qatada,
a Syrian Muslim cleric accused of acting as a mentor to Mohamed Atta, one of the
Sept. 11 hijackers.

The men were detained under anti-terrorism laws written after the Sept. 11
attacks. But, last December, Britain's highest court ruled that detaining them
indefinitely violated European human rights conventions.

At issue is the degree to which efforts to thwart terrorists justify suspending
centuries-old liberties.

Mr. Blair has been seeking Parliament's approval for a law that would permit the
home secretary to issue control orders to restrict the movement of terrorist
suspects through measures including house arrest.

After debates in the House of Lords this week, the Blair government offered
concessions, notably provisions for judges to be consulted on the use of control
orders and for the law to be reviewed each year.

But the House of Lords voted in favor of opposition demands for a deadline to
replace the law by November and for stricter criteria for control orders to be
issued only in cases with a ''balance of probability'' that a suspect was a
terrorist.

The government wants a lower standard, ''grounds for suspicion.''

The votes were embarrassing for Mr. Blair as 24 peers from his Labor Party voted
against the party. They included the former lord chancellor, Lord Irvine, widely
known as the prime minister's erstwhile mentor.

''We have made concessions we think are reasonable,'' Mr. Blair said Wednesday.

Senior police officers have said recently that hundreds of potential terrorists
are in Britain, and some antiterror specialists have said they fear an attack
before the British election, as happened in Madrid last March 11, three days
before Spain's vote.

''Should any terrorist act occur, there will not be a debate about civil
liberties,'' Mr. Blair said Wednesday. Saying that the police and security
services have urged him not to dilute the proposal, he added: ''There would be
debate about the advice the government received and whether they followed it.
I've got the advice, I intend to follow it.''

Neither of the main political camps wants to risk being accused of allowing a
terrorist attack by shying away from stern antiterror measures. Mr. Howard
accused Mr. Blair of wanting ''to pretend that he is the only one who is tough
on terrorism.''

''Isn't it a dreadful measure from a desperate prime minister and shouldn't he
be thoroughly ashamed of himself,'' Mr. Howard said in the weekly Prime
Minister's Questions, when the two men regularly clash.

In the lower House of Commons on Wednesday night, government legislators
rejected many of the additional changes demanded by the opposition and the House
of Lords. Mr. Blair later urged his opponents to abandon their efforts to change
the legislation, saying further resistance would be ''irresponsible and wrong.''

The legislation must still go before the House of Lords, possibly on Thursday,
and is likely to be challenged there again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(90%); HIJACKING (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); BRITISH NOBILITY &
GENTRY (88%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); PRISONS (75%); SUPREME COURTS
(75%); LITIGATION (75%); HOUSE ARREST (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); ARRESTS
(72%); APPROVALS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (55%); APPEALS (53%) Election Issues;
Elections; Law and Legislation; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade
Center (NYC)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (92%) Alan Cowell; Tony (Prime Min) Blair; Michael Howard;
Charles (Sec) Clarke; Abu Qatada; Mohamed Atta

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); SPAIN (91%)

REGION: Great Britain; Great Britain; Washington (DC); New York City

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             532 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abu Ghraib, Whitewashed Again

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 606 words


It was good to learn yesterday that the military commander in Iraq has issued
definitive rules about how to treat captives in American prison camps.
Unfortunately, that was about the only good news in the newest Pentagon report
on prisoner abuse, actually a 21-page summary of a larger, classified study by
the Navy inspector general of interrogation rules in Guantanamo Bay, Afghanistan
and Iraq.

Just consider that it took more than a year after the military says it first
learned of the nightmare at Abu Ghraib to issue the new rules. And don't ask
what they are, because they're classified. The report spoke of the regulations
approvingly. But its author, Vice Admiral Albert Church III, now director of the
Navy staff, admitted yesterday that, well, he had not actually read them.

This whitewash is typical of the reports issued by the Bush administration on
the abuse, humiliation and torture of prisoners at camps run by the military and
the Central Intelligence Agency. Like the others, the Church report concludes
that only the lowest-ranking soldiers are to be held accountable, not their
commanders or their civilian overseers.

It conveniently ignores President Bush's declaration that terrorists are not
covered by the Geneva Conventions and that Iraq is part of the war against
terror. Mr. Bush later said the conventions would cover Iraqi military
prisoners, but the Church report said military commanders in Iraq had never been
given guidance on handling prisoners, a vast majority of whom were not soldiers.
Still, the report tossed this off as merely a ''missed opportunity.'' It
overlooked Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's approval of interrogation
techniques for Guantanamo that violated the Geneva Conventions. It glossed over
the way military lawyers who were drafting later rules were ordered to ignore
their own legal opinions and instead follow Justice Department memos on how to
make torture seem legal.

The Church report said that ''none of the pictured abuses at Abu Ghraib bear any
resemblance to approved policies at any level, in any theater.'' Admiral Church
and his investigators must have missed the pictures of prisoners in hoods,
forced into stress positions and threatened by dogs. All of those techniques
were approved at one time or another by military officials, including Mr.
Rumsfeld. Of course, no known Pentagon policy orders the sexual humiliation of
prisoners. But that has happened so pervasively that it clearly was not just the
perverted antics of one night shift in one cellblock at Abu Ghraib.

The Church report said assessing the personal responsibility of Mr. Rumsfeld and
other top officials had been the job of another panel headed by a former defense
secretary, James Schlesinger. Well, not exactly. That group, appointed by Mr.
Rumsfeld, found ''both institutional and personal responsibility at higher
levels'' for Abu Ghraib. But the panel declined to name names.

Who will? Not the Pentagon, clearly. The Senate Armed Services Committee plans
another hearing or two, but that's inadequate. Congressional leaders could open
a serious investigation, but have shown no interest, although they are issuing
subpoenas on steroid use by baseball players.

We're not holding out much hope that the White House will step into the breach
because Mr. Bush has rewarded many of the officials responsible for the prison
policies -- one of them now serves as attorney general. Still, the only real
solution is for Mr. Bush to follow the American Bar Association's advice and
appoint an independent, bipartisan commission.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); APPROVALS
(88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); NAVIES (78%); AGENCY
RULEMAKING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); RANKINGS (72%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); TERRORISM (66%); LAWYERS (65%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(62%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Prisoners of War; Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR
(59%); AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (59%) Central Intelligence Agency; American Bar
Assn

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush; Albert T III (Vice Adm) Church

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (88%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             533 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Over Bitter Opposition, Antiterrorism Bill Passes in Britain

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 11


Over strong objections from civil libertarians, Parliament on Friday enacted
Prime Minister Tony Blair's new antiterrorism package, which among other things
allows the authorities to place terrorist suspects under an unusually strict
form of house arrest, without trial, instead of sending them to prison.

The passage came as eight foreign terror suspects were released under strict
bail conditions on Friday, after being held without charges or a trial under an
antiterrorism law hastily passed after Sept. 11, 2001. Three months ago a panel
of judges ruled that their imprisonment violated European human rights
legislation.

The new law was intended to get around just such objections, and had become a
political minefield. An increasingly angry Mr. Blair insisted that it was
essential for national security; his opponents in an unusually combative House
of Lords asserted, in the words of the Earl of Onslow, that it was a ''rotten,
rotten stinking bill.''

With an election widely expected to be held in May, neither the Labor Party nor
the Conservative opposition wants to be seen as weak on terrorism. In the end,
the differences between the parties came down to issues of procedure rather than
issues of substance, as the civil-liberties objections of legislators from both
parties were swept away in the final rush to exhibit toughness.

The debate in Britain mirrors that in the United States, where the Supreme Court
ruled last June that foreign terror suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, should be
allowed to challenge their detention before a judge or other neutral ''decision
maker.''

In Britain, as in the United States, the authorities are straining to enact laws
that are as tough on terrorism as possible while also able to withstand judicial
scrutiny -- and possibly to creatively circumvent existing law.

The debate has been particularly bitter in Britain, with its proud civil
libertarian tradition. The House of Commons, controlled by the prime minister
with his huge parliamentary majority, easily passed the proposed legislation.

But the House of Lords, which has a preponderance of Conservatives and whose
members are appointed rather than elected, balked at a bill that many of its
members felt violated centuries-old legal principles like the right of habeas
corpus, as enshrined in the Magna Carta.

With most legislation, the House of Lords is fairly supine, ceding to the House
of Commons's wishes without much fuss. But in this case, it dug in its heels.
Four times the House of Commons sent it the bill for consideration; four times
the Lords voted the bill down, sitting throughout the night on Thursday in a
session that eventually lasted 30 hours.

Finally, with the old terrorism law set to expire at midnight on Sunday, the
prime minister offered a concession: if his bill was enacted, he said, he would
agree to allow Parliament to review it within a year.

The compromise was immediately seized on by the Tory leader, Michael Howard, as
an embarrassing reversal by Mr. Blair. The Tories had wanted the bill to include
a ''sunset clause,'' under which it would expire after a year; Mr. Howard
proclaimed victory, saying that Mr. Blair had agreed to a ''sunset clause in all
but name.''

The eight detainees released Friday will find themselves in situations
remarkably like those allowed for in the new legislation. In their cases,
though, the conditions of their release were set by an immigration judge. Though
the eight, all Muslim and all men, are due to return home imminently, they will
hardly be free when they get there.

The men will have to wear electronic monitoring tags, report to an official
every time they enter and leave their houses, and remain at home between 7 p.m.
and 7 a.m. daily.

They will not be allowed to attend gatherings, other than group prayers at
mosques, without prior permission. They will not be allowed visitors, except
their children's friends, their lawyers, tradespeople and health care workers.
No Internet equipment or mobile telephones will be allowed in their houses.

In addition, they will be required to notify the Home Office when they want to
travel abroad. They will be allowed to hold just one bank account apiece, and
will be required to provide the government with monthly reports of their
financial transactions. They are also forbidden to transfer money or send
documents or goods abroad without government permission.

One of the men, the charismatic Syrian cleric Abu Qatada, whose incendiary calls
to arms have caused him to be described by British officials as Osama bin
Laden's ''ambassador to Europe,'' is also banned from leading prayers or
preaching at mosques.

The tough circumstances the men find themselves in reflect the continued
assertion by the British authorities that they are dangerous men with terrorist
connections. Earlier this week, Sir Ian Blair, commissioner of the Metropolitan
Police, warned that the detainees ''still represented a grave threat to national
security.''

With Parliament in upheaval over the new legislation, it was unclear, until the
very last minute, what the circumstances of the detainees' release would be.
Taken with the rest of the day's events, the confusion added to the sense that
the prime minister was in danger of losing control of an issue in which he has
long held the political upper hand.

On Thursday, Gareth Peirce, a lawyer for some of the men, said she had never
seen ''such an extraordinary, ill-prepared, ill thought-out and cackhanded
shambles,'' asking, ''How could anyone be convinced that those responsible know
what they are doing?''

The eight detainees, as well as a ninth who was released on Thursday, have been
held in near total secrecy in Belmarsh and other prisons in conditions that have
been called Britain's equivalent of Guantanamo Bay. Some have been in prison
since 2001.

The men have become a cause celebre for civil liberties groups who said their
imprisonment violated human-rights legislation and basic legal principles
enshrined in the British Constitution. Amnesty International and other groups
further charged that the conditions at Belmarsh, where the men were locked up
for 22 hours a day in tiny cells and never saw daylight, were inhumane.

As at Guantanamo Bay, the detainees were never informed of all the charges
against them and were not given access to lawyers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (89%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); POLITICS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (77%); PRISONS (77%); HABEAS CORPUS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); JUDGES (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HOUSE ARREST (77%);
CONSERVATISM (74%); BAIL (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); ARRESTS (72%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (88%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             536 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Politics of Ibrahim Parlak

BYLINE: By Alex Kotlowitz.

Alex Kotlowitz is a regular contributor to the magazine and the author of
''There Are No Children Here'' and ''Never a City So Real.''

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 8414 words


This is a story about the trickery of time. Sometimes the world changes on a
dime, as it did on Sept. 11, and with the transformation of the present, the
past, too, can suddenly take on a different hue. This, it seems, is what
happened to Ibrahim Parlak. Indeed, it's tough to choose the tense in which to
tell his story. He runs -- or ran -- a Middle Eastern restaurant. It's in
Harbert, Mich., a small summer resort town, an hour and a half by car from
Chicago, along the Lake Michigan shoreline. Parlak is a Kurd from Turkey and had
been in this country for 13 years when, on the morning of July 29 last year, he
was arrested by officers with the Department of Homeland Security and taken into
custody. He was charged with crimes relating to his time in Turkey, when he had
been involved with a Kurdish separatist group.

D.H.S. declared that he was -and consequently still is -- a terrorist. A
spokeswoman told the Associated Press at the time of his arrest, ''We think that
if most people knew the details they would see him as someone they wouldn't want
living in their community.'' Those details included the fact that before
immigrating to the U.S., he had illegally crossed the Turkish border and, armed
with an AK-47, a pistol and a grenade, was involved in a firefight in which two
Turkish soldiers were killed. He was compared to former Nazis who had hidden
their pasts to become U.S. citizens. A nearby newspaper in LaPorte County, Ind.,
The Herald-Argus, ran the headline ''Terrorist 22 Miles Away?'' A D.H.S.
prosecutor mentioned him in the same breath as Osama bin Laden.

But the people around Parlak -- not just his close friends but customers and
former employees, business competitors and neighbors -- saw things differently.

After Parlak's arrest, one of his closest friends, Martin Dzuris, who had fled
Communist Czechoslovakia and who is now a loyal George W. Bush supporter, built
a Web site and organized a letter-writing campaign to politicians. Parlak's
tennis partner, Marty Goldrick, a square-jawed, retired Whirlpool executive,
drove 120 miles to Lansing to lobby a U.S. senator on Parlak's behalf, the first
political act he had ever undertaken. Jo Ann Jansky, a tough-talking waitress
who worked for Parlak when he managed a truck stop, attached a plastic flag to
her car's antenna. It read: ''Free Ibrahim'' -- as did signs that sprouted on
front lawns like daisies. In their windows, businesses taped posters with a
similar plea; they featured a picture of Parlak in his chef's apron. To help
cover Parlak's legal costs, a competitor down the road sponsored a fund-raiser,
which brought in $25,000. (A friend contributed $750, but told me he did it
anonymously, not because he was afraid to take a public stand, but rather
because he says that otherwise Parlak would insist on repaying him.) A police
officer in town, David Duis, took a day off work to testify at Parlak's bond
hearing. ''If Ibrahim moved next to me,'' he told me, ''I'd welcome it. He's
just a classy guy.''

Even people who knew him only peripherally offered their support. A plumber who
had done some work in the restaurant stopped by and, holding back tears, told
Parlak's brother not to worry about the bill. Carol Marin, a TV journalist who
had dined at the restaurant, wrote editorials in The Chicago Sun-Times urging
the government to drop the charges. I was at the restaurant one afternoon when
two faculty members from a nearby university dropped off a small contribution
and a card. They explained that their school had warned them about getting
involved and forbade them to associate the school in any way with the case, so
they left the card unsigned. One friend commented that it was like a
contemporary version of the film ''It's a Wonderful Life,'' as Parlak's small,
everyday gestures had suddenly taken on added significance. In the wake of 9/11,
his friends were fairly certain that they knew evil, and in their minds Parlak
wasn't it. Not even close.

How is it that two groups of individuals -- Parlak's small-town friends and the
U.S. government -- can look at one man, at one case, at one situation and come
to such disparate conclusions? Are his friends so close to him that they can't
see what might have been ugliness in his past? Or is the government so intent on
proving that it's tough on terrorism that it has lost its moral bearing?

The Flight

On April 13, 1991, Ibrahim Parlak, who was 28 at the time, arrived in the United
States. He was on the run, and so was both relieved and tired. He had recently
been released from a Turkish prison, and the authorities there had been putting
pressure on him to rat out friends. Moreover, his family had received death
threats. So he fled. His father sold a tractor and other farm equipment, and his
sisters sold some of their jewelry to raise the several thousand dollars needed
for plane tickets and a false passport. Parlak remembers clearly something his
father told him before he left: ''You're old enough and have been through enough
to know what is right and what is wrong. But no matter what you do, don't stay
in the front or the back, find a place in the middle.'' By that he meant find a
place of comfort and safety.

Parlak told me he had planned his departure carefully. The day before leaving,
he went to a Turkish barber and asked for ''an American haircut,'' and he
purchased new clothes, including a leather jacket, so that he wouldn't attract
attention. Accompanying Parlak on the flight was a Turkish businessman, whom
Parlak had just met and whose travel expenses he paid in exchange for carrying
newspaper clippings and other documents that could help Parlak establish an
asylum claim. Parlak didn't want to transport the papers himself for fear that
he might be stopped and searched along the way. He was also traveling on a false
passport, and so brought papers that could establish his real identity.

In Chicago, the businessman took him to a city college, where there was a
language program for new refugees. There they met Ruth Lambach, its director.
Lambach was immediately drawn to Parlak. ''I looked at Ibrahim in my office,''
she recalls. ''I could feel that he was on the edge of his life, that he didn't
have that many options. He had this amazing warmth and fire in his eyes.''
Parlak is a slender, handsome man, but it's his eyes that most people comment
on. They're deep-set and simultaneously sad and sparkling. ''Dancing eyes,''
Lambach calls them. ''Alert, curious, alive.'' Lambach offered to let him stay
on her couch for the night. He spent much of the next year there, becoming good
friends with Lambach and her son. In those days, Lambach and Parlak, who spoke
no English, communicated in German.

Rebellion and Capture

Parlak immediately applied for political asylum, and two weeks after his arrival
went downtown to the immigration building where he was interviewed about his
claim. There are a number of critical moments in Parlak's story, and this one
has taken on added significance, especially when looked back on through the
prism of today's reordered world. In 1980, Congress passed legislation
formalizing the asylum process, in part to be in compliance with the
longstanding United Nations Convention on refugees and in part to respond to the
influx of Soviet citizens fleeing Communist rule. Over time, the process for
asylum seekers has become more demanding and systematic, but in 1991 it was a
rather straightforward one that relied heavily on the intuition of the
immigration officer. Asylum is given to people who can show a reasonable
likelihood that if they were to return to their countries, they'd be persecuted
because of their religion, race, nationality, social group or political beliefs;
it cannot, however, be given to people who have persecuted others. Applicants
must provide what documentation and narrative they can to substantiate their
claims, though in the end, at least in 1991, much of it came down to a matter of
trust. The immigration officer had to decide whether the applicant's story was
believable.

There is a place on the application where Parlak had to list his residences of
the last five years, the most recent first. It reads like a haiku of his
experience:

Istanbul
Aksaray
Prison in Gaziantep
Mountains of Maras
P.K.K. Camp, Halvi, Lebanon

It's unclear whether Parlak told the asylum officer about his childhood, since
the notes from that interview begin with high school. But Parlak grew up on a
farm with four brothers and five sisters; his father grew wheat, cotton and
watermelon. It was not an easy time to be a Kurd in Turkey, especially for
someone as independent-minded as Parlak. In the 1970's, Turkey refused to
recognize the Kurds as a distinct ethnic group even though half the world's
Kurds -- an estimated 10 to 12 million -- lived in the country.

The Kurds were concentrated in the mountainous regions in the east and south,
where few of their villages had electricity or running water. It has generally
been Turkey's belief that the Kurds need to assimilate and become Turks, in
language, culture and identity. In the 1970's and 1980's, the Kurdish language
was forbidden for official use. Schools taught only in Turkish. Newspapers or
television could not use the Kurdish language. Parents could not give their
children Kurdish names. Kurdish songs and books were banned. Parlak tells the
story of the time the military came through his village, and while his father
threw books into a fire, Parlak and one of his brothers tried to salvage what
they could, burying them in a nearby field. When Parlak was in first grade, a
classmate reported to the authorities that Parlak spoke Kurdish in his home.
When he got to school, his teacher hit him with a wooden cane and then
humiliated him by making him stand by the blackboard all day.

Parlak's father sent him to the nearby city, Gaziantep, for high school, and
it's here that Parlak's asylum testimony picks up. Parlak told the immigration
officer that it was in Gaziantep that he became involved with the burgeoning
Kurdish rights movement, attending meetings and political protests. At one
rally, where he was distributing leaflets and hanging posters, the police
arrested him. He was held for three months -- without ever appearing in front of
a judge -- before being released. He was 16. Realizing the danger of his
involvement in Kurdish affairs, Parlak left for the safety of Germany, where he
lived for the next seven years.

During that time, the mid-1980's, the Kurdish Workers' Party, or P.K.K., emerged
as the leading force for Kurdish rights. It was a Marxist-Leninist insurgent
group (though with no ties to Moscow) that advocated an independent Kurdish
state and was led by Abdullah Ocalan, who would eventually earn a reputation for
his zealotry and brutality (including against P.K.K. members when he lost trust
in them). The P.K.K. conducted guerrilla raids in southeast Turkey, killing
soldiers and police officers as well as civilians who sympathized with the
Turkish authorities. In Europe, Parlak became active in the P.K.K.'s political
arm and organized Kurdish cultural festivals throughout the continent. They had
a dual purpose: to fuel a sense of Kurdish identity as well as to raise money
for P.K.K. activities. Parlak used a pseudonym, Ayhan.

Parlak missed his family, and he carried around their photographs, trying to
memorize their faces so that he wouldn't forget them. He couldn't call them
because his parents' village didn't have telephones. After seven years in
Europe, Parlak decided to return home, with the assistance of the P.K.K. He
thought he could be more effective advocating Kurdish rights in Turkey than he
could from afar.

He told the immigration officer in Chicago that he left Germany for eastern
Lebanon, where he trained at a P.K.K. camp for eight months and where he learned
skills to survive in the mountains. He led a group of five Kurds, and with
Syrian smugglers as guides, crossed the border from Syria into Turkey. A Turkish
patrol discovered them, and a firefight ensued. In recounting this story for the
asylum officer, Parlak -- with the businessman who accompanied him translating
-- told her: ''We were shot at with automatic guns. Three of my friends were
injured, and we returned the gunfire.'' He didn't mention that in the skirmish
two Turkish soldiers were killed. He did, however, submit a Turkish newspaper
article that recounted the incident. The businessman translated the article and
left out mention of the soldiers' deaths. This omission, which Parlak said he
didn't know about at the time, would become important to the government's case
against Parlak.

Parlak evaded capture, and a couple of weeks later, he crossed into Turkey
successfully, spending the next six months hiding in the mountains by day and
traveling by night. Parlak has always maintained that he was there doing
political work, visiting villages to talk about Kurdish rights and Kurdish
culture and to put families of prisoners in touch with support groups in Europe.
(Turkey has never accused him of being involved in any combat outside of the
border skirmish.) On the afternoon of Oct. 29, 1988, as he sat in a small hole
he had dug into the side of a mountain eating a late lunch of macaroni, he was
surrounded by the local police and Turkish soldiers. For a brief moment, Parlak
considered fighting his way out, but thought better of it, and instead hastily
tried -- unsuccessfully -- to burn a journal and some photographs. Parlak was
arrested, and over the next four weeks was continually tortured. He didn't go
into details with the asylum officer, though he told her that he still had the
scars.

Parlak was put on trial in the State Security Courts, a separate judicial system
the Turkish government had established to try leftists and Kurdish separatists.
He was tried along with 57 other suspected militants; he faced the death penalty
for his association with the P.K.K. and for his involvement in the deaths of the
two soldiers (though the court concluded he had not shot them). But his sentence
was reduced because he directed the Turkish police to a buried munitions cache
and promised to end his involvement in Kurdish causes. He was released after
serving 16 months in prison.

This was not, however, what he told the asylum officer. Rather, he told a
half-truth: that he won an early release because of bribes his family paid to
the police and the judge. His family did pay something to the local police,
Parlak says, but he knew that wasn't the complete picture. Parlak now feared the
P.K.K., and so figured the fewer people who knew about his turning over
information, the better. He also felt ashamed. ''I accepted a bargain,'' he told
me. ''I felt selfish.'' At his asylum hearing, along with newspaper articles,
his discharge papers from prison and a recent internal police memo that said he
was wanted for questioning, Parlak brought with him a report from Human Rights
Watch, which condemned Turkey for its mass political trials and for its use of
torture, which ''continued unabated.''

At the end of her interview, the immigration officer asked Parlak, ''What do you
think would happen to you if you returned to Turkey?''

''Everything,'' Parlak replied. ''I'd be lucky to be alive after two to three
weeks.''

Parlak was given working papers after the interview and was granted asylum the
following year. In doing so, the U.S. government gave Parlak refuge, assurance
that it would protect him, that it would ensure his safety, that in the words of
Parlak's father, it would give him ''a place in the middle.'' Parlak says he
thought to himself: One part of my life is behind me. I can start something new.


A Place of Comfort

Parlak slowly learned English, and took his first job, as a room-service waiter
at the Ritz-Carlton in Chicago. In his first year here, on a blind date arranged
by Lambach, he met Michele Gazzolo, a 31-year-old graduate student who grew up
in a Chicago suburb. Gazzolo says she thought Parlak was ''resolute about
everything he did or thought.'' When she asked him if he liked verse, he
replied, ''I don't have time for poetry.'' Parlak told Gazzolo about his time in
Turkey and his involvement with the Kurdish separatist movement, and on their
first date drew the outlines of Kurdistan on a napkin. Kurdistan is the imagined
future home of the roughly 22 million Kurds who live in a contiguous area that
reaches into Turkey, Syria, Iran and Iraq. ''He impressed me as being a person
who knew who he was and what he cared about,'' Gazzolo recalls. The two soon
moved in together.

Parlak had trouble sleeping, and often in the middle of the night he would go to
the kitchen, turn on the light and puff on a Winston cigarette. He was haunted.
Gazzolo tried to get him to talk; his stories came out in bits and pieces. He
told Gazzolo that after he was arrested he was blindfolded and placed in a
box-size cage where the ceiling was too low to stand upright. But he couldn't
sit either, since there was a layer of frigid water and excrement on the floor.
He spent more than a week in this cage, and when he was able to fall asleep, in
a crouching position, guards would spray him with a hose to wake him. His
genitals, he told Gazzolo, still ached from the jolts of electric shock
administered by interrogators. He once was tied to a wall, and had a sandbag
that hung by a rope repeatedly knocked against his chest. He'd go days without
food, and when his captors gave him bread they would smear it in excrement. He
finally gave information to the authorities when they threatened to harm his
father. Gazzolo tried to persuade Parlak to get some help, but he refused. He
wanted to put it behind him, and he feared that talking about it would only
invigorate the memories.

Gazzolo's parents had a summer home in Harbert, and occasionally, she would take
Parlak there. He fell in love with the area, especially the long, winding sandy
beaches, and relished the distance from the big city, mostly because he wanted
to keep his distance from the Kurdish community. He still worried that the
P.K.K. might seek revenge on him for turning over the munitions cache to the
Turkish government. He soon found a job managing a truck stop. He had a
reputation for working long hours, sometimes three shifts in a row, and for
being an outstanding cook. Truckers would radio others about Parlak's lentil
soup. Jo Ann Jansky, the tough-talking waitress, was struck by his generosity.
When Jansky lost her job, Parlak came by her house a few days before Christmas
and handed her a check for $500. This, he told Jansky, was to buy presents for
her grandchildren.

Parlak very much wanted his own restaurant, and so, in 1994, he opened Cafe
Gulistan in a small, low-slung building along the Red Arrow Highway, a busy
thoroughfare that runs along the lake. Gulistan means ''land of roses''; it's
how he and his friends in Turkey referred to Kurdistan because they couldn't
refer to it by name. He planted rosebushes in front of the restaurant and
hollyhocks along the side, and decorated the inside with Kurdish artifacts and
photographs of Kurdish children.

Parlak, in his reserved, unassuming manner, found a community of friends. There
was, for instance, Goldrick, the retired Whirlpool executive. He, Parlak and a
local contractor took tennis lessons together, and nearly every Sunday night
would gather for dinner at Cafe Gulistan, a ritual that they kept for three
years until Parlak's arrest. Goldrick served as a Marine officer in Vietnam, and
so he and Parlak would exchange stories about survival in the bush. ''I came to
consider him a very good friend,'' Goldrick told me, ''one of the greatest human
beings I've had the good fortune to know.''

David Duis, who has been a local patrol officer for 18 years, recalls talking to
Parlak when Cafe Gulistan was burglarized. Restaurant burglaries, Duis told me,
are usually the work of an employee, and so the first thing he asked of Parlak
was to interview the workers there. Parlak resisted. ''He didn't want me to
subject his employees to what he thought would be some kind of interrogation,''
Duis recalled. ''He treated his employees like family.'' The burglary turned out
to have been done by outsiders. Duis became a regular customer. After 9/11, his
police unit was asked by the F.B.I. for background on Parlak. Duis couldn't
understand why they'd be concerned about him.

In 1997, Parlak and Gazzolo had a daughter, Livia. Though they have split up,
they have remained good friends, and Parlak has participated in their daughter's
upbringing. Livia helped her father in the garden, and he taught her what each
herb tasted like so she could pick them for his cooking. He called her maymun,
Kurdish for ''little monkey.'' He joined her school's parents' association, and
when she had trouble with her reading in first grade, he worked with her every
day on phonics and told her that she was teaching him to read English better.
''The sun rises and sets on Livia,'' said a friend.

The Past, Redefined

Parlak's life began to unravel when he took the U.S. citizenship test in 1999.
Applying for citizenship seemed like the natural thing to do. He said he felt
that the United States was where he belonged. His friend Goldrick had been
nudging him to become a full-fledged American. ''I just thought this guy was the
epitome of the immigrant coming to America and making good for himself,''
Goldrick told me. ''He needed to be a citizen.'' So, on a July afternoon, Parlak
drove the 100 miles to Grand Rapids to take his English language and history
tests, both of which he passed easily. Afterward, he was interviewed by an
I.N.S. worker, and she asked him about his involvement with the P.K.K. She
explained that as of 1997, the State Department had listed the P.K.K. as a
terrorist group. He testily told her he had detailed his affiliation in his
asylum application eight years earlier. ''Didn't you just ask me about the
meaning of Fourth of July?'' he asked, referring to the U.S. history test he'd
taken. ''The Kurds fight for their freedom, and why do they have to be
punished?'' She told him that his citizenship application would be delayed. A
month later, an I.N.S. representative sent a terse inquiry to Interpol, asking
for any information it might have on Parlak.

For more than two years, Parlak awaited word on whether his application for
naturalization had been approved. Then, in August 2001, his frustration
mounting, he filed a lawsuit against the I.N.S.; his hope was to expedite the
process. While awaiting word from the I.N.S., Parlak heard instead from the
F.B.I., as the agency began taking a second look at old asylum and immigration
cases after the Sept. 11 attacks. He would meet periodically with a local F.B.I.
agent from nearby St. Joseph, and the two would have coffee together. Wanting to
cooperate fully, Parlak handed out index cards to local law-enforcement
officials with his work and home phone numbers on them.

By the end of 2001, Parlak received a formal denial of his naturalization
request. Then, in April 2002, the I.N.S. filed charges against him for having
lied on his green-card application 10 years earlier. He had answered no to two
questions: one asked if he had ever been arrested for anything, the other
inquired as to whether he had ever provided support to a terrorist organization.
He says he misunderstood the questions because of his English, which was
rudimentary then. In any event, he had previously disclosed his arrest and
P.K.K. affiliation on his asylum application a year earlier.

While his immigration case dragged through the courts, Parlak received a call on
July 29 of last year from the F.B.I. agent in St. Joseph, who invited him over
to his office. Parlak thought it was to be a routine visit. Soon after he sat
down to talk, though, two special D.H.S. agents, who were also seated in the
room, rose from their chairs and handcuffed him. Parlak was told he was under
arrest.

The D.H.S. (the I.N.S. had been subsumed by this new agency) charged Parlak with
committing an aggravated felony after his admission to the U.S. This charge came
out of an unusual turn of events. Shortly after Parlak had been released from a
Turkish prison in 1990, the prosecution there appealed the sentence. The appeal
sat unanswered in the court system until early last year, when the State
Security Court in one of its last acts before it was disbanded (which was a
condition for Turkey's entry into the European Union) resentenced Parlak, in
absentia, to six years. D.H.S., which says it didn't know of Parlak's
involvement in the two soldiers' deaths until 2002, argues that this
resentencing means he was convicted of a felony while he was here, even though
it was a crime for which he had already served time.

But the government soon ratcheted up the charges and accused Parlak of having
engaged in terrorist activity in Turkey. It suddenly became a very different
kind of case.

Terrorist activity as defined by Congress includes the ''intent to endanger,
directly or indirectly, the safety of one or more individuals'' (other than for
mere personal monetary gain), and the government argued that Parlak's presence
at the shooting of the two soldiers fell under this rubric. Parlak was also
charged with providing material support to a terrorist organization, given his
activities with the P.K.K.'s political arm. There have never been any
allegations that Parlak is a threat to the security of this country, or that he
has been involved with any kind of militant group since his arrival here.
Rather, as legislators reshaped the definition of terrorism, first in 1990, then
in 1996, and then again in 2001 -- in the aftermath of 9/11 -- Parlak's
activities in Turkey took on a more sinister coloring. What's more, with each
broadening of the definition by Congress, its application became retroactive.

What Is Terrorism?

There has long been disagreement about what constitutes a terrorist. Often the
definition depends on the historical context. In one case in 1990, immigration
authorities gave asylum to a member of the mujahedeen, a group that used
terrorist tactics against the Soviets in Afghanistan. They said there was no
lawful way for him to change the government. In 1997, a member of the Irish
Republican Army who had served time for bombing police barracks received asylum;
the immigration judge ruled that it was not a terrorist act but a political
offense because of the conflict in Northern Ireland. In the late 80's, the
African National Congress was considered a terrorist group by the Department of
Defense, while the State Department called it ''a legitimate voice'' in South
African affairs. In the past, there has been disagreement over whether a state
can be guilty of using terrorist tactics, and in 1984 a member of Savak, the
shah of Iran's notoriously brutal secret police, received political asylum.

The definition of terrorism in the U.S. has changed over time, as terrorism has
itself changed. In the 1980's, U.S. immigration law had no definition for
terrorism (though it explicitly banned admission of members of the Palestine
Liberation Organization). The State Department thought of it as ''premeditated,
politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets . . .
usually intended to influence an audience.'' In 1990, for purposes of
immigration matters, Congress came up with a definition that didn't explicitly
limit terrorism to attacks against civilians, and while the law didn't take
effect until after Parlak's admission to the U.S., the government argues it
applies retroactively to his case. Then in 1996, after the bombings of the World
Trade Center and the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City -- acts
that seemed designed to take as many lives as possible -- the government made it
a crime to provide any sort of material support, including food and housing, to
a terrorist organization. Congress also directed the State Department to publish
a list of organizations it deemed to be terrorist groups; it included the P.K.K.
Finally, in the U.S. Patriot Act, Congress used broader language so that now a
terrorist organization included any two or more individuals involved in what it
deemed terrorist acts. It was also retroactive to past situations like Parlak's.

''The problem now is that if you broaden it so much, you can pin the label on
anyone you don't like,'' said Louise Richardson, a scholar of terrorist
movements and now the executive dean of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced
Study. ''The P.K.K., while guilty of certain atrocities, were more in line with
a guerrilla group insofar as they had a broad base of support in the Kurdish
community. And the Kurdish community was so discriminated against.''

The P.K.K. nonetheless has been involved in some rather ugly and savage
activity. It not only attacked the Turkish police and military but also went
after civilians, including Turkish teachers in Kurdish communities, and even
fellow Kurds -- especially landlords and the village guards -- who wouldn't take
a stand for a separate Kurdish state. The State Department's Country Reports on
Human Rights Practices for the late 1980's -- the period when Parlak re-entered
Turkey -- chronicled various attacks on civilians by the P.K.K., including on
women and children. While the State Department often referred to the P.K.K. as a
terrorist organization, it also employed the terms ''insurgency,''
''guerrillas'' and ''separatist organization.'' (In newspaper articles about the
P.K.K. from that same period, they're described as ''Kurdish guerrillas,''
''Kurdish insurgents'' and ''Kurdish separatists.'') This isn't to suggest that
the P.K.K. didn't attack civilians, but rather that there was ambiguity about
how we viewed a militant organization that appeared to have some legitimate
complaints. Indeed, a State Department official told me that until the
mid-1990's, Turkey never felt that the U.S. condemned the P.K.K. strongly
enough.

''There's such a fuzzy line between civil war, insurgency and terrorism,'' says
Peter W. Singer of the Brookings Institution. ''To be blunt about it, a lot of
people use Justice Potter Stewart's notion about pornography: I know it when I
see it.''

Since 9/11, it has become a much less fluid term, and like the way we saw the
Communist threat in anyone who opposed us during the cold war, we now see
terrorism in any group that employs unconventional tactics of warfare. But most
important, the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon have colored
our view of history. ''Today, we're looking for terrorism everywhere,'' Singer
says. ''It's the lens through which we view the world. The bar has been lowered.
. . . It's going to shift the way we look at things in the past.''

It's also instructive to revisit 1991, the year Parlak was admitted to the U.S.,
to understand the prism of that time. There was much going on in the world that
made us more tolerant and ready to embrace someone with his background. Two
years earlier the Berlin Wall fell, a grand symbolic moment signaling an
openness and orderliness the world hadn't experienced in a long while. And there
was much worldwide sympathy for the Kurds. In the late 80's, Saddam Hussein
gassed Kurdish villages and carried out mass executions, killing some 100,000.
Then around the time of Parlak's arrival, after the gulf war, roughly half a
million Iraqi Kurds decamped for the safety of Turkey, but tens of thousands
were stranded at the border. There was a world outcry first at Iraq, then at
Turkey, for their treatment of the Kurds. Certainly, these events shaped the way
we viewed someone like Parlak back in 1991.

Jailed and Confused

I visited Parlak this past October at the Calhoun County jail in Battle Creek,
where there's a wing set aside for immigrants awaiting possible deportation. He
has been held without bond because of the terrorism allegations. We sat across
from each other in a small, windowless, white-cinder-block room, and Parlak
spent much of our time together leaning over the table, his attention fully on
the moment, his eyes, as Lambach had suggested, ''dancing.'' They brighten when
he laughs, but even then there's a solemnity about them. (When he spoke of his
torture in Turkey, he averted my gaze altogether.) We spent four hours together,
but this was, it turns out, the last visit D.H.S. would allow reporters.

Parlak, who's now 42, looked thin, his wiry shoulders apparent through his
orange jail garb; he told me he had lost 10 pounds since his arrest. I asked how
he was doing. ''It's not how I expected to spend my summer,'' he said, forcing a
smile.

He told me that shortly after he was arrested and taken here, he decided to
request deportation rather than proceed with a hearing. He didn't have any fight
in him, he told me. He was too angry, too bewildered and too disoriented. Being
incarcerated had revived memories of his time in Turkish prisons. ''It's just
like watching old movies,'' he told me. ''You put your head on the pillow, and
they come.'' Then he heard what his friends were doing on his behalf, about the
fund-raiser, about people stopping by the restaurant to donate money, about
neighbors who hadn't lost faith. And he thought of his daughter, Livia.

Lambach, the first American to befriend him, sent him 36 postcards, all scenes
from Monet's garden, because she knew he loved flowers. Goldrick visited Parlak
in jail and got so choked up that he found it hard to have a conversation.
Through the glass partition, Parlak told Goldrick he was having a hard time with
the radical Muslims in the jail. He would argue with them about America, and
they would deride him for not joining their gripe sessions about the country.
(An Iraqi who was in the jail with Parlak told me that Parlak was a calming
influence there, that many of the immigrants came to him for advice.) Two of his
sisters -- one of whom he hasn't seen in 20 years -- came to the U.S., one from
Switzerland, the other from Germany. And every Monday night, 20 to 40 friends of
Parlak's gather at Cafe Gulistan for a potluck, and Parlak calls to speak with
them.

When I saw him, he clearly seemed boosted if not emboldened by the support.
''I'm not any less American than the judge,'' he said. ''I'm not any less
American than the prosecutors. The America here is not the America I know.''

Parlak talked openly and in great detail about his time as a Kurdish separatist,
about crossing the border, about being armed, about the firefight, about his six
months hiding in the mountains. There wasn't any effort to hide his place in the
Kurdish movement. Regarding his arrest here, he seemed more perplexed than
anything else. Periodically he would say to me: ''Why? I've been asking myself
that question over and over.''

Parlak had a pile of papers in front of him, many of them legal documents. On
the top were a few pages of notes he had jotted for himself, some in English but
much in Kurdish. He told me that he can't sleep for more than two to three hours
at a time, so he'll often record what he can remember of the events 16 years
ago. The hardest thing, though, was being away from his 7-year-old daughter,
with whom he had had only one contact visit, but who comes to see him almost
every Thursday morning at the jail. They talk through a glass partition. At one
point, using toothpaste, he glued photographs of Livia to a sheet of cardboard,
but the guards told him he had to take it down. ''The only thing I could tell
her,'' he said, ''is that I didn't do anything wrong. That it's a mistake. That
we'll fix it.''

A Defiant Hearing

On a gloomy, rainy Monday morning this past December, Parlak, whose hair had
grayed considerably after four months in detention, was escorted by federal
agents, one of them toting an automatic, into the building that houses Detroit's
immigration court. Parlak's wrists were tethered to a manacle around his waist.

His friends, each of whom wore a sticker with a photograph of a red rose, waited
for him outside the courtroom, and when he appeared, burst into applause. Livia
wore a T-shirt that read: ''Free My Dad.'' People squeezed onto the nine wooden
benches of the compact courtroom; two of the benches were filled with reporters
from small newspapers that serve the area around Parlak's hometown, as well
reporters from The Chicago Tribune and ''Nightline.'' Goldrick spent the first
day in a blue poncho with the words ''Free Ibrahim'' on the back, parading in
front of the building, holding aloft his ''Free Ibrahim'' lawn sign.

The prosecutor was Mark Jebson, 37, a rapid-fire speaker with the
straight-backed bearing of a marine. He has spent most of his career working for
immigration, first for the I.N.S. and then for the D.H.S. By contrast, Parlak's
legal team was unusually large -- seven in all; there was room for only three of
them at the defense table, so the others crammed into the front bench. They
included two attorneys from the Chicago office of a large corporate law firm
that had agreed to take the case pro bono. (One of them, David Foster, was
Gazzolo's cousin, who had known Parlak for many years.) A D.H.S. official later
commented to me, ''That kind of goes against the perception of David going
against Goliath.''

The attorney who spent the most time visiting Parlak in jail, and who would be
the one to question him in court, was a demure, soft-spoken woman, Anne
Buckleitner. Buckleitner, who is in private practice in Grand Rapids, first
heard about Parlak's case when she read a local newspaper article about his
arrest and remembers thinking to herself, He was in trouble now for what he'd
already opened up about? This can't be right. There's got to be more to this
story.

From 1989 to 1999, Buckleitner worked for the F.B.I. at its Washington
headquarters, the last five of them as an assistant general counsel specializing
in counterintelligence and counterterrorism. (She and her law partner, John
Smietanka, who also served in the U.S. attorney general's office during the
Reagan and first Bush administrations, have taken on Parlak's case at a reduced
fee.) Buckleitner remembers the debates she and her F.B.I. colleagues would have
over what constitutes a terrorist organization, especially because they saw the
emergence of radical Islamic fundamentalists who had no connection to a country
or a discernible cause. Buckleitner wondered if the government might have reason
to believe that Parlak posed a security threat, but she became satisfied --
through her meetings with him and through her own investigation -- that that
wasn't the case. ''Government people often times lose a perspective of the power
and the impact that their actions have,'' she told me. ''When you have shifting
goal posts, I don't know how Ibrahim could anticipate what would be important to
the government.''

The hearing lasted two days, and it was Parlak's testimony that occupied most of
the time. Parlak, who had had little sleep, looked on edge. He wore an
ill-fitting green suit and, because he hadn't been given time to shave at the
jail, had a day's worth of growth. He appeared nervous, and often sat on his
hands, his body leaning forward, as if he couldn't decide how best to appear,
deferential or assertive. One friend noticed that his English, usually quite
good, was more halting and choppy than usual. His exchanges with Jebson, the
prosecutor, were combative. Indeed, Parlak's demeanor was at times defiant,
which made his answers seem elusive. At one point, Jebson asked Parlak about the
pseudonym he used while in Germany.

''Was that your code name?'' Jebson asked.

''Could be,'' Parlak replied. Jebson approached him.

''It is or it isn't,'' he demanded.

''It was.''

Toward the end of the hearing, Jebson asked Parlak if he still supported the
P.K.K.

''As long as they stay with the Kurdish issue,'' he said. ''I want the Kurds to
be free to speak their language, to experience the culture. If the P.K.K.
encourages that, then we're on the same page. I don't agree with their military
tactics. I agree with their ideals.'' In subsequent conversations, Parlak has
made it clear that his fire for Kurdish rights has not diminished.

Jebson contended that Parlak's asylum application ''was full of lies,'' and in
his conclusion argued that ''if he had told the truth, we never would have
granted him asylum.'' During the two-day hearing, Jebson presented some material
that Parlak had not disclosed when he entered the U.S., including the fact that
right before crossing the border into Turkey he had a farewell meeting with the
P.K.K. leader Ocalan, that he was the commander of the five men and that a
grenade fell from his pack when he fled. The bulk of Jebson's argument rested on
the contention that Parlak had hidden his involvement in the deaths of the two
soldiers. Parlak continues to maintain that he always believed the newspaper
article had been fully translated.

For Jebson, it seemed clear: Parlak had a violent past. He had tried to re-enter
Turkey carrying an AK-47, a pistol and a grenade, prepared to do battle. When
Jebson asked why he was armed, Parlak replied: ''Because I was in danger. The
Turkish government considered me an enemy, and I considered them an enemy.''
Jebson appeared irritated by the efforts of Parlak's lawyers to make his
activities seem benign. While they wanted to establish that Parlak was not part
of the P.K.K.'s military arm, they sometimes soft-pedaled the evidence. At one
point, they argued unconvincingly that the P.K.K. camp where Parlak spent time
could also be considered a refugee camp for the elderly and children. Plain and
simple, Parlak was armed and involved in illegal activity in Turkey. About that
there seems no doubt.

Indeed, in the end, what's most striking is not how far apart the two sides are,
but how much they agree on. Jebson confirmed that assessment. ''Mr. Parlak
admitted almost everything I questioned him on,'' he told me after the hearing.
Parlak by his own admission had been associated with the P.K.K. He had told the
asylum officer that he attended a P.K.K. camp in Lebanon, and that he was a
member of the P.K.K.'s political arm. (The government does claim, though, that
there was little distinction between the political and military wings of the
organization.) Parlak had spoken of crossing the border into Turkey illegally
and in court acknowledged the death of the two Turkish soldiers. The government
doesn't dispute that Parlak himself didn't shoot the soldiers. Parlak spoke of
his torture, and of his ultimate conviction and prison sentence. None of that is
in dispute. Rather, it seems, what is in question is how we view his activities
now, through the prism of a post-9/11 world.

''Mr. Parlak,'' Jebson said in his concluding remarks, ''is literally the
complete terrorist package. . . . There are many governments in this world that
would claim Osama bin Laden as a freedom fighter. He's not a freedom fighter.
He's a terrorist. Parlak is not a freedom fighter. He's a terrorist.''

But is he? Was he? Parlak and his lawyers argue that he never committed any
violent acts against civilians, that he was in fact convicted in Turkey not for
being a terrorist but rather for his activities advocating an independent
Kurdish state. They also argue that, to use their words, he has been ''road
tested,'' that in his 14 years here he has shown himself to be an ideal citizen.
Until changes in the immigration laws in 1996, if you'd been in this country for
seven years, proved yourself to be of good moral character and had a family who
depended on you, it was enough to avoid deportation. ''I think the way he was
treated speaks for itself,'' Buckleitner said, referring to the asylum office.
''They had comfort with what they knew and let him in.''

At his hearing, Parlak testified to his torture in a closed courtroom with only
the attorneys and the D.H.S. guards present. It was, one of his lawyers said, a
highly emotional session. Immediately afterward Parlak was allowed a break, and
the plainclothes officer guarding him allowed him a visit with his daughter in a
room off the hallway. He left the door open. At one point, Buckleitner passed
by. She noticed Livia in her father's lap and the guard sitting in a corner
reading a newspaper. ''Something about that scene, coming on the heels of that
testimony, just overwhelmed me,'' Buckleitner said. ''The guard seemed real
comfortable with him. I have to think that the guards were also affected by his
deportment and his testimony.'' Buckleitner told she me she got teary-eyed, and
still can't fathom why the government is so determined to prosecute this case.
''Maybe,'' she suggested, ''it's because they've been dealt so many blows on the
criminal side, and so they're just digging in their heels.''

It is the question that everyone familiar with this saga asks: Why? Is this a
political payoff to Turkey, whose assistance in the Middle East we rely on?
Unlikely. The State Department had no involvement in this case, and an officer
at the Turkish Embassy told me that while Turkey was satisfied that the U.S. had
gone after Parlak, Turkish authorities had not made a decision whether to even
allow him back into Turkey. (Oddly enough, the U.S. government has in recent
years tried to get Turkey to expand its offer of limited amnesty to P.K.K.
members; since the 1999 capture of Ocalan, P.K.K. activities have diminished
considerably.) Are there suspicions that Parlak might still be active in any
kind of nefarious activity since his arrival here? There's been no suggestion of
that. It may be as simple as this: since 9/11, the government has clamped down
on immigration cases (57 percent more people were deported last year than in the
year 2000), and we now see threats where we didn't before. From D.H.S.'s
perspective, they're simply following the letter of the law.

''There's a lot of people on his side who really feel that he's helpless victim
of government oppression,'' said Robin Baker, the director of detention and
removal for a D.H.S. branch based in Detroit. ''Frankly, if people wanted an
individual who's admitted to being a member of a terrorist organization and
who's been held responsible for the murders of two people to live in their
neighborhood, then they should contact our elected representatives and ask them
to change the law because all we're doing is enforcing the law.''

Even if you presume, as the government does, that Parlak once engaged in
terrorist activity, is he still a terrorist? I spoke with Henri Barkey, an
expert on Turkey who served on the policy-planning staff at the U.S. State
Department in the late 90's. ''If we're going to brand a terrorist forever and
go after them until the cows come home, we'll never win this thing,'' he said of
the country's war on terrorism. ''If there's no redemption, we'll either have to
jail them forever or kill them.''

After the hearing, in a phone conversation from jail, Parlak told me that a year
and a half before his arrest, the F.B.I. approached him with a vague proposal to
infiltrate the P.K.K. somewhere in the Middle East. Parlak declined the offer.
When asked about this, the F.B.I. refused comment and asked that I speak to the
D.H.S. A spokesman there said, ''Nobody will disclose that a conversation
materialized.'' Privately, a D.H.S. official said that he had been told that the
F.B.I. had pitched Parlak, though he didn't know the details. What does it say
that at one point one arm of the U.S. government felt confident enough in
Parlak's integrity to think that he could re-enter the Kurdish separatist
movement and turn over valuable information? It's further evidence, I suppose,
that we see what we want to see.

The Court Rules

On Dec. 29, Elizabeth A. Hacker, a U.S. immigration judge, issued a scathing
59-page decision, ordering Parlak deported to Turkey. She wrote that she didn't
find Parlak credible because of ''his evasive demeanor'' at the hearing. She
agreed with the prosecution on virtually every point. She wrote that Parlak's
''actions as a restaurateur, father and resident of Harbert are not the subject
of this hearing.'' She continued: he ''is accountable for the actions he took
prior to entry into the United States and the actions in obtaining his status
under the immigration laws before this Court.'' Parlak's attorneys are
appealing, first to the Board of Immigration Appeals, and then if necessary to
the federal courts.

Meanwhile, Parlak worries that if sent back to Turkey he would be a target of
the authorities and of the P.K.K., which he says he believes views him as a
traitor to their cause. (Despite his new sentence, he doesn't have to serve any
more prison time because he has already fulfilled one-fifth of it, which was all
that was required by the Turkish court.) If Turkey -- which long ago revoked
Parlak's citizenship -- refuses him entry, then it's unclear what will happen.
It's highly unusual for a deportee to be sent to a third country. Theoretically,
he could be detained indefinitely, if it was believed he posed a danger to the
community. Otherwise, he could be temporarily released under supervision. A
D.H.S. spokesman told me, ''Ibrahim Parlak will never walk these streets
again.''

Shortly after the decision, I spoke with Parlak's neighbors. I thought that
given the forcefulness of the judge's decision, some of them might now think
differently about their friend. Goldrick conceded to me that he had been worried
that maybe the government had something on Parlak that would suggest he was
engaged in villainous activity here. ''I thought, I'll kill you if you haven't
been honest with us,'' he told me. But in the end it was as he had known it to
be. ''You better go and round up all those people who fought the apartheid
government in South Africa,'' he told me, sounding even more agitated than when
I'd spoken to him a couple of months earlier. He's in Florida for the winter,
and told me that when he returns to Michigan, he intends to continue lobbying
his local politicians.

David Duis, the local police officer who testified at an earlier hearing, told
me that he plans to visit Parlak in jail. ''There's a big difference between law
and justice,'' he said. ''The law says some things can be done, and justice is
what's the right thing to do. I think in this situation, the law may say we can
deport him, but I don't think it's justice.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Parlak in his cafe before his arrest. (Photograph by Michelle
Gazzolo)Drawings: Turkish troops discovered Parlak in his mountain hideaway.
First Date: When Parlak first met Michele Gazzolo, he sketched out a map of an
imagined Kurdistan for her.
Stopover: Parlak managed a truck stop and was known for his cooking, especially
his lentil soup.
Cafe Gulistan: Parlak opened his restaurant in 1994. It was there that he built
up the community of friends who would become staunch supporters after his
arrest.
Without Bail: In a Michigan jail cell, Parlak used toothpaste to hold up
pictures of his daughter, but was told to take them down
The Hearing: Parlak was often combative and his English which was usually
smooth, became halting.
 For the Defense: Parlak's friends paraded outside the courthouse and packed the
courtroom during his hearing (Illustrations by Tomer Hanuka)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); RESTAURANTS (71%); LAKES (70%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (69%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (69%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (68%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (68%);
WAR & CONFLICT (66%); IMMIGRATION (65%); WEB SITES (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (79%); LANSING, MI, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%); LAKE MICHIGAN (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); TURKEY (94%); MIDDLE EAST (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             550 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Council Approves Penalties In Darfur

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 29


The Security Council voted Tuesday to impose sanctions on individuals in the
conflicted Darfur region of Sudan who commit atrocities or break cease-fire
agreements.

The vote was 12 to 0, with three countries -- Algeria, China and Russia --
abstaining. Under the resolution, all 15 countries would contribute members to a
new panel that would decide who was eligible for punishment.

The measure, drafted by the United States, bans travel by individuals who are
deemed guilty of offenses and freezes their assets. It also forbids the Sudanese
government in Khartoum from conducting offensive military flights into Darfur
and from sending military equipment there without first notifying the Security
Council.

It did not contain an oil embargo, a step that probably would have brought a
veto from China, which is a principal buyer of Sudanese oil.

It was the second Sudan resolution in a week. Criticism of the Council has been
rising after two months of inaction on Darfur. The other one, also written by
the United States, passed Thursday and authorized a 10,715-member peacekeeping
force to monitor the peace agreement in the south of Sudan and to lend
assistance to the 2,000-soldier African Union force in Darfur.

A third resolution, which would determine what court should handle war-crimes
suspects, is scheduled for action Wednesday. The resolution, drafted by France
and supported by 11 of the Council members, proposes that suspects be tried in
the International Criminal Court in The Hague. The United States opposes the
court, and Stuart Holliday, a deputy American ambassador, declined Tuesday to
say whether the United States would veto the measure.

The United States suggested creating a new court for Sudanese crimes in Arusha,
Tanzania, but the idea attracted little support. Nine of the 15 Council members
have ratified the treaty creating the international court, and three others,
Algeria, the Philippines and Russia, have signed it.

The Darfur sanctions resolution said the people subject to its terms would be
those who were found to ''impede the peace process, constitute a threat to
stability in Darfur and the region, commit violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law or other atrocities.''

In statements by their ambassadors, the three abstaining countries said they
felt that putting pressure on Sudan would be counterproductive. ''You may end up
complicating the situation and making it more difficult to resolve,'' said
Andrei Denisov, the Russian ambassador.

Passage of the measure brought a rebuke from Elfatih Mohamed Ahmed Erwa, the
Sudanese ambassador, who complained that the real impulse had come from members
of the United States Congress who he complained were beholden to ''pressure
groups and drum-beaters.''

He charged that American lawmakers knew nothing about his country and never
visited or read about it, a critique that brought a rejoinder from Mr. Holliday.
Saying he had not meant to make a statement, Mr. Holliday asked for the floor to
''defend the honor of the United States Congress.'' He told Mr. Erwa that,
contrary to his assertion that the lawmakers ignored his country, many of them
had gone there to see the situation firsthand.

The United Nations office in Khartoum reported Tuesday that the number of people
displaced from their homes as a result of the conflict in Darfur had reached 2.4
million. The United Nations estimates that 180,000 people have died, but other
reliable estimates place the figure at 300,000.

Pro-government Arab militias, including those known as the janjaweed, have been
blamed for most of the violence, including rape, murder and arson. The Security
Council has been pressing the government to arrest and prosecute the militia
leaders, and this week Khartoum announced that it had taken 24 people into
custody on suspicion of crimes including rape and murder in Darfur.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); APPROVALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); BUDGETS (79%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(78%); VETO (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); FINES & PENALTIES (58%) Politics and
Government; Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; United States International
Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);
AFRICAN UNION (55%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%) United Nations

PERSON: Ariel (Prime Min) Sharon; Steven Erlanger; Warren Hoge

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AFRICA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%);
ISRAEL (79%); FRANCE (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); China

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             559 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 6, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sweden Boldly Exposes a Secret Side of Women's Lives

BYLINE: By Lizette Alvarez

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; LETTER FROM EUROPE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM


Full-throated feminism and its offspring, gender equality, have never gone out
of vogue in Sweden.

Feminists here are seldom hectored about quashing family values or derided, at
least publicly, as a gang of castration-happy women. Relentlessly, they have
pushed for women's rights, and their triumphs are well known. Sweden ranks at
the top (or near it) in the number of women who hold public office, serve as
cabinet ministers, graduate from college and hold jobs. Mothers are granted long
maternity leaves and send their children to excellent day care centers.

If anything, the movement is gaining strength: Sweden is expected later this
year to create its first feminist political party, which could court as many as
1 in 5 voters, a recent opinion poll indicated.

But there is one significant blot on the record of women's empowerment here:
domestic violence, a crime that until recently remained muffled in shame.

Swedish men are not any more violent toward women than the men of most other
Western European countries. It has simply been easier for them to get away with
violence against wives and girlfriends, experts and politicians said, and harder
for women to get the help they need.

In an unforeseen twist, Sweden's well-guarded sense of privacy and its
leadership on women's rights served for many years to mute the issue. Rather
than boldly tackle the pattern of violence, many in Sweden reflexively dismissed
it as the sort of thing that happens somewhere else.

''The equality thing put a wet blanket over the issue,'' said Eva Hassel Calais,
assistant to the chairwoman of the National Organization for Women's Shelters in
Sweden.

But this is changing.

It took a stinging Amnesty International report and startling admissions by
well-known victims to set off a national reckoning that began last year. That
has been followed by calls for action, not for new laws -- Sweden has passed a
series of tough, progressive laws in recent years -- but for new attitudes.

A period of self-reflection was inevitable.

''We've had to change our picture of ourselves in Sweden,'' said Maria
Carlshamre, a former television journalist who acknowledged last summer to
viewers, against the station's wishes, that her husband had abused her for a
decade. ''We are not the gender equality champions of the world.''

The turmoil began a year ago with the Amnesty International report, which took
Sweden to task for failing to adequately curb violence against women and help
victims cope with their situations. The organization also cited spotty
prosecutions, vague statistics, old-fashioned judges and unresponsive local
governments.

The report praised Sweden's laws as ''unambiguous,'' but warned that ''strongly
worded legislation is not in itself a sufficient instrument to ensure women's
right to a life without violence.''

The group concluded that acts of violence against women had spiraled upward in
Sweden in the last 15 years, a jump that could not be explained away as merely a
greater willingness by women to report the incidents. The number of police
reports filed for assault against women increased 40 percent in the 1990's,
according to the Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention.

By 2003 the number of reported assaults had swelled to 22,400, from 14,000 in
1990. An estimated 16 women are killed by a husband or partner each year, the
report said. And only a fraction of the cases involving assaults, rape, breaches
of restraining orders or continuing abuse lead to prosecution, the report
stated. The report also underscored that most incidents of violence against
women continue to go unreported.

In addition, the network of shelters for battered women is deeply frayed, the
reports says, with only about 150 of the 289 municipalities in Sweden operating
shelters. Those open for business rely almost entirely on volunteer workers.

Like a picture-perfect family forced to come clean, Sweden found itself baring
its own foibles, women and experts said. ''There has been a turning point,''
said Liza Marklund, a journalist and best-selling novelist whose books have
explored themes of violence against women. ''Now people are beginning to take it
seriously.''

In October, Gudrun Schyman, one of Sweden's most colorful and radical feminist
politicians, proposed a ''man tax'' in Parliament, where she is a member of the
Left Party. The idea was to force men to pay for the consequences of their
violence against women. The proposal stalled, but seized the public's attention.

Not long after, the justice minister, Thomas Bodstroem, declared his own outrage
during a November demonstration to protest men's violence against women.

''Let this become an election issue in 2006,'' he announced. ''Silence is a
betrayal to all abused women, and a help to all violent men.''

In March, the prosecutor general proposed building a team of 35 special
prosecutors devoted to the issue of violence against women. There have also been
proposals to electronically tag men who break the law.

The pervading sense that domestic violence is a crime affecting ''others'' is
dissipating.

''It's not a question of a group of criminals,'' said Ms. Schyman, who is
leading the campaign for the feminist party. ''It's not alcoholics and drug
users, and it's not people that are put out from the society. It's every man and
in every class of society.''

The same is true of the victims.

Ms. Carlshamre, 48, helped crack the code of silence last summer with her
surprising on-air admission that she had been beaten and psychologically abused
for 10 years.

''I said, 'Do you want to know what a battered woman looks like? Here she is,'''
she recalled.

Ms. Carlshamre said she was fired because her bosses, fearing slander charges,
had warned that the topic was off limits. She then ran for a seat in the
European Parliament on an anti-violence platform, and won. ''Now you can't talk
about battered women like 'them' anymore,'' she said. ''It's no longer about
poor women on the fringe of society.''

Still, many women are skeptical that things will change all that much, or that
fast, and they point to the stubborn gender imbalance in the country's power and
pay structure as the major reason why. This is precisely the reason why
feminists are trying to form a political party.

''We have made much progress in the discussion of gender equality; it is a more
advanced political debate,'' Ms. Schyman said. ''This is one thing, and reality
is another.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: After years of reflexively dismissing domestic violence as a
crime affecting ''others,'' Swedes are taking action to stop it. (Photo by Linus
Meyer/Pressens Bild)
 Eva Hassel Calais, of the National Organization for Women's Shelters in Sweden.
(Photo by Rob Schoenbaum for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (95%); WOMEN (92%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%);
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (90%); DOMESTIC OFFENSES (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (90%); FAMILY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (88%); MATERNITY LEAVE (78%); MEN (78%); TEMPORARY
SHELTERS (75%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICS (74%); VIOLENT CRIME
(73%); WOMEN'S SHELTERS (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (70%); JOURNALISM (67%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (63%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (50%) Domestic
Violence; Public Opinion; Law and Legislation; Feminist Movement; Domestic
Violence

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%)
Amnesty International

PERSON: Lizette Alvarez

CITY: STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN (58%)

COUNTRY: SWEDEN (99%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Sweden

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             563 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Appeals Court Is Urged to Let Guantanamo Trials Resume

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


A senior lawyer in the Bush administration urged a federal appeals court on
Thursday to allow the resumption of war crimes trials in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
as part of the effort to defend against terrorists.

The lawyer, Peter D. Keisler, the assistant attorney general who heads the civil
division of the Justice Department, said the trials that a federal judge halted
on Nov. 8 were an important part of the fight against terrorism. The trials, Mr.
Keisler said, ''send a message that if you commit terrible crimes, we will
capture you, we will give you a fair trial, and if you're convicted, we will
impose a just sentence.''

The administration is appealing the stopping of the trial of Salim Ahmed Hamdan,
a former driver for Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan who is facing charges of
terrorism. In his ruling, Judge James Robertson said the military commissions
could not proceed because they did not provide minimally fair procedures and
violated international law.

The hearing before a three-judge panel on Thursday was one part of a battle
fought on many legal fronts between the administration and lawyers representing
the Guantanamo detainees.

The issues involve a complex mix of United States and international law, and the
arguments put forward on Thursday ranged across the Constitution, the Uniform
Code of Military Justice, the Geneva Conventions and the Pentagon rules for the
Guantanamo trials, the first such proceedings held by the United States since
World War II ended.

Mr. Keisler, representing the government, said Judge Robertson's statement that
the detainees had to be treated as prisoners of war was incorrect. He said that
because Al Qaeda did not sign the Geneva Conventions, the principal
international code of the laws of war, its members were not entitled to the
protections afforded prisoners of war, which include the right not to be put on
trial for hostilities.

Mr. Keisler said that Qaeda fighters openly defied the Geneva accords' rules for
war, which include prohibiting making civilians targets and requiring the
wearing of uniforms to distinguish fighters from civilians.

Judge Robertson ruled that President Bush had violated his obligation to comply
with the requirement in the Geneva Conventions that captured combatants had to
be put before a tribunal to determine whether they were entitled to
prisoner-of-war protections.

Mr. Bush declared all Qaeda and Taliban fighters unlawful enemy combatants.

Mr. Keisler also argued that the judges should let the trials proceed and
consider afterward whether they were fair.

Prof. Neal K. Katyal of the Georgetown University law school, representing Mr.
Hamdan, said the administration had consistently tried to keep its detention
procedures free from oversight by judges.

''The government wants to make this case about judicial interference with the
executive function,'' Professor Katyal said, ''and what this case is about is
executive interference with the judicial function.'' He said Mr. Hamdan was
justifiably afraid that the procedures could suddenly be changed. The rules for
the war crimes trial commissions, he said, did not constitute ''a system of
laws, but a system where the rules can be changed at any time.''

Professor Katyal also said that by virtue of being imprisoned for more than
three years at Guantanamo, with more than 10 months in solitary confinement, Mr.
Hamdan was ''going insane.''

Mr. Hamdan, a Yemeni, has said through his lawyers that although he was Mr. bin
Laden's driver, he was not involved with Al Qaeda.

Four detainees have been formally charged with war crimes. Twelve are also
eligible to be charged, and Colonel Swann said several others might soon be
charged.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); JUDGES (91%); TERRORISM (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); LAWYERS
(89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); APPEALS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(86%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
MILITARY COURTS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); WORLD
WAR II (73%); NAVIES (73%); SCHOOL DRESS CODES (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (63%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (60%) Freedom and Human Rights
; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (58%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%) Salim Ahmed Hamdan; Neil A
Lewis; Peter D (Asst Atty Gen) Keisler; George W (Pres) Bush; Osama Bin Laden;
James (Judge) Robertson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             571 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Connecticut Approves Civil Unions For Gays

BYLINE: By WILLIAM YARDLEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 833 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, April 20


Gov. M. Jodi Rell on Wednesday signed into law a measure allowing same-sex
couples to enter into civil unions, making Connecticut the second state after
Vermont to approve such unions and the first to do so without pressure from the
courts.

''I think that it certainly bodes well for Connecticut that we didn't have to be
ordered to do this,'' said Mrs. Rell, a Republican, who signed the bill about an
hour after the Democratic-controlled Senate approved the measure by a three to
one ratio. The House passed the bill last week 85 to 63.

Under the law, which takes effect on Oct. 1, couples in civil unions will
essentially have all of the rights and protections the state provides married
couples, from tax benefits and insurance coverage to hospital visiting rights to
family leave from work.

The law also includes an amendment, added last week, that defines marriage as
being between a man and a woman.

Mrs. Rell had encouraged the amendment, though she stopped short of saying
whether her support for civil unions depended on it.

''I have said all along that I believe in no discrimination of any kind, and I
think that this bill accomplishes that while at the same time preserving the
traditional language that a marriage is between a man and a woman,'' the
governor said outside her office after signing the bill.

The relative ease with which civil unions became law in Connecticut contrasts
with the trend across the country.

Fourteen states have voted to ban gay marriage since last year. Earlier this
month, Kansas voted to ban gay marriage and civil unions.

Yet in New England, Connecticut falls cleanly into a countertrend. Vermont
approved civil unions in 2000, and Massachusetts last year began allowing gay
couples to marry. Vermont and Massachusetts adopted new policies after courts
ruled that gay couples were being discriminated against.

Connecticut also faces a discrimination lawsuit, supported by the same gay
activists who pushed lawsuits in Vermont and Massachusetts, but the suit could
be years from resolution. And many lawmakers said on Wednesday that their
support for civil unions was less a defensive act against a potential court
ruling than the obvious next step for a state with a 15-year history of
expanding gay rights.

In 1990, the state passed a law that included gay people among those protected
under a hate-crimes law. The next year, the state added protections in housing
and employment laws. In 2000, the state made it easier for gay couples to adopt
children.

''This is a different state in many ways,'' said Representative Michael P.
Lawlor, a Democrat from East Haven, who was the bill's lead supporter in the
House, which Democrats control 99 to 52. ''I think Democrats and Republicans can
disagree about the budget, but when it comes to basic human rights issues, we
don't disagree that much. There was more evidence of that today.''

Public opinion polls also showed support for civil unions. A poll released this
month by Quinnipiac University showed that 56 percent of Connecticut voters
supported civil unions and 37 percent were opposed. The poll showed that 53
percent opposed gay marriage and 42 percent supported it.

Some viewed the civil unions bill as a compromise. Earlier this year, the
state's most prominent gay marriage activist group, Love Makes a Family, opposed
the bill for civil unions, vowing to settle only for marriage.

A longtime lobbyist for gay rights, Betty Gallo, eventually broke from Love
Makes a Family, saying she could not oppose increased rights for gay couples.

Loves Makes a Family later said it would end its opposition to the bill, and the
measure then moved quickly out of committee to the Senate floor two weeks ago.

''We don't want to overplay the rights versus the status and dignity that come
with marriage,'' said Anne Stanback, the president of Love Makes a Family. ''But
today we celebrate.''

Ms. Gallo said on Wednesday that opposition to civil unions was mostly rooted in
wariness of a lifestyle foreign to many people.

She said the bill's passage was brought about partly by the activists' strategy
of having gay couples invite lawmakers and others into their homes, where such
wariness ''goes away when you know people and you go into their houses and have
coffee and pastries.''

The bill passed on the day that Roman Catholic clergymen in the state, and many
parishioners, make their annual visit to the Capitol to lobby for their
legislative agenda. This year the agenda included one item reflected in the
stickers many wore: ''Protect Marriage!''

Peter Wolfgang, a lobbyist and the public policy director for the Family
Institute of Connecticut, which opposes civil unions, said his group would make
them an issue in next year's election.

He and others said that polls misrepresent voter sentiment and that lawmakers
are being deceived by lobbyists who support civil unions.

''This is basically the end of one phase and the beginning of another,'' Mr.
Wolfgang said. ''It's all about 2006.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Andrew McDonald, a Stamford Democrat, spoke yesterday
in favor of civil unions for gay couples. (Photo by Bob Child/Associated Press)
Catholic clergymen and parishioners in Hartford yesterday
 they lobbied to protect traditional marriage. (Photo by Phil Noel/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (95%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (92%); COHABITATION
(90%); DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); APPROVALS (90%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); LGBT RIGHTS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); MARRIAGE LAW (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); GOVERNORS
(79%); GAY PARENTING (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (74%); FAMILY (74%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (72%); TRENDS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); HATE CRIME
(68%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (61%) Marriages; Law and Legislation;
Homosexuality

PERSON: M JODI RELL (91%) William Yardley; M Jodi (Gov) Rell

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (92%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (97%); VERMONT, USA (94%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (93%);
NORTHEAST USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Connecticut

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             574 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1093 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-7

Kurds May Be Stalling New Iraqi Government
Some leading Kurdish political figures are trying to stall the formation of a
new Iraqi government in an effort to force out Ibrahim Jaafari, the Shiite
chosen two weeks ago as prime minister, Iraqi and Western officials said.   A1

Investigators have discovered a video posted on the Internet by a group calling
itself the Islamic Army in Iraq that includes a sequence showing the execution
of a survivor from the crash of a Bulgarian Mi-8 transport helicopter that was
shot down near Baghdad.   A8

Pope's Growth From Scandal
The man who is now Pope Benedict XVI had more responsibility than any other
cardinal in the Vatican for deciding whether and how to discipline Roman
Catholic priests accused of sexual abuse. The scandal changed the church in the
United States, and it may have changed Pope Benedict as well.   A1

China to Thwart Protests
China made clear, in an orchestrated effort to clamp down on rising nationalist
anger, that it would tolerate no more anti-Japanese protests.   A3

Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi offered the most public apology in a decade
over Japan's wartime aggression in Asia.   A3

U.S. Accused on Detentions
A United Nations human rights monitor has accused American military forces and
contractors in Afghanistan of acting above the law in the detaining of people.
A4

Terror Trials Begin in Spain
Twenty-four people accused of forming or aiding a cell of Al Qaeda in Spain,
including three charged with helping to plan the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks in the United States, went on trial.   A10

Rice Freed German Detainee
A German citizen detained for five months in an Afghanistan prison was released
in May 2004 on direct orders from Condoleezza Rice, then the national security
adviser, after she learned the man had been mistakenly identified as a terror
suspect, government officials said.   A3

NATIONAL   A8-11;14

9/11 Suspect Admits Role,Pleads Guilty in Conspiracy
Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person to stand trial in the United States in
connection with the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, pleaded guilty to
participating in a broad conspiracy by Al Qaeda to fly planes into American
buildings.   A1

Cheney Enters Fight for Judges
Vice President Dick Cheney plunged the White House into the judicial
confirmation battle by saying he supported changing the Senate rules to stop the
Democrats from blocking judicial nominees.   A1

Bush on Hospital Rules
The Bush administration told doctors and hospitals that they must make every
effort to save the lives of premature babies born after failed abortions. The
administration's directive said such efforts were required by a 2002 law known
as the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act.   A10

Arrest Made in Wendy's Case
A woman who said she found a finger in her beef chili at a Wendy's restaurant
has been charged with attempted larceny in what the police are calling a hoax
against the chain.   A9

Oregon City Plans Pullout
Citing irreconcilable differences with how the Federal Bureau of Investigation
has operated in a post-Sept. 11 world, city officials in Portland, Ore., said
they planned to pull their police officers out of an F.B.I.- run anti-terrorism
task force.   A9

Intelligence Chief Greets Staff
On his first day as director of national intelligence, John D. Negroponte sent
greetings from his headquarters to the thousands of spies and bureaucrats whose
$40-billion-a-year labors he is charged with hammering into a stronger bulwark
against terrorism.   A10

Hate Mail on Illinois Campus
Scores of African-American and Hispanic students at a small Evangelical
Christian college missed classes after a series of racist letters spurred their
evacuation.   A14

Beliefs   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Top New York City OfficialPleads Guilty in Ferry Crash
The former director of the city's ferry operations, Patrick Ryan, pleaded guilty
to negligent manslaughter in the Staten Island ferry crash that killed 11
passengers in 2003, admitting that he failed to ensure the safe operation of the
system and then lied to federal investigators after the disaster.   A1

Audit Finds Fault at Agency
The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development demanded that the
embattled Newark Housing Authority return $6.4 million in federal funds after an
audit questioned several expenditures.   B1

Mayor Defends Response Plan
Mayor Bloomberg said the threats posed by terror attacks require that police
officials have management authority over other city agencies during a biological
or chemical attack. Fire Department officials had released a 21-page memo
criticizing the city's plan.   B3

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

New York Cleared by I.O.C.
The International Olympic Committee's ethics commission concluded that NYC2012
broke no rules in its proposal to offer free marketing assistance to
international sports federations should it win the right to hold the 2012
Olympics.   D1

ARTS   B9-19

OBITUARIES   B7

Cliff Montgomery
The quarterback who executed the hidden-ball play that propelled Columbia to a
7-0 upset of Stanford in the 1934 Rose Bowl, he was 94.   B7

Diane Knippers
A religious strategist who helped conservative Christians raise an increasingly
loud and unified voice, she was 53.   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Nasdaq Buys Instinet
Nasdaq, the electronic stock market, announced that it would buy Instinet, the
last major operator of an electronic trading system still standing, for $1.9
billion.   C1

States Curb Car Pollution
Washington and Oregon plan to become the ninth and 10th states to adopt
California's stringent emissions rules, forming an increasingly potent market
for more fuel-efficient vehicles on the West Coast and the Northeast. Other
states plan to also follow California's precedent.   C1

Medtronic Offers To Settle
Medtronic, the medical device giant, said that it would pay $1.35 billion to
Gary K. Michelson, a surgeon-turned-inventor, to gain ownership of patents
related to spinal surgery and to settle litigation.   C1

Again Market Has Tough Day
The stock market stumbled again, finishing a volatile week with no hint of
whether the recent slump was near an end. After their best day in more than a
year, the three main market measures fell 0.6 percent or more, after
disappointing earnings from Eastman Kodak and Costco and higher crude oil
prices.   C4

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A12-13

Editorials: The ship that's sinking the Navy; a civil debate over civil union;
big move by the Big Board; birth of a sales pitch

Columns: Maureen Dowd, John Tierney.

Bridge   B18
Crossword   B17
TV Listings   B19
Weather   B20


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); CONSPIRACY (88%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (86%); GUILTY PLEAS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (77%); ARMIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (76%); SEX OFFENSES (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HOSPITALS (63%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (62%); ABORTION (60%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%); AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: POPE BENEDICT XVI (90%); DICK CHENEY (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); SPAIN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); JAPAN
(79%); BULGARIA (79%); ASIA (79%); HOLY SEE (72%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             575 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 TOP OFFICERS CLEARED BY ARMY IN PRISON ABUSES

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: ATROCITIES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1354 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


A high-level Army investigation has cleared four of the five top Army officers
overseeing prison policies and operations in Iraq of responsibility for the
abuse of detainees there, Congressional and administration officials said
Friday.

Among the officers was Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, who was the top commander in
Iraq from June 2003 to July 2004. He was the highest-ranking officer to face
allegations of leadership failure in connection with the scandal, but he was not
accused of criminal misconduct.

Barring new evidence, the inquiry, by the Army's inspector general, effectively
closes the Army's book on whether the highest-ranking officers in Iraq during
the Abu Ghraib prison scandal should be held accountable for command failings
described in past reviews.

Only one of the top five officers, whose roles the Senate Armed Services
Committee had asked the Army to review, has received any punishment. That
officer, Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, an Army Reserve officer who commanded the
military police unit at the Abu Ghraib prison, was relieved of her command and
given a written reprimand. She has repeatedly said she was made the scapegoat
for the failures of superiors.

The findings, which provoked outrage from some civil rights groups and
Democratic aides, came nearly a year after shocking photographs of American
military police officers stacking naked Iraqi prisoners in a human pyramid and
of other abuses first telecast nationally. Shortly afterward, an internal Army
report chronicled the virtual collapse of the command structure at Abu Ghraib,
outside Baghdad, in the fall of 2003.

So far, only a small number of soldiers, mostly from the enlisted ranks, have
faced courts-martial for their actions at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere. Dozens of
others have faced administrative discipline for abusing captives at other
detention sites and battlefield interrogation stations across Iraq.

An independent panel led by former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger
concluded last August that General Sanchez had failed to make sure that his
staff was dealing with Abu Ghraib's problems. A separate Army investigation,
called the Kern-Fay-Jones report, found that at one point General Sanchez
approved the use of severe interrogation practices that led indirectly to some
of the abuses.

The Schlesinger inquiry last summer also determined that General Sanchez's
deputy, Maj. Gen. Walter Wojdakowski, failed to act quickly enough to make
urgent requests to higher levels for more troops at the understaffed prison.

But those inquiries were not empowered to impose any punishments; that was left
up to the Army.

The new review, by the Army inspector general, Lt. Gen. Stanley E. Green,
exonerated General Sanchez and General Wojdakowski of the allegations that were
included in one or more of the 10 major investigations over the past year into
detainee abuse.

It also found to be ''unsubstantiated'' allegations against Maj. Gen. Barbara G.
Fast, the former chief intelligence officer in Iraq who oversaw the
interrogation center at Abu Ghraib, and Col. Marc Warren, the command's top
legal officer. The Schlesinger panel said Colonel Warren had failed to report
prisoner abuses witnessed by the Red Cross to his boss for more than a month,
and that General Fast had failed to advise General Sanchez properly about the
management of interrogations at the prison.

While General Sanchez and the other top officers may not have done everything
right, the inquiry said, their failures came as they struggled to combat a
fast-growing insurgency and a booming prison population, all with an
understaffed headquarters.

But some Democratic aides on Capitol Hill, civil rights groups and lawyers for
lower-ranking soldiers who have been disciplined voiced dismay on Friday at the
findings, which they said would fuel the perception that the Army was trying to
protect its senior leaders at the expense of junior officers and enlisted
soldiers.

Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union,
denounced the findings and urged the Bush administration to appoint a special
independent counsel to look up the military and Pentagon civilian chains of
command. ''This further underscores the military's inability to look into
allegations of torture and abuse,'' Mr. Romero said in a telephone interview.
''It's just another effort to paper over the scandal.''

Guy Womack, a lawyer for the Army reservist who the government had called the
ringleader in the abuse, Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., said he had
interviewed Generals Sanchez and Wojdakowski and agreed with the Army's findings
about them. But he said General Fast and Colonel Warren were more directly
involved in overseeing detention policy and operations and should have been
disciplined. ''It's a joke,'' he said.

Democratic aides, who along with their Republican counterparts were briefed this
week on the Army inquiry's findings, said Friday that they disagreed with the
conclusions and would review the full investigation before determining their
next step.

Army officials defended the investigation as an exhaustive inquiry that included
a review of the 10 major inquiries so far, sworn statements from 37 senior
officials, including L. Paul Bremer III, the former top civilian administrator
in Iraq, as well as information gathered from dozens of criminal investigations
and courts-martial.

''The recommendations and decisions are consistent with, and appropriate to, the
findings of these very thorough investigations,'' Brig. Gen. Vincent K. Brooks,
the Army's top spokesman, said in a statement.

Senator John W. Warner, the Virginia Republican who heads the Armed Services
Committee, declined in a statement to comment directly on the Army's findings,
but signaled he would call a hearing on senior officer accountability in the
detainee abuse scandal. A spokesman for Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, the
committee's ranking Democrat, declined to comment.

As a result of the findings of the Schlesinger panel and other military
inquiries, Mr. Warner's committee directed the Army in September to review the
cases of General Sanchez and at least four other senior officers in Iraq to
determine if any should be held accountable and disciplined.

The Army expanded that inquiry to 12 officers of the rank of colonel or higher,
including anyone of that rank who was criticized in at least one of the 10 major
investigations.

Four senior Defense Department officials, who provided details about the inquiry
on the condition of anonymity because several members of Congress had not been
fully briefed, declined to identify the officers under scrutiny, although the
five whom Congress has focused on were well known. Nor did they say whether any
of seven other officers under scrutiny were disciplined. Congressional aides
said they had not yet been briefed on those cases.

The 12 officers under scrutiny by the inspector general do not include the top
two military intelligence officers at Abu Ghraib, Col. Thomas M. Pappas and Lt.
Col. Steven L. Jordan. Senior military officials said they were being examined
by separate investigations that could lead to criminal charges.

General Green, the inspector general, has completed his review of allegations
against 11 of the 12 officers, officials said. If the allegations were not
substantiated, no action was taken. If they were, the files were forwarded to
the Army judge advocate general, the senior military lawyer, Maj. Gen. Thomas
Romig, who could recommend a wide range of disciplinary options, from no action
to counseling to a career-killing reprimand. The 12 officers had the right to
respond to the findings before any disciplinary action were taken.

A senior military official said there were no criminal allegations against any
of the 12 officers.

General Sanchez, once considered for promotion to be the four-star commander of
military operations in Latin America, remains the head of the Army's V Corps,
based in Germany. It is unclear whether he will be given a new assignment when
his command ends this summer or whether he will retire.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (94%); PRISONS (90%); SCANDALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%);
MISCONDUCT (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE
FORCES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); EVIDENCE (76%); EXECUTIVES (73%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); APPROVALS
(72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (62%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             580 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Self-Proclaimed Artist and an Inexplicable Act of Cruelty

BYLINE: By DANA STEVENS

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; FILM REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 433 words


In May 2001, three young men in Toronto tortured and killed a cat and -- for
reasons that remain unclear -- videotaped themselves doing it. When another
resident of the house where the incident happened found the skinned and
decapitated cat in the refrigerator, she alerted the police. A trial and animal
rights protests followed.

The incident and its aftermath are the subjects of ''Casuistry: The Art of
Killing a Cat,'' a new documentary by the Canadian director Zev Asher, which
opens at the Two Boots Pioneer Theater in the East Village today and runs
through May 3. ''Casuistry'' takes its title from a word for specious reasoning
that rationalizes dubious behavior; as Jesse Power, the ringleader of the cat
killers and a self-proclaimed artist, observes in an interview, he discovered
the word in a dictionary directly above ''cat.''

''Casuistry'' consists mainly of talking-head interviews -- with animal rights
advocates, art gallery owners and two of the three accused young men -- intercut
with news clips about the event, shots of Mr. Power's disturbing artwork, and
extreme close-ups of a variety of cats (all of whom, pet lovers will be relieved
to know, remain alive and well throughout). The offending videotape is never
seen, but the entire film is built around its absence. Periodically, the film
returns to a written police account of the video, which scrolls up the screen,
documenting the animal's suffering blow by blow to the sound of ominous music.

Two of the cat's assailants come off as bored, alienated and none-too-bright
young men seeking a nihilistic thrill. The third, Mr. Power, is a more complex
figure, an intelligent and well-spoken but possibly psychopathic art student who
has long been obsessed with the death of animals (he once took a job in an
abattoir, he says, to better understand the suffering of the animals he ate).
Among the least sympathetic figures in the film are two local gallery owners who
seem callow and pretentious as they refuse to judge Mr. Power for his actions.
Though it clearly takes the position that the animal's death was a crime, Mr.
Asher's film is likely to leave viewers eager to discuss the limits of artistic
freedom and the extension of human rights to animals.

Casuistry: The Art of Killing a Cat
Opens today in Manhattan.

Written, directed and edited by Zev Asher; directors of photography, Mr. Asher
and Linda Feesey; music by Roughage; produced by Ms. Feesey; released by Rough
Age Projectiles. At the Two Boots Pioneer Theater, 155 East Third Street at
Avenue A, East Village. Running time: 88 minutes. This film is not rated.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Outside the courthouse where three men were tried for killing a
cat. From ''Casuistry: The Art of Killing a Cat.'' (Photo by Linda Feesey/Rough
Age Projectiles)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (90%); ANIMALS (90%); CATS (90%); INTERVIEWS
(90%); LIVESTOCK ABUSE & NEGLECT (89%); FILM DIRECTORS (89%); TORTURE (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); ANIMAL RIGHTS (76%); FILM (76%); ANIMAL SLAUGHTERING &
PROCESSING (76%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (76%); PHOTOGRAPHY (76%); MOVIE RELEASE
DATES (75%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (75%); PETS (73%); ART DEALERS (72%) Motion
Pictures; Reviews

COMPANY: AQUANTIVE INC (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541830 MEDIA BUYING AGENCIES (50%); NAICS541810 ADVERTISING
AGENCIES (50%); SIC7319 ADVERTISING, NEC (50%); SIC7311 ADVERTISING AGENCIES
(50%)

PERSON: Dana Stevens; Zev Asher

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); CANADA (73%)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             583 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syria Leaves Lebanon, Without Thanks

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 277 words


There was a time, long ago, when the world might have been tempted to thank the
Syrians, who have finally withdrawn from Lebanon, for helping to end a sectarian
war. But the ''helping hand'' quickly turned into a brutal and predatory fist.

In the end, perhaps the one service Syria provided was to finally give the
Lebanese a measure of unity. Now they have to build on it.

For decades, Lebanon has been roiled by the ills of the Middle East. Deeply
divided among numerous Christian and Muslim denominations, it was a battleground
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, a breeding ground for
Hezbollah terrorists, and, for 29 years, a fief of Syrian strongmen. If
political order can emerge there, it could become a model for other Middle
Eastern countries.

This is not simply wishful thinking. Lebanon once had a tradition of balancing
religious communities. The Palestinians are no longer the dangerous force they
were when Yasir Arafat had his bases here. Hezbollah, the radical movement
supported by Syria and Iran, poses a threat if it insists on maintaining its
private army. But even Hezbollah may find that its best bet is the political
process.

Above all, there are the Lebanese who went out into the streets by the tens of
thousands to demand Syria's withdrawal after the assassination last Feb. 14 of
the former prime minister Rafik Hariri. Mr. Hariri's murder touched a strong
national longing for genuine independence. The next major step will be a general
election next month.

Lebanon's sectarian divisions need not be destructive. The Lebanese now have a
chance to shape a new consensus that can lead to a real and durable democracy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (85%); RELIGION (77%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (75%); ASSASSINATION
(75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); ELECTIONS (69%); TERRORISM (69%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%)
Editorials; Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (91%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (57%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (97%); LEBANON (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (90%); ISRAEL (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Lebanon; Syria

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             609 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberal Bible-Thumping

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 767 words


Even aside from his arguments that Jesus and Mary Magdalene were married and
that St. Paul was a self-hating gay, the new book by a former Episcopal bishop
of Newark is explosive.

John Shelby Spong, the former bishop, tosses a hand grenade into the cultural
wars with ''The Sins of Scripture,'' which examines why the Bible -- for all its
message of love and charity -- has often been used through history to oppose
democracy and women's rights, to justify slavery and even mass murder.

It's a provocative question, and Bishop Spong approaches it with gusto. His
mission, he says, is ''to force the Christian Church to face its own terrifying
history that so often has been justified by quotations from 'the Scriptures.'''

This book is long overdue, because one of the biggest mistakes liberals have
made has been to forfeit battles in which faith plays a crucial role. Religion
has always been a central current of American life, and it is becoming more
important in politics because of the new Great Awakening unfolding across the
United States.

Yet liberals have tended to stay apart from the fray rather than engaging in it.
In fact, when conservatives quote from the Bible to make moral points, they tend
to quote very selectively. After all, while Leviticus bans gay sex, it also
forbids touching anything made of pigskin (is playing football banned?) -- and
some biblical passages seem not so much morally uplifting as genocidal.

''Can we really worship the God found in the Bible who sent the angel of death
across the land of Egypt to murder the firstborn males in every Egyptian
household?'' Bishop Spong asks. Or what about 1 Samuel 15, in which God is
quoted as issuing orders to wipe out all the Amalekites: ''Kill both man and
woman, child and infant.'' Hmmm. Tough love, or war crimes? As for the New
Testament, Revelation 19:17 has an angel handing out invitations to a divine
dinner of ''the flesh of all people.''

Bishop Spong, who has also taught at Harvard Divinity School, argues that while
Christianity historically tried to block advances by women, Jesus himself
treated women with unusual dignity and was probably married to Mary Magdalene.

Christianity may have become unfriendly to women's rights partly because, in its
early years, it absorbed an antipathy for sexuality from the Neoplatonists. That
led to an emphasis on the perpetual virginity of Mary, with some early Christian
thinkers even trying to preserve the Virgin Mary's honor by raising the
possibility that Jesus had been born through her ear.

The squeamishness about sexuality led the church into such absurdities as a
debate about ''prelapsarian sex'': the question of whether Adam and Eve might
have slept together in the Garden of Eden, at least if they had stayed longer.
St. Augustine's dour answer was: Maybe, but they wouldn't have enjoyed it. In
modern times, this same discomfort with sex has led some conservative Christians
to a hatred of gays and a hostility toward condoms, even to fight AIDS.

Bishop Spong particularly denounces preachers who selectively quote Scripture
against homosexuality. He also cites various textual reasons for concluding (not
very persuasively) that St. Paul was ''a frightened gay man condemning other gay
people so that he can keep his own homosexuality inside the rigid discipline of
his faith.''

The bishop also tries to cast doubt on the idea that Judas betrayed Jesus. He
notes that the earliest New Testament writings, of Paul and the source known as
Q, don't mention a betrayal by Judas. Bishop Spong contends that after the
destruction of Jewish Jerusalem in A.D. 70, early Christians curried favor with
Roman gentiles by blaming the Crucifixion on Jewish authorities -- nurturing two
millennia of anti-Semitism that bigots insisted was biblically sanctioned.

Some of the bishop's ideas strike me as more provocative than persuasive, but at
least he's engaged in the debate. When liberals take on conservative Christians,
it tends to be with insults -- by deriding them as jihadists and fleeing the
field. That's a mistake. It's entirely possible to honor Christian conservatives
for their first-rate humanitarian work treating the sick in Africa or fighting
sex trafficking in Asia, and still do battle with them over issues like gay
rights.

Liberals can and should confront Bible-thumping preachers on their own terms,
for the scriptural emphasis on justice and compassion gives the left plenty of
ammunition. After all, the Bible depicts Jesus as healing lepers, not slashing
Medicaid.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (92%); RELIGION (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(90%); BIBLE & CHRISTIAN TEXTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LIBERALISM
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WOMEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); GAYS & LESBIANS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(75%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (75%); LITERATURE (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(72%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (67%); GENOCIDE (61%) Bible; Episcopal Church; Books
and Literature; Women; Slavery; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; John Shelby Spong

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); EGYPT (88%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             610 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court on Crimes in Former Yugoslavia Hits Its Stride

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


It happens discreetly, unnoticed by other passengers. The traveler, usually a
middle-aged man, gets off the plane at a Dutch airport where plainclothes
officials politely receive him. He is escorted to a vehicle and, before long, he
disappears behind the walls of a high-security jail near The Hague.

Thus, another war crimes suspect is checked in at the compound where the United
Nations has its own cellblock.

This apparently simple routine, repeated more than 20 times this year, still
causes a frisson here because the newcomers include senior commanders of the
Serbian and Bosnian Serb military and police, central players in the 1990's
Balkan wars.

They include men charged with chilling atrocities, including the mass killings
of civilians in Sarajevo and Srebrenica, cities whose names have become
synonymous with latter-day European barbarity.

At the quarters of the United Nations war crimes tribunal, officials are quietly
elated. ''Many of the senior suspects are now here,'' said Jean-Daniel Ruch, an
adviser to Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor. ''Instead of pulling and
pushing to get detainees, our work has moved more fully into the courtrooms,
which is where it belongs.''

Confounding many critics who have long called the war crimes tribunal an
excessively cumbersome, even dubious experiment in international justice, the
court dealing with atrocities of the former Yugoslavia is at the peak of its
activity. Six trials are going on daily, alternating in the three courtrooms.
Given the many newcomers, court hours now often run from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.

Three mornings a week, courtroom No.1 is booked for the most notorious trial,
that of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Serbian leader and the first president to
face war crimes charges, including genocide. In its third year, the process is
often delayed by the former strongman's health problems. Some say it also
suffers from its sheer scope; charges span a decade and the four wars that took
more than 200,000 lives and tore up the former Communist country of Yugoslavia.

But other trials of Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims are moving faster or are
set to begin.

''There's quite a scramble for court time now,'' said Jim Landale, a spokesman.
''This is the busiest we've ever been.'' He offered a copy of the tribunal's
latest ''wanted'' poster. Long looking like a dense mosaic, it is now reduced to
10 faces.

The court's cellblock is filled to capacity, with 60 people. Another 18 suspects
have been allowed to return home until their trials start.

Obtaining a temporary release has become easier since defense lawyers complained
forcefully about long waiting times, sometimes more than two years. Judges have
refused such release to some well-known suspects on the grounds that they may
threaten witnesses or not return for trial.

But last year, human rights groups protested when the former leader of Serbia's
notorious state security forces, Jovica Stanisic, and his deputy, Franko
Simatovic, were allowed to return to Serbia to await trial. The two ran the
secret police and a brutal militia of paid volunteers in the war.

''The court was either naive or woefully ignorant of the role the state security
services played,'' said Judith Armatta of the Coalition for International
Justice. Most intriguing perhaps, the judges said the court had taken into
account the positive letters from the United States and French governments, who
said the men had been cooperative in the past. Spokesmen in Washington and in
Paris declined to comment.

Although the Milosevic trial has caught much of the limelight, 128 people have
appeared before the tribunal since its first trial opened in 1995. Of these, 56
have received judgments. Among them are people including camp guards or platoon
commanders, the kind of low-level actors in the war who court officials concede
would not be sent to The Hague today. But during its early years, the court had
few senior indictees. That has changed.

Several factors explain the shift.

The United Nations Security Council, which created the court in the middle of
the Yugoslav wars in 1993, recently made demands, ordering the prosecutor to
focus on the top leaders and to cease all investigations by the end of 2004. It
also said that trials should be completed by 2008 and appeals by 2010.

That meant the tribunal needed to be handed the most senior suspects. But
Serbia, after delivering Mr. Milosevic, refused to cooperate. In recent months,
the West has increased pressure on Belgrade. The Bush administration suspended
aid to Serbia for 2005, and the European Union has twisted Belgrade's arm,
saying that any negotiations for union membership, which Belgrade covets, cannot
seriously start until all indicted war crimes suspects have been sent to The
Hague.

As a result, Serbia, with its economy shattered, has talked more than a dozen
military and police commanders into surrendering in recent months, threatening
some with arrest and negotiating deals with others, including promises of
financial help for their families.

Among the tribunal's 10 fugitives today are two famous men who have been seen in
Serbia, the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander,
Ratko Mladic, both indicted on genocide charges. But the government insists it
does not know where they are.

The prosecution is particularly pleased about the recent arrival of Momcilo
Perisic, the Yugoslav Army chief of staff during the wars in Croatia and Bosnia.
His trial may rank among the most significant. General Perisic's indictment says
that from Belgrade, he secretly ran the surrogate Serbian forces fighting in
Croatia and Bosnia, providing the Serb-run troops with personnel, equipment,
provisions and payment. His case could directly link Belgrade, and Mr.
Milosevic, with military actions and atrocities outside Serbia.

At the tribunal prison, the newcomers include former top officials from
Macedonia and Kosovo, two other Balkan regions that need approval and money from
the West. Croatia been told its bid to join the European Union will be delayed
until it delivers its main fugitive, Gen. Ante Gotovina. ''This is the first
time political pressure has been applied on such a scale, and we see that it
works,'' said Mirko Klarin, director of Sense, a news agency that has monitored
the war crimes court. With so many new suspects, the tribunal can schedule
several group trials to speed proceedings. But court officials say privately
that even without getting its 10 fugitives, the tribunal cannot meet the
Security Council deadline of 2008. Discussions are under way to transfer at
least a dozen low-level suspects heldhere to be tried in their home region.

Mr. Klarin said that despite the growing workload and the hectic pace: ''Right
now, things are looking good for the tribunal. It's so busy, I'm almost
nostalgic for the days I could actually keep up with events.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Momcilo Perisic, left, the former Yugoslav Army chief of
staff, at the United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague in March. He is
accused of running the surrogate Serbian forces fighting in Croatia and Bosnia.
(Pool photograph by Michael Kooren)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); AIRPORTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PRISONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); MEN (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); LAWYERS (73%); RELIGION (50%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%);
CROATIA (92%); MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             614 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Arrests Cuban Exile Accused In Deadly '76 Airline Bombing

BYLINE: By ABBY GOODNOUGH; Tim Weiner contributed reporting from New York for
this article, and Terry Aguayo from Miami.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1144 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, May 17


Immigration officials arrested Luis Posada Carriles, a Cuban exile suspected in
a deadly airplane bombing and other attacks, on Tuesday, weeks after he slipped
into the United States and shortly after he withdrew an application for
political asylum.

The Bush administration, which had been mostly silent about Mr. Posada's
presence and until Tuesday denied knowing if he was even in the country, faced
growing pressure from Cuba and its ally Venezuela to extradite him. Critics had
questioned why the United States would not root out a suspected terrorist, even
one hailed by Cuban exiles as a freedom fighter against Fidel Castro.

As the Department of Homeland Security detained the 77-year-old Mr. Posada,
hundreds of thousands of Cubans in Havana participated in a protest march
against him, which Mr. Castro described as ''against terrorism and in favor of
our people's life and peace.'' Mr. Castro had furiously accused Mr. Bush of
sheltering Mr. Posada, a former Central Intelligence Agency operative, in recent
weeks.

Government officials would not discuss why, where or how they arrested Mr.
Posada, 77, though on Tuesday night, Russ Knocke, a spokesman for United States
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said: ''Today is the first time there was
verifiable information about his presence in the country. We had received leads
prior to today, which we pursued, but they ultimately did not go very far.''

One of Mr. Posada's associates said he was detained at a private home in
Southwest Miami-Dade County. His lawyer, Eduardo Soto, said he was taken to
Homestead Air Force Base and flown by military helicopter to an undisclosed
location.

Immigration officials had scheduled an interview with Mr. Posada in Miami early
Tuesday regarding his asylum request. But he did not show up, Mr. Soto said.
Hours later, Mr. Posada held a furtive news conference to deny involvement in
the Cuban airliner bombing, which killed 73 people off the coast of Barbados in
1976, and to say he may withdraw his asylum application to avoid causing trouble
for the United States.

''I have lived clandestinely for more than 30 years,'' Mr. Posada said at the
news conference, which he held near Hialeah under strict terms and was later
broadcast on local television news programs. ''If my request for political
asylum should become a problem for the United States government, I am willing to
reconsider my request.'' A few hours later, through his lawyer, he withdrew his
application. He was arrested about an hour later.

The New York Times declined to attend the news conference because of the terms,
which included being driven by Mr. Posada's associates to an undisclosed place
and agreeing to ask questions only on certain topics.

Barbara Gonzalez, a spokeswoman for United States Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, said the agency had 48 hours to determine ''what we are charging
him with and what his custody status will be.''

In a written statement, the Department of Homeland Security said that it ''does
not generally remove people to Cuba'' or ''to countries believed to be acting on
Cuba's behalf.'' Mr. Castro has a close relationship with Hugo Chavez, the
Venezuelan president, whose country officially asked the United States last week
to extradite Mr. Posada so it could retry him for the airliner bombing.

Newly declassified F.B.I. documents from 1976 places Mr. Posada, who had been a
senior Venezuelan intelligence officer, at two meetings where the bombing was
planned. Some experts following the case said the document complicated Mr.
Posada's request for asylum, though his lawyer did not mention it on Tuesday.

At a news conference in Coral Gables, Mr. Soto said he had asked the Department
of Homeland Security not to question his client without a lawyer present and to
look after Mr. Posada's health. Mr. Posada was shot in the face in an attempt on
his life in Guatemala in 1990, and his speech is permanently slurred as a
result.

Mr. Soto questioned why the United States did not let Mr. Posada leave quietly
after he withdrew his asylum application. ''It's clear that by formally
withdrawing his application for asylum,'' Mr. Soto said, ''that his intent was
to abandon the United States, and they simply could have let him go.''

Mr. Soto added, however, that he would renew Mr. Posada's asylum application
because of the arrest. Mr. Posada was seeking asylum for having served as a cold
war soldier on the payroll of the C.I.A. in the 1960's, Mr. Soto told reporters
last month.

In an interview with The Miami Herald last week that was not published until
Tuesday, Mr. Posada said he was hiding less these days because it seemed that
the United States was not looking for him. He told The Herald that he took a bus
from Houston to Miami after crossing into Texas with a smuggler, and that while
here, he had read Confucius and painted Cuban landscapes.

Pepe Hernandez, president of the Cuban American National Foundation, an exile
group in Miami, said that the United States had the right to question Mr. Posada
if he entered the country illegally but that the timing of the arrest was bad.

''To wait for Fidel Castro to put together a rally and to go and detain him
almost at the same hour is something I don't understand,'' Mr. Hernandez said.

Mr. Posada was released from prison in Panama last year after that country
pardoned him for a conviction in a bomb plot against Mr. Castro in 2000.
Venezuela wants to retry him for the airline bombing, and the Cuban government
wants to prosecute him for hotel bombings that damaged tourist spots in Havana
and killed an Italian visitor in 1997.

Mr. Posada said in the news conference Tuesday that he had nothing to do with
the 1976 airplane bombing, adding, ''I repudiate that abominable action as a
case of terrorism.'' But in his earlier interview with The Miami Herald, he
would not confirm or deny involvement in the 1997 attacks, saying, ''Let's leave
it to history.''

In a 1998 interview with The New York Times, Mr. Posada said he organized the
hotel bombings in Cuba the previous year.

The government's plans for Mr. Posada -- extraditing him, keeping him jailed for
illegal entry or granting him asylum -- remained uncertain, as did his
whereabouts. Nor was it clear just how much of a political risk his detention
was for President Bush, who with his brother Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida counts on
South Florida's Cuban exiles for financial and political support.

But Steven Schwadron, the chief of staff for Representative Bill Delahunt, a
Massachusetts Democrat who has lobbied the Bush administration to expel Mr.
Posada, said there was no excuse to keep him here. ''You can't pick and choose
the ideology of a particular terrorist without undermining the fundamental
integrity of the global war on terror,'' Mr. Schwadron said. ''Mr. Posada does
not belong in the United States.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Luis Posada Carriles, left, held a furtive news conference
yesterday in Florida, hours before he was taken into custody. Mr. Posada, a
Cuban exile, denied being involved in a 1976 airline bombing that killed 73
people. (Photo by Tim Chapman/The Miami Herald, via Associated Press)(pg. A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); ARRESTS (89%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(89%); AIRLINES (88%); PRESS CONFERENCES (85%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(79%); RIOTS (79%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); AIR FORCES (78%);
HELICOPTERS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); POLITICS (72%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); LAWYERS (66%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (64%);
ARMED FORCES (64%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (62%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (60%);
TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (60%) Bombs and Explosives; Demonstrations and Riots;
Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; United States International Relations;
Extradition  ; Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Demonstrations
and Riots

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%); US IMMIGRATION & CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT (55%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (79%) Abby Goodnough; Luis Posada Carriles; Fidel (Pres)
Castro; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (93%); HAVANA, CUBA (91%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (95%); BARBADOS (79%)

REGION: Cuba; Cuba; Havana (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             634 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Image, Sullied by Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 112 words



To the Editor:

Bob Herbert's May 26 column should be required reading for every member of the
administration and every member of Congress.

There is far too much hypocrisy in political rhetoric today. Mr. Herbert focuses
on the torture and abuse that have made the United States appear too like our
enemies. I wonder about a ''culture of life'' that shows little value for the
lives of soldiers and even less for the lives (and deaths) of Iraqi civilians.

If the ''culture of life'' makes exceptions for war, if it makes exceptions for
the death penalty, then politicians ought not to make the claim that ''all human
lives are sacred.''

Meghan Thompson
New Haven, May 26, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (51%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and
Human Rights; Torture

PERSON: Meghan Thompson; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             639 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Suspect Awaits Word on Leniency Bill

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 398 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, June 1


The man considered Colombia's most brutal paramilitary warlord has a new home
since he surrendered on murder charges last week. The man, Diego Fernando
Murillo, is being held on a ranch while waiting to hear if he will benefit from
a leniency bill that Congress is about to approve for paramilitaries who disarm.

Mr. Murillo, 43, known as Don Berna, began life on Wednesday in a house in
northern Cordoba State as Congress debated the proposal that would govern the
demobilization of paramilitary commanders. He is, for now, safe from extradition
to the United States, which has issued a warrant for his arrest on
cocaine-trafficking charges.

The government's top peace negotiator, Luis Carlos Restrepo, hailed Mr.
Murillo's detention and assured radio listeners on Wednesday that the commander
had no say in choosing the ranch. ''We decided where we would put him,'' Mr.
Restrepo said.

But the case reminded many Colombians of Pablo Escobar, the cocaine kingpin who
in the early 1990's was jailed in a luxury prison where he continued to plot
crimes.

''What this shows is what we've kept saying, that this process is a defeat for
the government,'' said Senator Wilson Borja, who was wounded in a paramilitary
assassination plot in 2000. ''What Berna gets is no extradition and the same
benefits that he would have received had he not just assassinated someone.''

For Mr. Borja and other critics in Congress here, the ''Berna case''
demonstrates all that is wrong about disarmament talks between President Alvaro
Uribe's government and the paramilitaries of the United Self-Defense Forces.
Formed as a force to counter Marxist rebels, the paramilitaries have killed
thousands in an effort to erode support for guerrillas. Mr. Uribe says his
disarmament talks will end that wave of terror.

But during yearlong negotiations, the government's human rights ombudsman, the
Defender of the People, says the paramilitaries have continued to kill
civilians.

By June 20, Congress is expected to approve a legal framework for
demobilization. It would let commanders, including those accused of war crimes,
serve terms as short as 22 months. In return, they would accept the charges
against them. But they would not be required to guarantee demobilization of all
their forces, confess to their crimes or reveal the workings of their
organizations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); MURDER (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (89%); DISARMAMENT (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(78%); ARRESTS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); APPROVALS (77%); JAIL SENTENCING
(75%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (75%); PRISONS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); COCAINE (74%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (70%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (69%); AMNESTY (66%);
PARDONS (66%) Amnesties and Pardons

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (58%) Diego Fernando Murillo; Juan Forero

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Colombia

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             641 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Video of Serbs in Srebrenica Massacre Leads to Arrests

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD; Ivana Sekularac contributed reporting from Belgrade,
Serbia, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, June 2


Almost 10 years after the massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys by
Serbian security forces in Srebrenica, a video has surfaced that presents
graphic details of their fate. Several people in the video were arrested as a
result, the Serbian prime minister said Thursday.

The tape -- shown at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague on Wednesday and rebroadcast on Serbian television on
Thursday -- shows the killing of six Muslim men by members of a Serbian
paramilitary police unit.

While the number of those killed represents a tiny proportion of those who died
in July 1995, the video is being seen as irrefutable evidence that Serbia's
police forces, and not just Bosnian Serb forces, took part in the massacre,
evidence that challenges the commonly held view among Serbs that the atrocity
never took place.

The killings, which began July 11, 1995, in a designated United Nations safe
haven overrun by Serbs, are widely acknowledged to be the worst atrocities
committed in Europe since World War II.

The massacre represented the final push by Bosnian Serb forces to forge an
''ethnically pure'' state within Bosnia and end the war on their own terms. The
atrocities ultimately prompted Western military intervention to end the
conflict.

A decade later many Serbs say they are either unaware of war crimes or refuse to
accept that their police or security forces could have committed them.

Serbia's prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, announced the arrest of several of
those caught on the video at a joint news conference on Thursday with the
tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, in Belgrade.

''I think it is important for our public that we reacted immediately and that
based on this shocking and horrible footage several of those who are involved in
this crime are arrested and will answer to justice,'' he said.

The video shows a group of paramilitary police, called the Scorpions, being
blessed by a Serbian Orthodox priest before they start their mission. The video,
shot by a member of the group, shows six emaciated men being removed from a
canvas covered military truck driven from Srebrenica to Treskavica, a mountain
in Serbian-held territory south of Sarajevo.

Two are taken away and tortured in a house. Eventually all six are lined up with
their hands tied behind their backs and shot with machine guns.

At one point the man behind the camera says his batteries are running out but
tells the killers that he will keep recording for as long as he can.

The tape was shown on Radio Television Serbia, as well as B92, a privately run
station. The torture scenes were not broadcast, but the killings were.

The majority of those killed in the massacre at Srebrenica are believed to have
been murdered by the Bosnian Serb Army under the command of Gen. Ratko Mladic,
who is still sought for trial by the court at The Hague. Human rights advocates
say the tape shows police forces under Serbia's control also took part,
something the Serbian government until now has denied.

Public perceptions of war crimes in Serbia are seen by diplomats as critical to
the country's future, as cooperation with the tribunal is the main criterion for
closer ties with the European Union. Serbian politicians frequently cite public
opinion as their main reason for failing to arrest war crimes suspects.

After refusing to cooperate with the tribunal for over a year, the Serbian
government has given in to international pressure and has transferred 16 war
crimes suspects since January. It has, however, presented them as voluntary
surrenders. This is the first time that Mr. Kostunica, himself a moderate
nationalist, has publicly announced the arrest of war crimes suspects.

The tape was initially given to the Serbian government on May 23 by a Belgrade
rights activist, Natasha Kandic. The government made its first public statement
about the tape after it was shown at the trial of the former Yugoslav leader
Slobodan Milosevic.

Serbia's justice minister said the suspects' trial in Serbia would help confront
people with what happened during the war.

''We have done everything to enable trials before local courts so that people
are faced with what happened,'' said Zoran Stojkovic, the justice minister. ''If
you face the facts directly there is no space for manipulations.''

Ms. Kandic, director of the Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade, a rights
advocacy group, said, ''Until now the prime minister and others were afraid to
touch the issue of war crimes.

''The tape has changed the strategy of the state,'' she said in a telephone
interview. ''For the first time politicians were forced publicly to react.''
Public opinion remains strongly nationalist in Serbia a decade after the end of
the war in Bosnia. An opinion poll published by the Belgrade-based Strategic
Marketing Research in April showed that more than 50 percent of respondents
either did not know about war crimes in Bosnia, or did not believe they had
taken place. The poll was conducted by phone and surveyed 1,200 people.

In Belgrade, many passers-by appeared skeptical about the possible impact of the
tape on public opinion.

''What was shown on that tape was just a tiny bit of the crimes committed
throughout the war,'' said Neohjsa Mrdjenovic, a 29-year-old musician. ''The
footage will not change anything because people knew what had been happening.
Everyone knew about the siege of Sarajevo all along. Unfortunately people don't
care about it. They only care how to feed their family.''

Rodoljub Cosic, 25, said: ''The footage might change some people's opinion about
Srebrenica, but the majority knew what had happened there. People knew what had
happened in Srebrenica more than any other place as it has been often raised in
public.''

Despite those views, Ms. Kandic said she believed the tape would make it harder
for revisionists to play down the massacre. ''Nobody can continue to deny that
Srebrenica took place now,'' she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Serbian television ran video yesterday of killings by a Serbian
security force in 1995. The video showed men taken from Srebrenica to
Treskavica, in Serbian-held territory, where six were shot, their hands tied.
(Photo by Associated Press Television News)
 A Belgrade broadcast showed a Serbian paramilitary unit lining up men on the
ground in 1995. Some were taken elsewhere and shot. (Photo by Koca
Solejmanovic/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (87%); ARMIES
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); POLICE FORCES (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); WORLD WAR II (67%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (64%); MURDER (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Recordings (Video)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (58%) International Criminal Tribunal; United
Nations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Vojislav (Prime Min) Kostunica; Carla Del Ponte

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%);
SLOVENIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Srebrenica (Bosnia)  ;
Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             642 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Faults 4 Allies Over Forced Labor

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


The United States criticized four of its closest allies in the Middle East on
Friday, saying Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are
doing little if anything to stop forced labor and other forms of ''modern
slavery'' within their borders.

The four countries are among 14 ''Tier III'' nations that the State Department
said had a serious problem with trafficking in persons and made little or no
effort to control it, despite prodding from the United States. Citation as a
Tier III country can trigger economic penalties.

''Trafficking in human beings is nothing less than a modern form of slavery,''
said Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, speaking at a news conference
introducing the government's fifth annual Trafficking in Persons Report.

None of the four Middle Eastern countries were on the government's list of
problem nations last year -- though Saudi Arabia was listed in 2001 and 2002.
The government decided this year to focus its attention on forced labor, the
primary problem in the four Middle Eastern states.

In Saudi Arabia, said John R. Miller, the State Department's senior adviser on
trafficking, ''We have domestic workers being brought in from many countries
into domestic servitude, child beggars, a lot of beatings, reports of beatings
and rape -- very difficult to get shelter, no convictions.''

Slave trafficking burst onto the world stage in the mid-1990's, when thousands
of women from the former Soviet Union, attracted by job offers in Europe, were
forced to work as prostitutes once they arrived. These Russian women began
working the streets of major European capitals.

In the United States during the late 1990's, several notorious farm-labor
servitude cases in Florida and forced prostitution cases involving hundreds of
Mexican and Thai women caught the attention of the Clinton administration, just
as Europe was urging Washington to get involved.

In 2000, Congress passed the Trafficking Victim Protection Act, which set out
new penalties for slave traffickers and required the State Department to publish
an annual report on slave trafficking worldwide. The department vigorously
opposed the report provision. Officials said they did not want to do research
for another annual report, on top of the human rights and drug trafficking
reports, and did not believe nations found to be out of compliance should be
penalized automatically.

The bill was amended to make the sanctions subject to the president's
discretion. And since 2003, when the sanction provision took effect, only two
countries -- Venezuela and Equatorial Guinea -- have been cited. Under the law,
no decisions on whether to sanction the 14 nations cited this year can be made
before September -- to give the nations time to improve their records, Mr.
Miller said.

The other nations include Bolivia, Cambodia, Ecuador, Jamaica, Sudan, Togo and
Venezuela. Also listed were Cuba, Myanmar and North Korea, nations that are
mentioned in almost every government list of problem states. Last year, the
department listed only 10 problem states. But the first report, in 2001, listed
23.

Saudi Arabia is a key American ally and oil supplier whose leader, Crown Prince
Abdullah, visited President Bush at his Texas ranch in April. Kuwait and the
United Arab Emirates, along with Qatar, are also allies, and the United States
maintains an important military base in Qatar.

The criticisms of the four countries were similar. All four nations, the report
says, imported workers from the region, from the Middle East and Asia and then
effectively enslaved them.

''Some foreign women who migrate legally to Kuwait as domestic workers,'' the
report says, ''are subsequently abused by their employers or coerced into
situations of debt bondage or involuntary servitude,'' the legal term for
slavery. In the United Arab Emirates, ''women are trafficked'' from many nations
''for the purpose of sexual exploitation.''

Saudi Arabia, the report adds, discourages victims from complaining. ''The
government offers no legal aid to foreign workers,'' the report says, ''and does
not otherwise assist them in using the Saudi criminal justice system to bring
exploiters to justice. If a victim chooses to file a complaint, he or she is not
allowed to work.''

None of the embassies of the four countries responded to requests for comment.

The government was particularly critical of Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab
Emirates for allowing young children to be held in captivity and used as jockeys
in camel races, ''a multi-million dollar activity'' in the Persian Gulf states.
Tiny children, some 3 or 4 years old, are prized, and they are underfed to keep
their weight down, the report notes.

''Some boys as young as 6 months old were reported kidnapped and sold to
traffickers and raised to become camel jockeys.'' Others, it adds, ''were sold
by their parents to traffickers.'' Recently, it adds, one fell off his camel and
was trampled to death.

In Kuwait, it says, ''some have been thrown from the camels they rode and
suffered serious neurological damage. Most no longer remember where they came
from.''

The United States estimates that about 800,000 people are trafficked against
their will between nations each year, and that many hundreds of thousands more
are enslaved within their own nations.

The government also estimates that about 15,000 people are trafficked to the
United States each year. That estimate has fallen since the Central Intelligence
Agency issued the first one in 2000. Then it was estimated that as many as
50,000 people were trafficked to the United States from a dozen foreign
countries each year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FORCED LABOR (92%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%);
SLAVERY (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (89%); ANNUAL REPORTS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (71%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (71%);
ILLEGAL PROSTITUTION (69%); EMPLOYMENT (65%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (64%); PROSTITUTION
(64%); PRESS CONFERENCES (54%); FARM LABOR (51%) Labor; Labor

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (58%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (58%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (58%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (88%) Joel Brinkley; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (93%); QATAR (93%); EUROPE (93%); KUWAIT (93%); JAMAICA (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: Kuwait; Qatar; Saudi Arabia; United Arab Emirates; Bolivia; Cambodia;
Ecuador; Jamaica (West Indies); Sudan; Togo; Venezuela; Cuba; Myanmar; North
Korea

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             644 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Un-American by Any Name

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 556 words


Now that the Bush administration has made clear how offended it is at Amnesty
International's word choice in characterizing the Guantanamo Bay detention camp
''the gulag of our times,'' we hope it will soon get around to dealing with the
substantive problems that the Amnesty report is only the latest to identify.
What Guantanamo exemplifies -- harsh, indefinite detention without formal
charges or legal recourse -- may or may not bring to mind the Soviet Union's
sprawling network of Stalinist penal colonies. It certainly has nothing in
common with any American notions of justice or the rule of law.

Our colleague Thomas L. Friedman offered just the right solution a few days
back. The best thing Washington can now do about this national shame is to shut
it down. It is a propaganda gift to America's enemies; an embarrassment to our
allies; a damaging repudiation of the American justice system; and a highly
effective recruiting tool for Islamic radicals, including future terrorists.

If legitimate legal cases can be made under American law against any of the more
than 500 remaining Guantanamo detainees, they should be made in American courts,
as they should have been all along. If, as the administration says, some of
these prisoners are active, dangerous members of a conspiracy to commit
terrorism against the United States, there must be legitimate charges to file
against them. Those prisoners with no charges to face should be set free and
allowed to go home or to another country. The administration must not ship them
off to cooperative dictatorships where thuggish local authorities can torture
them without direct American accountability -- as they have reportedly done
recently in places like Uzbekistan, Syria and Egypt.

What makes Amnesty's gulag metaphor apt is that Guantanamo is merely one of a
chain of shadowy detention camps that also includes Abu Ghraib in Iraq, the
military prison at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan and other, secret locations
run by the intelligence agencies. Each has produced its own stories of abuse,
torture and criminal homicide. These are not isolated incidents, but part of a
tightly linked global detention system with no accountability in law. Prisoners
have been transferred from camp to camp. So have commanding officers. And
perhaps not coincidentally, so have specific methods of mistreatment.

Over more than two centuries of peace and war, the United States has developed a
highly effective legal system that, while far from perfect, is rightly admired
around the world. The shadowy parallel system that the Bush administration
created after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks has by now proved its inferiority
in almost every respect. It does not seem to have been effective in finding and
prosecuting the most dangerous terrorists, and it has been a disaster in
undermining America's reputation for fairness, just treatment of the guilty and
humane treatment of the innocent.

It is time to return to the basic principles of justice that served America so
well even in the most perilous times of the past. Shutting down Guantanamo is
just a first step. But it is a crucial step that would pay instant dividends
around the world, not only toward repairing America's reputation but also toward
enhancing its overall security.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); PRISONS (89%);
MILITARY BASES (89%); TORTURE (89%); WAR CRIMES (87%); RULE OF LAW (76%);
CONSPIRACY (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(72%); RELIGION (72%); HOMICIDE (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); NAVIES
(69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); ARMED FORCES (62%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (61%) Editorials; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Islam

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (54%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%); IRAQ (79%);
UZBEKISTAN (79%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             649 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeing Slavery In Liberalism -- Janice Rogers Brown

BYLINE: By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Woman in the News; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


Janice Rogers Brown, the African-American daughter of Alabama sharecroppers who
was confirmed Wednesday to the federal appeals court here, often invokes slavery
in describing what she sees as the perils of liberalism.

''In the heyday of liberal democracy, all roads lead to slavery,'' she has
warned in speeches. Society and the courts have turned away from the founders'
emphasis on personal responsibility, she has argued, toward a culture of
government regulation and dependency that threatens fundamental freedoms.

''We no longer find slavery abhorrent,'' she told the conservative Federalist
Society a few years ago. ''We embrace it.'' She explained in another speech,
''If we can invoke no ultimate limits on the power of government, a democracy is
inevitably transformed into a kleptocracy -- a license to steal, a warrant for
oppression.''

To her critics, such remarks are evidence of extremism. This week, some Senate
Democrats have even singled her out as the most objectionable of President
Bush's more than 200 judicial nominees, citing her criticism of affirmative
action and abortion rights but most of all her sweeping denunciations of New
Deal legal precedents that enabled many federal regulations and social programs
-- developments she has called ''the triumph of our socialist revolution.''

Her friends and supporters say her views of slavery underpin her judicial
philosophy. It was her study of that history, they say, combined with her
evangelical Christian faith and her self-propelled rise from poverty that led
her to abandon the liberal views she learned from her family.

''We discuss things like, 'How did slavery happen?''' said her friend and mentor
Steve Merksamer, a lawyer in Sacramento, Calif. ''It comes down to the fact that
she believes, as I do, that some things are, in fact, right and some things are,
in fact, wrong. Segregation -- even though the courts had sustained it for a
hundred years -- was morally indefensible and legally indefensible and yet it
was the law of the land,'' he said. ''She brings that philosophy to her legal
work.''

On the California Supreme Court, her opinions have reflected the philosophy and
language of her speeches. In an opinion involving fees charged to San Francisco
hotel owners, for example, she proclaimed that ''private property, already an
endangered species in California, is now entirely extinct in San Francisco.'' In
an affirmative action case, she criticized ''entitlement programs based on group
representation.'' And in dissenting in a case involving Nike's labor practices,
she compared the United States Supreme Court to ''a wizard trained at Hogwarts''
conjuring up distinctions about commercial speech that she said restricted
businesses' freedoms.

On Wednesday, two years after President Bush first nominated her, the Senate
voted 56 to 43 to confirm Justice Brown. She was the second of three appellate
court nominees who had been blocked by Senate Democrats until a compromise was
reached a few weeks ago. Immediately after her confirmation, the Senate voted 67
to 32 to close debate on the third stalled nominee, Judge William H. Pryor Jr.,
setting the stage for a vote on him on Thursday.

Justice Brown, though, was the focus of special attention from both sides in the
Senate. For one thing, she was named to the Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit, widely considered the most influential appellate court and
currently almost evenly divided between Republican and Democratic appointees.
And even before her confirmation, however, she was often cited as a potential
candidate for the Supreme Court, in part because of her politically appealing
life story.

She was born Janice Olivia Allen in Greenville, Ala., in 1949, five years before
the Supreme Court struck down segregation in Brown v. Board of Education. After
returning from service in World War II, her father grew cotton, corn and peanuts
on a 158-acre plot he leased about 25 miles away before he re-enlisted, said
Havard Richburg, a friend of the family. Her parents split up, and she was
raised primarily by her grandmother, Beulah Allen, until her teenage years, when
her mother, a nurse, took her to Sacramento. (Her mother remarried, adding the
name Rogers.)

Her family was involved in the voting rights movement in Alabama and became
liberal Democrats. She was inspired to become a lawyer by the career of Fred D.
Gray, an Alabama civil rights lawyer who represented Rosa Parks and Martin
Luther King Jr. Justice Brown has said she initially shared her family's views,
but over the years became more conservative in her thinking.

In California, she made her way through Sacramento State University in part by
working at the Department of Corrections, where she met her first husband, Alan
Brown, an administrator there. Soon after the birth of their son, Mr. Brown died
of cancer, leaving her to finish college and then law school, at the University
of California, Los Angeles, as a single working mother.

After graduating in 1977, she became a legal counsel to the State Legislature
and joined the attorney general's office. There she helped successfully defend
the state against a class action suit charging that it underpaid its female
employees, which brought her to the attention of former Gov. Pete Wilson. ''It
was regarded as a considerable legal feat and also saved the state a ton of
money,'' he recalled.

In 1991, he hired her as legal adviser, then chose her as an agency head, state
appeals court judge and eventually State Supreme Court justice. She has often
said that she has been guided through the challenges of her life and work by her
deep Christian faith, and she has often argued that judges should look to higher
authorities than precedent or manmade laws in making decisions. In Sacramento,
she and her mother attend the evangelical Cordova Church of Christ. (They were
on a cruise when Ms. Brown met Dewey Parker, a jazz musician, whom she married
in 1991, a fellow appellate judge said.)

Her friends describe Justice Brown as a voracious reader, amateur poet and
serious intellectual, and her speeches are filled with allusions to writers
including Cicero, the apostle Paul, Abraham Lincoln, Samuel Beckett, Ayn Rand,
Gertrude Himmelfarb, Friedrich von Hayek and the comedian Chris Rock.

But she also has a fondness for rock 'n' roll lyrics, quoting at length from
Procol Harem's ''Whiter Shade of Pale'' in one speech and rewriting Paul Simon's
song ''50 Ways to Leave Your Lover'' as ''50 Ways to Lose Your Liberty'' in
another.

She concluded that speech, ''We've had to decide before: whether to be slaves or
free.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: Janice Rogers Brown

GRAPHIC: Photo: Justice Janice Rogers Brown was confirmed by the Senate
yesterday. (Photo by Paul Sakuma/Associated Press, 2004)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (92%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(78%); APPEALS COURTS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%); HISTORY (76%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (69%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (68%); RELIGION (64%); ENDANGERED SPECIES
(63%); ABORTION (52%); HOTELS & MOTELS (50%) Courts; Biographical Information;
Appointments and Executive Changes; Blacks; Judges

COMPANY: NIKE INC (50%)

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS'
& INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT
& SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (50%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (50%);
SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (50%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (50%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (50%)

JANICE R BROWN (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (55%) Janice Rogers (Judge) Brown; David D
Kirkpatrick

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SACRAMENTO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             652 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld Says Guantanamo Isn't Being Considered for Closing

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 341 words

DATELINE: STAVANGER, Norway, June 8


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Wednesday that the Bush administration
was not considering shutting down the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
and he defended the treatment of its prisoners by their American military guards
and interrogators as humane.

During a visit to Norway before a meeting with NATO defense ministers in
Brussels, Mr. Rumsfeld responded to criticisms that the detention center should
be closed after reports that the Koran had been mishandled and prisoners
mistreated.

''I know of no one in the U.S. Government, in the executive branch, that is
considering closing Guantanamo,'' he said at a news conference.

Information gathered from detainees there has allowed the United States and its
allies to disrupt terrorist operations or prevent some attacks, saving the lives
of Americans and people from other nations, Mr. Rumsfeld said. He said up to a
dozen suspected terrorists released from American detention centers had been
recaptured later as they were taking part in either terrorist plots or combat.

Military guards and interrogators, he said, are fully aware of Bush
administration orders ''that any detainees be treated in a humane way, and they
have been.''

Among those calling for the Guantanamo camp to be closed is former President
Jimmy Carter, who said this week that the United States should shutter the
detention center as an illustration that it is committed to protecting human
rights.

In an interview with Fox News on Wednesday, President Bush said of the prison:
''We're exploring all alternatives into how best to do the main objective, which
is to protect America. What we don't want to do is let somebody out who comes
back and harms us.''

The White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, also said, ''We always are looking
at all alternatives when it comes to dealing with these detainees.''

The American military's own official inquiry found that guards or interrogators
at the detention center had mishandled the Koran five times, in some cases
intentionally but in others by accident.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PRISONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MILITARY BASES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (74%); NAVIES (74%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (66%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (66%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (66%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Thom
Shanker

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); NORWAY (94%); CUBA (92%); BELGIUM (72%)

REGION: Norway

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             656 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slavery, Liberalism and the Judge

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 155 words



To the Editor:

As a white Alabamian around the same age as Janice Rogers Brown (she is 56), I
am saddened that she equates liberalism with slavery.

Has she forgotten that the Constitution once affirmed slavery and that the Jim
Crow system of her youth had the imprimatur of state and federal courts?

She also ignores the reality that wealthy landowners and corporate interests
supported all-out resistance to federal efforts that enforced civil rights laws
or court orders.

That neither slavery nor segregation now exists and that Janice Rogers Brown is
herself a judge are almost wholly owed to the activism of liberal civil rights
groups that won battles for equal justice against states' rights conservatives.
Now these same conservative interests pose the real threat to our liberties.

Robert G. Corley
Birmingham, Ala., June 9, 2005

The writer is director of the Center for Urban Affairs at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CONSERVATISM (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (87%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); APPEALS COURTS (70%) Courts; Appeals Courts; Slavery

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA (55%)

PERSON: JANICE R BROWN (93%) Robert G Corley; Janice Rogers (Judge) Brown

CITY: BIRMINGHAM, AL, USA (90%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             657 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

7 Bombings Shatter Calm in Iran, Killing 10 as Election Day Nears

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, June 12


Seven bomb blasts shattered Iran's pre-election calm on Sunday, leaving at least
10 people dead and nearly 80 wounded in one of the worst outbreaks of political
violence here since the end of the Iran-Iraq war in 1988.

Iran's Security Council blamed what it called terrorist groups linked to
supporters of Saddam Hussein, the deposed Iraqi leader, for four of the
bombings. It was the first time that Iran has accused any foreign terrorist
organization of playing a role in a domestic attack.

The bombings occurred only five days before Iranians are to elect a successor to
President Mohammad Khatami. No group took responsibility, but the Interior
Ministry said the timing of the bombings suggested that they were meant to
intimidate Iranians into not voting.

While Iranian dissidents and others opposed to the Islamic fundamentalist
establishment have made no secret of their dislike for its leaders, political
violence in Iran has been extremely rare. Political dissent is often expressed
through unauthorized demonstrations, as was the case on Sunday in Tehran, when
hundreds of women marched to protest sexual discrimination.

Four of the bombings took place in the southern city of Ahvaz near the Iraqi
border, where ethnic Arabs are in the majority. The official IRNA news agency
said at least 8 people were killed and 75 wounded in those blasts.

Three blasts occurred hours later in Tehran. The first bomb, concealed in a
garbage bin, blew up in Imam Hossein Square, a crowded commercial district. IRNA
said it killed two people and wounded three. Two subsequent explosions shattered
windows of cars and homes but caused no casualties, according to the Iranian
Students News Agency.

A witness to the deadly Tehran explosion said the police sealed off the area,
where blood was spattered in a rectangular hole caused by the bomb. The Fars
news agency reported Sunday night that a suspect had been arrested in connection
with at least one of the Tehran explosions but provided no further details.

A spokesman for the Supreme National Security Council, Ali Agha Mohammadi, said
terrorist groups affiliated with Iraq's former Baath Party were responsible for
the bombings in Ahvaz, but there was no immediate word on whether the bombings
in Tehran were linked to the attacks in Ahvaz.

''Groups that were close to Iraq's Baath Party and Saddam Hussein, who also
helped the regime in the war against Iran, and are now based in Arab countries,
are responsible for the bombings in Ahvaz,'' the Iranian Students News Agency
quoted Mr. Mohammadi as saying.

The first Ahvaz bomb exploded when authorities were moving what they correctly
suspected was an explosive concealed in a briefcase outside a residential area,
the students news agency said. The other Ahvaz bombs went off between 10:30 and
11 a.m. at the governor's office and two other public buildings. Many women and
children were among the wounded, and four of the eight people killed in Ahvaz
were security guards stationed outside the governor's office, the news agency
reported.

State-run television showed video of smashed windows, rubble and floors stained
with blood inside the governor's office.

Gholam Reza Shariati, the deputy governor general of Khuzistan Province, said
the attacks in Ahvaz were well organized and aimed at ''damaging the territorial
integrity of the country and the election process.''

Relations have become increasingly cordial between Iran's Shiite Islamic
government and the new Shiite-dominated government of Iraq, where the Sunni Arab
minority that was in power during the Hussein era has been marginalized and is
believed to be an important force behind the insurgency in Iraq. Some Sunni
leaders in Iraq have said the Shiite clerics in Iran are maneuvering to help
create a Shiite theocracy in Iraq. Shiite leaders in Iran and Iraq have denied
this.

Even so, if a pro-Hussein group is responsible for the bombings in Iran, that
suggests that the instability plaguing Iraq may have begun to spill over into
Iran. It also suggests that Iran's leaders could get more involved in Iraqi
politics.

Mr. Mohammadi rejected the possibility that Iran's armed opposition group in
exile, the Mujahedeen Khalq, was behind the bombings. But he said the bombings
were aimed at undermining public participation in the election on Friday.

Bomb explosions have been almost unheard of in Iran since the eight-year war
with Iraq ended in 1988. .

There were some indications that the Ahvaz bombings might have been rooted in a
more local dispute. Ahvaz was the site of ethnic protests in April over rumors
that the government wanted to relocate some of the region's Arab population.

The rumors grew out of a letter that had been circulated suggesting that there
was such a government plan. The government said the letter was forged, but 250
people were arrested in the protests, and at least one person was killed.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Emergency workers carried the body of a man killed in a bomb
blast in Tehran yesterday. The bomb was in a garbage bin in a commercial area.
(Photo by Raheb Homavandi/Reuters)(pg. A8)
 A guard wounded by a bomb in Ahvaz was treated at a hospital. (Photo by
Associated Press)(pg. A1)Map of Iran highlighting Ahvaz: Most residents of
Ahvaz, near the Iraqi border, are ethnic Arabs. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (95%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICS (78%); RIOTS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
WITNESSES (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%);
GOVERNORS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); ARRESTS (71%); RELIGION (68%);
DISCRIMINATION (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); CHILDREN (64%) Bombs and Explosives;
Elections; Politics and Government; Demonstrations and Riots; Freedom and Human
Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) Nazila Fathi; Mohammad (Pres) Khatami

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); AHVAZ, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(94%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAQ (96%); IRAN (95%)

REGION: Iran; Ahvaz (Iran); Tehran (Iran); Iran

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             658 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 15, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Friends Like This ...

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 475 words


During a joint press conference last December, President Bush praised the
visiting Pakistani president, Pervez Musharraf, for prosecuting ''those who
would inflict harm and pain'' on the Pakistani people. ''There is nobody more
dedicated in the protection of his own people than President Musharraf,'' Mr.
Bush said.

That line may need to be run through the teleprompter again. At a time when
Pakistan is supposed to be going after Al Qaeda terrorists who make merry within
the country's borders, our colleague Nicholas Kristof reports that Mr.
Musharraf's government has instead arrested a victim of sanctioned gang rape for
planning a visit to the United States. Mukhtaran Bibi was sentenced by a tribal
council to be gang-raped because her younger brother supposedly had relations
with a woman from a higher caste. After the rape by four men, she was forced by
village leaders to walk home nearly naked in front of a jeering crowd.

Ms. Mukhtaran was unbowed. She testified against her persecutors in court,
started two schools in her village, established a shelter for abused women and
bought a van that is used as an ambulance in the area. She has also spoken out
against honor killings, rapes and other attacks on women.

Her guts in daring to oppose the feudalistic elements of rural Pakistani society
earned her invitations from all over the world, including from the
Asian-American Network Against Abuse of Women, which asked her to visit the
United States this Saturday. But before she could get here, General Musharraf's
government arrested her. Pakistan also released her attackers, who had been in
prison since they were convicted of raping her. Pakistani newspapers report that
the government, bizarrely, is worried that Ms. Mukhtaran might malign Pakistan's
image if she is allowed to go abroad -- as if it has not taken care of that
rather ably by itself.

The Bush administration has made nice with General Musharraf in the joint
interest of antiterrorism campaigns. Christine Rocca, the assistant secretary of
state for South Asian affairs, said in Congressional testimony yesterday that
America is ''dismayed'' at the abuse of Ms. Mukhtaran, and that administration
officials would pursue the matter during the course of the day. Let us hope this
one goes straight up to Ms. Rocca's boss, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
It makes no sense for the United States to accept the kind of behavior from
friends that it would not tolerate from enemies.

Being allies with Pakistan should go beyond just selling F-16 fighter jets to
General Musharraf in the hope that he will one day get serious about finding
Osama bin Laden and stop allowing recruiters for the Taliban to operate in
Pakistan. It should also include pressing Pakistan to adopt minimum standards of
human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
RACE & RACISM (78%); TALIBAN (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (76%);
LITIGATION (75%); ARRESTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%);
SENTENCING (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); TESTIMONY (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(71%); TEMPORARY SHELTERS (70%); ASIAN AMERICANS (69%); WOMEN'S SHELTERS (68%);
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (66%) United States International Relations; Editorials; Sex
Crimes; Women; Discrimination

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (74%);
OSAMA BIN LADEN (55%) Pervez (Pres) Musharraf; George W (Pres) Bush; Condoleezza
(Sec) Rice; Mukhtaran Bibi

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (94%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             663 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Libraries Say Yes, Officials Do Quiz Them About Users

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1409 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


Law enforcement officials have made at least 200 formal and informal inquiries
to libraries for information on reading material and other internal matters
since October 2001, according to a new study that adds grist to the growing
debate in Congress over the government's counterterrorism powers.

In some cases, agents used subpoenas or other formal demands to obtain
information like lists of users checking out a book on Osama bin Laden. Other
requests were informal -- and were sometimes turned down by librarians who
chafed at the notion of turning over such material, said the American Library
Association, which commissioned the study.

The association, which is pushing to scale back the government's powers to gain
information from libraries, said its $300,000 study was the first to examine a
question that was central to a House vote last week on the USA Patriot Act: how
frequently federal, state and local agents are demanding records from libraries.

The Bush administration says that while it is important for law enforcement
officials to get information from libraries if needed in terrorism
investigations, officials have yet to actually use their power under the Patriot
Act to demand records from libraries or bookstores.

The library issue has become the most divisive in the debate on whether Congress
should expand or curtail government powers under the Patriot Act, and it was at
the center of last week's vote in the House approving a measure to restrict
investigators' access to libraries.

The study does not directly answer how or whether the Patriot Act has been used
to search libraries. The association said it decided it was constrained from
asking direct questions on the law because of secrecy provisions that could make
it a crime for a librarian to respond. Federal intelligence law bans those who
receive certain types of demands for records from challenging the order or even
telling anyone they have received it.

As a result, the study sought to determine the frequency of law enforcement
inquiries at all levels without detailing their nature. Even so, organizers said
the data suggested that investigators were seeking information from libraries
far more frequently than Bush administration officials had acknowledged.

''What this says to us,'' said Emily Sheketoff, the executive director of the
library association's Washington office, ''is that agents are coming to
libraries and they are asking for information at a level that is significant,
and the findings are completely contrary to what the Justice Department has been
trying to convince the public.''

Kevin Madden, a Justice Department spokesman, said that the department had not
yet seen the findings and that he could not comment specifically on them. But
Mr. Madden questioned the relevance of the data to the debate over the Patriot
Act, noting that the types of inquiries found in the survey could relate to a
wide range of law enforcement investigations unconnected to terrorism or
intelligence.

''Any conclusion that federal law enforcement has an extraordinary interest in
libraries is wholly manufactured as a result of misinformation,'' Mr. Madden
said.

The study, which surveyed 1,500 public libraries and 4,000 academic libraries,
used anonymous responses to address legal concerns. A large majority of those
who responded to the survey said they had not been contacted by any law
enforcement agencies since October 2001, when the Patriot Act was passed.

But there were 137 formal requests or demands for information in that time, 49
from federal officials and the remainder from state or local investigators.
Federal officials have sometimes used local investigators on joint terrorism
task forces to conduct library inquiries.

In addition, the survey found that 66 libraries had received informal law
enforcement requests without an official legal order, including 24 federal
requests. Association officials said the survey results, if extrapolated from
the 500 public libraries that responded, would amount to a total of some 600
formal inquires since 2001.

One library reporting that it had received a records demand was the Whatcom
County system in a rural area of northwest Washington.

Last June, a library user who took out a book there, ''Bin Laden: The Man Who
Declared War on America,'' noticed a handwritten note in the margin remarking
that ''Hostility toward America is a religious duty and we hope to be rewarded
by God,'' and went to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Agents, in turn, went
to the library seeking names and information on anyone checking out the
biography since 2001.

The library's lawyers turned down the request, and agents went back with a
subpoena. Joan Airoldi, who runs the library, said in an interview that she was
particularly alarmed after a Google search revealed that the handwritten line
was an often-cited quotation from Mr. bin Laden that was included in the report
issued by the Sept. 11 commission.

The library fought the subpoena, and the F.B.I. withdrew its demand.

''A fishing expedition like this just seems so un-American to me,'' Ms. Airoldi
said. ''The question is, how many basic liberties are we willing to give up in
the war on terrorism, and who are the real victims?''

The survey also found what library association officials described as a
''chilling effect'' caused by public concerns about the government's powers.
Nearly 40 percent of the libraries responding reported that users had asked
about changes in practices related to the Patriot Act, and about 5 percent said
they had altered their professional activities over the issues; for instance, by
reviewing the types of books they bought.

Representative Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, who sponsored the House
measure to curtail the power to demand library records, said he was struck by
the 40 percent response.

''What this demonstrates is that there is widespread concern among the American
people about the government having the power to monitor what they are reading,''
Mr. Sanders said.

The margin of the vote on Mr. Sanders's measure, which passed 238 to 187, with
support from 38 Republicans, surprised even some backers, but Bush
administration officials say they are hopeful the decision will be reversed and
have threatened a veto of any measure that would limit powers under the Patriot
Act.

Carol Brey-Casiano, who runs the library system in El Paso and is president of
the library association, said she, too, sensed a public unease.

''We're concerned about protecting people's privacy,'' she said. ''People will
say to me, 'I've read about the Patriot Act, and does that mean the government
can come in and ask you what I'm reading?' And my answer to them has to be,
'Yes, they can,' and quite frankly, I can't even tell anyone if that happened,
because there's a gag order.''

Investigators have long had the ability to seek out library records in tracking
leads in criminal inquiries. In two of the most noted cases, investigators in
the 1990's used library records to search for the Unabomber, who wrote detailed
and unusual academic treatises in his string of bombings over almost two
decades, and for New York's ''Zodiac Killer,'' who had cited the writing of an
obscure occult poet.

Government officials say that while they have no interest in using their
expanded powers under the Patriot Act to monitor Americans' reading habits, they
do not believe that libraries should be safe havens for terrorists. They point
to several cases in which Sept. 11 hijackers and other terror suspects used
library computers to send e-mail messages.

Perhaps the fiercest counterattack from the Bush administration on the issue
came in 2003 from John Ashcroft, then the attorney general, who said in a speech
in Washington that groups like the American Library Association had bought into
''breathless reports and baseless hysteria'' about the government's interest in
libraries.

''Do we at the Justice Department really care what you are reading?'' Mr.
Ashcroft asked. ''No.''

Ms. Sheketoff at the library association acknowledged that critics of the study
may accuse the group of having a stake in the outcome of the Patriot Act debate.
''Sure, we have a dog in this fight, but the other side has been mocking us for
four years over our 'baseless hysteria,' and saying we have no reason to be
concerned,'' she said. ''Well, these findings say that we do have reason to be
concerned.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PATRIOT ACT (90%); LIBRARIANS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); LIBRARIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (87%); LEGISLATION (79%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); SUBPOENAS (77%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (75%); BOOKSTORES
(71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); EXECUTIVES (63%) Terrorism;
Libraries and Librarians; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and Legislation;
Privacy; Terrorism

COMPANY: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (57%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (83%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (59%) Federal Bureau of Investigation; American Library Assn

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (56%) Eric Lichtblau

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             668 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rice Urges Egyptians and Saudis to Democratize

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN; Mona el-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Tuesday, June 21


Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, delivering a challenge to the United
States' closest allies in the Arab world, called on Egypt and Saudi Arabia on
Monday to embrace democracy by holding fair elections, releasing political
prisoners and allowing free expression and rights for women.

''For 60 years, my country, the United States, pursued stability at the expense
of democracy in this region here in the Middle East, and we achieved neither,''
Ms. Rice declared at the American University in Cairo. ''Now we are taking a
different course. We are supporting the democratic aspirations of all people.''

Praising President Hosni Mubarak for taking some ''encouraging'' first steps
toward democracy, she said Egypt's elections ''must meet objective standards
that define every free election,'' including freedom of assembly, speech and
press.

As for Saudi Arabia, where Ms. Rice flew after speaking in Egypt, she said that
''brave citizens are demanding accountability from their government'' and that
''many people pay an unfair price for exercising their basic rights.''

She praised ''some first steps toward openness'' in the holding of municipal
elections. But she condemned depriving women of the right to vote and the
arrests of some dissidents.

Ms. Rice's appeal, some of the toughest talk in the Arab world from a secretary
of state, drew a mixed reaction, including criticism from Egyptian opposition
groups demanding an even harder line. On the other hand, the Egyptian foreign
minister, dismissing her comments, said Egypt's planned elections were already
going to be free and fair.

Some of the 600 listeners at the university complained that her call for freedom
was undercut by American indifference to Israeli ''war crimes,'' mistreatment of
prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and Abu Ghraib and the continuing violence in
Iraq.

The criticism was similar to what erupted last month after Laura Bush praised
Mr. Mubarak for taking a ''bold step'' in planning multiparty elections, even as
protesters were being arrested and opposition groups complained about election
requirements barring independent candidates.

''We were shocked at the statements made,'' Hany Enan, one of the founders of an
Egyptian movement demanding that Mr. Mubarak step down, said of Ms. Rice's
remarks. She added, ''I don't think the content of her remarks met the
expectations of the people or the opposition.''

Officials traveling with Ms. Rice said they were prepared for such criticism.
''Most of the region's leaders won't like what they hear, and most people will
resent it,'' one American official said on the condition of anonymity because he
did not want to prejudge Arab reaction. ''But in the long run, her speech will
make people think about the problem.''

The reaction illustrated the quandary that the Bush administration faced in
navigating the demands for sweeping changes and a desire not to offend close
allies or to apply separate benchmarks to different countries, depending on
their status as friends.

Ms. Rice criticized Egypt and Saudi Arabia for intimidating or locking up
protesters, for example. She also met with Ayman Nour, a Parliament member whose
arrest this year prompted the secretary to cancel a visit to Egypt. But she did
not meet with leaders of the outlawed Islamist organization known as the Muslim
Brotherhood, though it is probably the most popular opposition group.

''Egypt has its laws, it has its rule of law, and I'll respect that,'' Ms. Rice
said, explaining the decision not to meet with the Brotherhood.

In her speech, she assailed Syria as a police state, and then Iran, where the
election for president on Friday got no praise even though it has been more
competitive than Egypt's is likely to be. ''The appearance of elections does not
mask the organized cruelty of Iran's theocratic state,'' she said.

Her criticism of Egypt, by contrast, came in a conciliatory tone, accompanied by
reminders that the United States has its own history of slavery and racism.
''The United States has no cause for false pride, and we have every reason for
humility,'' she added.

In Riyadh, her remarks in Cairo received a curt reaction from Prince Saud
al-Faisal, the Saudi foreign minister, who dismissed her appeal for the release
of the dissidents. ''They have broken the law,'' Prince Saud said at a
post-midnight news conference with Ms. Rice, adding that Saudi Arabia would use
its own judgment of what changes were best.

Ms. Rice's speech had been billed in advance as a bold change for the United
States. ''This is a great region of the world, the cradle of civilization,'' she
implored her audience. Noting that the entire region of 22 countries had a
collective economy the size of Spain's, she added:

''How can that be the case? It certainly isn't anything about the intelligence
of the Arab people. It certainly isn't anything about their aspirations. It's
about the absence of freedom and the absence of liberty.''

Even critics of the American administration say the increasing calls by
President Bush for democracy have helped inspire the Egyptian movement known as
Kifaya, or Enough, which calls for Mr. Mubarak to step down. He has served since
1981 without ever being challenged in an election.

Under pressure, Mr. Mubarak in February announced the first Egyptian election
for president in which candidates will be able to run, but the National Assembly
dominated by his National Democratic Party has been moving toward erecting an
array of barriers against candidates outside its influence.

When Ms. Rice raised those problems at a news conference with the Egyptian
foreign minister, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, she got what appeared to be an airy rebuff.

''Who would object to fair, transparent elections?'' Mr. Gheit said, turning to
the secretary. ''Everybody wants fair, transparent elections. And it will be so,
I assure you.''

In another awkward exchange, Mr. Gheit reminded Ms. Rice that he had told her
earlier that without ''a settlement for the Palestinian problem,'' little could
be done. ''That is crucial!'' he added.

Ms. Rice, who traveled to Egypt from Jordan and Israel, where she had sought to
coax the Israelis and Palestinians toward a solution, retorted with a smile,
''That's what we're working on.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, at American University in
Cairo yesterday, called for fair elections, free expression and women's rights.
(Photo by Amr Nabil/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A4)
 Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Foreign Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit of
Egypt traded words at a briefing in Sharm el Sheik. (Pool photo by Khaled
Desouki)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (90%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); MUBARAK RESIGNATION (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); WOMEN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (73%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION
(72%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); ARRESTS (70%); CITY GOVERNMENT (66%);
UNFAIR PRICING (52%); CITIES (51%) Freedom and Human Rights; United States
International Relations; Elections; Political Prisoners; Freedom of Speech and
Expression; Women; Freedom of the Press

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (94%); HOSNI MUBARAK (79%) Steven R Weisman;
Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Ahmed Aboul (Min) Gheit; Saud Al-Faisal (Prince); Hosni
(Pres) Mubarak

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (92%); RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); EGYPT (97%); SAUDI ARABIA (96%); MIDDLE EAST
(92%); CUBA (90%); IRAQ (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: Egypt; Saudi Arabia; Egypt; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             670 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Relatives Protest Plan for Museum at 9/11 Memorial Site

BYLINE: By JANON FISHER

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 525 words


Chanting, ''9/11 memorial only,'' about 200 relatives of those who died in the
terrorist attack gathered at ground zero yesterday to express anger over a
proposed museum at the site. They said a museum would dilute the purpose of the
memorial and dishonor the memory of their relatives.

Although plans for the museum, the International Freedom Center, have yet to be
completed, its Web site (ifcwtc.org) said it would include an educational and
cultural center ''that will nurture a global conversation on freedom in our
world today.''

Relatives said they feared that the museum would shift the focus from the
victims of the terror attack toward political harangues against United States
foreign and domestic policy.

Debra Burlingame, whose opinion piece on June 8 in The Wall Street Journal
ignited a movement to remove the museum, has focused her anger on the executive
director of the American Civil Liberties Union, Anthony D. Romero, who is an
adviser to the museum.

''Do we really want to entrust the meaning of Sept. 11 to a man who is calling
our secretary of defense, in a time of war, dishonorable and dishonest?'' asked
Ms. Burlingame, whose brother, Charles F. Burlingame III, was a pilot of the
hijacked American Airlines Flight 77.

But project coordinators vowed to press forward and held a quickly organized
news conference to address the family members' concerns.

''It's important what we have here is not a place for political polemics, but a
place to memorialize the history of man's march toward freedom and to remember
the role that Sept. 11 plays in that important march,'' said John P. Cahill,
appointed by Gov. George E. Pataki in May to lead the rebuilding effort in Lower
Manhattan.

But relatives at the protest said there should be no political slants at ground
zero.

''The organizers of the International Freedom Center say that in order to
understand 9/11, we must see exhibits about slavery, segregation and genocide
and its impact around the world,'' said Michael Burke, whose brother, Capt.
William F. Burke Jr. of the Fire Department, died in the World Trade Center
collapse. ''This is history that all should know and learn, but not here -- not
on sacred ground.''

He added: ''Nobody is coming to this place to learn about Ukraine democracy or
to be inspired by the courage of Tibetan monks. They're coming for Sept. 11.''

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg also defended the idea of the freedom center
yesterday and vowed to move forward with plans for it on that site.

''You are never going to please everybody,'' he said. ''I don't think any
memorial is going to do what they would really like to have; clearly it's not
going to bring back their loved ones. But we're trying to remember those who
have passed and at the same time build for the future.''

The relatives vowed to continue the fight against the center. All day long,
signatures poured in on an Internet petition on the Web site
takebackthememorial.com.

''Three thousand people died on their way to work,'' said Rita Riches, holding a
photograph of her son, Firefighter Jimmy Riches. ''That's what this is about,
nothing else. Absolutely nothing else.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relatives of those who died on Sept. 11 said yesterday that
there should be no political slants at ground zero. (Photo by Fred R. Conrad/The
New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (93%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (70%); FIRE DEPARTMENTS (68%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (66%); PRESS CONFERENCES (65%);
AIRLINES (65%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (56%); WALL STREET JOURNAL (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (56%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (50%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); UKRAINE (79%); CHINA (56%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             672 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. GENERAL SEES NO EBB IN FIGHT

BYLINE: By DAVID S. CLOUD and ERIC SCHMITT; David E. Sanger contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENCY;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


The top American commander for the Middle East said Thursday that the insurgency
in Iraq had not diminished, seeming to contradict statements by Vice President
Dick Cheney in recent days that the insurgents were in their ''last throes.''

Though he declined during his Congressional testimony to comment directly on Mr.
Cheney's statements, the commander, Gen. John P. Abizaid, said that more foreign
fighters were coming into Iraq and that the insurgency's ''overall strength is
about the same'' as it was six months ago. ''There's a lot of work to be done
against the insurgency,'' he added.

His more pessimistic assessment, made during a Senate Armed Services Committee
hearing, reflected a difference of emphasis between military officers, who
battle the intractable insurgency every day, and civilian officials intent on
accentuating what they say is unacknowledged progress in Iraq.

Mr. Cheney, in an interview with CNN after General Abizaid spoke, repeated his
assertion that the insurgency was facing defeat, which he said was driving it to
increase attacks to disrupt the United States-backed political process aimed at
defusing the violence.

''If you look at what the dictionary says about throes, it can still be a
violent period,'' he said in the interview. ''The terrorists understand if we're
successful at accomplishing our objective, standing up a democracy in Iraq, that
that's a huge defeat for them. They'll do everything they can to stop it.''

Persuading the public that the American-led effort in Iraq is succeeding is a
White House priority this month. President Bush will meet Friday with the Iraqi
prime minister, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, at the White House, and on Tuesday, he will
give a speech on the first anniversary of the end of the American occupation.

Dr. Jaafari, speaking at the Council of Foreign Relations here, supported the
White House argument that the situation in Iraq was steadily improving, despite
continuing attacks. He also warned against setting a timetable for troop
withdrawal. When he was asked Thursday evening about Mr. Cheney's recent
comments, he sidestepped the issue.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and his top commanders appeared at all-day
hearings, starting with the Senate Armed Services Committee in the morning and
continuing with the House Armed Services Committee in the afternoon.

''Any who say that we've lost this war, or that we're losing this war, are wrong
-- we are not,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said in the morning session.

He added that consideration of troop reductions in Iraq, as some Democrats have
called for, would ''throw a lifeline to terrorists, who in recent months have
suffered significant losses and casualties, been denied havens and suffered
weakened popular support.''

General Abizaid had just returned from a visit to Iraq, Afghanistan and the Horn
of Africa, where he said he was surprised at how many American commanders and
soldiers asked whether the military was losing support at home for their
missions overseas. ''It was a real concern,'' he said.

He added that Afghan and Iraqi military officers had raised the same concern.
''They worry we don't have the staying power to see the mission through,'' he
said.

Several lawmakers warned that public support for the American troop presence in
Iraq would continue to decline, which could eventually force a withdrawal of the
troops, unless progress could be made at stemming the violence.

Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican from South Carolina, told Mr. Rumsfeld at
the Senate Committee hearing: ''We will lose this war if we leave too soon, and
what is likely to make us leave too soon? The public going south. That is
happening, and it worries me greatly.''

No senator called for an American withdrawal, but several Democrats urged the
administration to consider setting a timetable for troop reductions if Iraqi
officials fail to approve a constitution by a self-imposed August deadline,
which could be extended for six months. The constitution is scheduled to be
voted on in October, and if it is approved, a national election would be held in
December.

''An open-ended commitment to the Iraqis that we will be there even if they fail
to agree on a constitution would lessen the chances that the Iraqis will make
the political compromises necessary to defeat the jihadists and end the
insurgency,'' said Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan.

Dr. Jaafari urged the United States on Thursday night not to set a timetable for
a troop withdrawal, saying insurgents would seize on the action to ''spread
terror across the nation to weaken the country.''

He said the only viable military strategy was to wait until Iraqi troops are
''trained to a very high level,'' a process he insisted was already well under
way.

His reluctance to set deadlines appeared synchronized with the position taken by
Mr. Bush, who has declined to set a goal for withdrawal.

Yet despite his care not to differ with the White House, Dr. Jaafari appeared at
one point to side with General Abizaid, who told Congress that foreign fighters
were still entering Iraq. Mr. Jaafari agreed that Iraq's borders were still not
secure and that terrorists continued to flow into Iraq. He made no effort to
quantify how many have entered the country, or how important they have been in
the insurgency.

In the afternoon session, Representative Loretta Sanchez, a California Democrat,
repeatedly pressed Gen. George W. Casey Jr., the top commander in Iraq, on
whether the insurgency was in its final throes, as Mr. Cheney said, or was
essentially holding its own, as another top American officer, Lt. Gen. John R.
Vines, stated this week.

Pressed repeatedly to choose between the two, General Casey said: ''There's a
long way to go here. Things in Iraq are hard.''

But General Casey insisted that the allied forces had significantly weakened the
insurgency even though the number of attacks against American forces has
remaining steady at about 60 a day for the last several weeks.

The most heated exchange of the day occurred between Mr. Rumsfeld and Senator
Edward M. Kennedy. After a six-minute recitation of what he said were Mr.
Rumsfeld's mistakes and misjudgments, the senator, a Massachusetts Democrat,
accused him of putting ''our forces and our national security in danger" and
called for Mr. Rumsfeld to resign, as he has several times previously.

''Well, that is quite a statement," Mr. Rumsfeld responded, saying Mr. Bush has
rebuffed his offers to resign twice.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld at a Senate hearing
yesterday with Gen. Richard B. Myers, center, and Gen. George W. Casey Jr..
(Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); POLITICS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (88%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%);
TESTIMONY (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); ANNIVERSARIES (68%); PRIME MINISTERS
(66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare  ; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human
Rights; Politics and Government

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) David S Cloud; Eric Schmitt; John
P (Gen) Abizaid; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             673 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cheney Says Detainees Are Well Treated

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


Vice President Dick Cheney said Thursday that prisoners at the detention camp in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, had everything they could possibly want and were well fed
and well treated as they lived in the ''tropics.''

Mr.

Cheney dismissed calls for the center, which holds terrorism suspects, to be
closed. ''They got a brand new facility down at Guantanamo,'' Mr. Cheney said in
an interview with CNN. ''We spent a lot of money to build it. They're very well
treated down there.''

''They're living in the tropics,'' he added. ''They're well fed. They've got
everything they could possibly want. There isn't any other nation in the world
that would treat people who were determined to kill Americans the way we're
treating these people.''

Mr. Cheney categorized the prisoners as ''terrorists,'' ''bomb makers'' and
''facilitators of terror.''

''If you let them out, they'll go back to trying to kill Americans,'' he said.

The prison holds about 525 people. Some have been there more than three years
without being charged with any crime.

Former President Bill Clinton has become the most prominent critic of the base
in Cuba. ''It is time that there are no more stories coming out of there about
people being abused,'' Mr. Clinton said in an interview published on Monday in
The Financial Times.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERVIEWS
(89%); PRISONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); NEW CONSTRUCTION (76%); US PRESIDENTS
(74%); NAVIES (74%) Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

COMPANY: FINANCIAL TIMES GROUP (66%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (66%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (66%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (92%); BILL CLINTON (73%) Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             675 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgrade Says It Is Working Toward Surrender of Bosnian Serb

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD and DAVID ROHDE; Nicholas Wood reported from Belgrade
for this article, and David Rohde from Boston.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 21


The Serbian government gave its clearest indication this week that it was
seeking the surrender of Gen. Ratko Mladic, the former Bosnian Serb Army
commander wanted for orchestrating the killing of at least 7,000 Muslim men and
boys in Srebrenica nearly a decade ago.

For the first time, government officials on Tuesday confirmed that they had
sought contact with the secret support network that has helped to keep General
Mladic in hiding for at least eight years.

Their hope, they say, is to secure his voluntary surrender to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague, as was the case with
the 14 other Serb war crimes suspects that have been sent to the court from
Serbia this year.

If Serbia succeeds in transferring General Mladic to The Hague, it will be a
substantial victory for the moderate nationalist Vojislav Kostunica, who has
refused to adopt a policy of openly arresting war crimes suspects.

Speculation has intensified over the last two weeks as the 10th anniversary of
the fall of Srebrenica, on July 11, 1995, approaches, but the government has
denied that it is conducting negotiations.

However, in an interview, Serbia's chief government spokesman, Srdjan Djuric,
conceded that efforts were being made to reach members of the Mladic support
network to secure a possible surrender.

''Considering how highly sensitive this is, the Serbian government does not
announce results before they have happened,'' Mr. Djuric said. ''Any detail
could jeopardize the whole process.''

A senior American official in Washington said he had learned from Serbian
officials that they contacted supporters of General Mladic after a videotape
appeared in June showing paramilitaries from Serbia executing six Bosnian Muslim
prisoners from Srebrenica.

''There is a lot of very detailed work on it,'' said the American official, who
spoke on condition of anonymity because he did not want to be perceived as
speaking for officials in Belgrade.

Serbian officials said they had been pressuring the general's supporters to
reveal his whereabouts, or to persuade him to surrender, the official said.

For most of the last decade General Mladic has been hiding in Serbia and has
spent most of his time on military bases, Serbian officials say. Serbian
officials recently told the American official that for the last year General
Mladic had been sheltered by a shadowy network of military and civilian
supporters, the same tactic used by the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serbs,
Radovan Karadzic, in neighboring Bosnia, who is also wanted by the Hague
tribunal.

Diplomats and government officials in Belgrade said the most recent sighting of
General Mladic was in May 2003, at a Serbian Army barracks.

It is not known whether General Mladic is still in Serbia.

The leading Serbian rights advocate, Natasha Kandic, whose Humanitarian Law
Center monitors war crimes cases, said General Mladic had two support networks,
one consisting of former members of the Yugoslav military intelligence service,
the other of Bosnian Serbs.

American officials have been telling Serbia's leaders since 2002 that Serbia is
responsible for General Mladic's surrender and that their country will ''never
be allowed'' to join NATO as long as the fugitive general remains free,
R.Nicholas Burns, the American under secretary of state for political affairs,
said in a telephone interview from Washington. ''Our view is they want to find
him for the first time in 10 years,'' said Mr. Burns, who visited Belgrade on
June 9.

                             --------------------


Official to Skip Ceremony

 THE HAGUE, June 23 (Reuters) -- The chief United Nations war crimes prosecutor
said Thursday that she was too ashamed to attend the 10th anniversary of the
fall of Srebrenica next month because the two main suspects were still at large.

The prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, told diplomats at The Hague that she could not
show her face at the commemoration in Bosnia on July 11 because Dr. Karadzic and
General Mladic were still on the run.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ARMIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); ANNIVERSARIES (69%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; David Rohde; Ratko (Gen) Mladic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             677 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who Are Americans To Think That Freedom Is Theirs To Spread ?

BYLINE: By Michael Ignatieff.

Michael Ignatieff, a contributing writer, is the Carr professor of human rights
at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. He is the editor of the
forthcoming book ''American Exceptionalism and Human Rights.''

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 5033 words


I.
As Thomas Jefferson lay dying at his hilltop estate, Monticello, in late June
1826, he wrote a letter telling the citizens of the city of Washington that he
was too ill to join them for the 50th-anniversary celebrations of the
Declaration of Independence. Wanting his letter to inspire the gathering, he
told them that one day the experiment he and the founders started would spread
to the whole world. ''To some parts sooner, to others later, but finally to
all,'' he wrote, the American form of republican self-government would become
every nation's birthright. Democracy's worldwide triumph was assured, he went on
to say, because ''the unbounded exercise of reason and freedom of opinion''
would soon convince all men that they were born not to be ruled but to rule
themselves in freedom.

It was the last letter he ever wrote. The slave-owning apostle of liberty, that
incomparable genius and moral scandal, died 10 days later on July 4, 1826, on
the same day as his old friend and fellow founder, John Adams.

It's impossible to untangle the contradictions of American freedom without
thinking about Jefferson and the spiritual abyss that separates his
pronouncement that ''all men are created equal'' from the reality of the human
beings he owned, slept with and never imagined as fellow citizens. American
freedom aspires to be universal, but it has always been exceptional because
America is the only modern democratic experiment that began in slavery. From the
Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, it took a
century for the promise of American freedom to even begin to be kept.

Despite the exceptional character of American liberty, every American president
has proclaimed America's duty to defend it abroad as the universal birthright of
mankind. John F. Kennedy echoed Jefferson when, in a speech in 1961, he said
that the spread of freedom abroad was powered by ''the force of right and
reason''; but, he went on, in a sober and pragmatic vein, ''reason does not
always appeal to unreasonable men.'' The contrast between Kennedy and the
current incumbent of the White House is striking. Until George W. Bush, no
American president -- not even Franklin Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson -- actually
risked his presidency on the premise that Jefferson might be right. But this
gambler from Texas has bet his place in history on the proposition, as he stated
in a speech in March, that decades of American presidents' ''excusing and
accommodating tyranny, in the pursuit of stability'' in the Middle East inflamed
the hatred of the fanatics who piloted the planes into the twin towers on Sept.
11.

If democracy plants itself in Iraq and spreads throughout the Middle East, Bush
will be remembered as a plain-speaking visionary. If Iraq fails, it will be his
Vietnam, and nothing else will matter much about his time in office. For any
president, it must be daunting to know already that his reputation depends on
what Jefferson once called ''so inscrutable [an] arrangement of causes and
consequences in this world.''

The consequences are more likely to be positive if the president begins to show
some concern about the gap between his words and his administration's
performance. For he runs an administration with the least care for consistency
between what it says and does of any administration in modern times. The real
money committed to the promotion of democracy in the Middle East is trifling.
The president may have doubled the National Endowment for Democracy's budget,
but it is still only $80 million a year. But even if there were more money,
there is such doubt in the Middle East that the president actually means what he
says -- in the wake of 60 years of American presidents cozying up to tyrants in
the region -- that every dollar spent on democracy in the Middle East runs the
risk of undermining the cause it supports. Actual Arab democrats recoil from the
embrace of American good intentions. Just ask a community-affairs officer trying
to give American dollars away for the promotion of democracy in Mosul, in
northern Iraq, how easy it is to get anyone to even take the money, let alone
spend it honestly.

And then there are the prisoners, the hooded man with the wires hanging from his
body, the universal icon of the gap between the ideals of American freedom and
the sordid -- and criminal -- realities of American detention and interrogation
practice. The fetid example of these abuses makes American talk of democracy
sound hollow. It will not be possible to encourage the rule of law in Egypt if
America is sending Hosni Mubarak shackled prisoners to torture. It will be
impossible to secure democratic change in Morocco or Afghanistan or anywhere
else if Muslims believe that American guards desecrated the Koran. The failure
to convict anybody higher than a sergeant for these crimes leaves many Americans
and a lot of the world wondering whether Jefferson's vision of America hasn't
degenerated into an ideology of self-congratulation, whose function is no longer
to inspire but to lie.

II.

And yet . . . and yet. . . .

If Jefferson's vision were only an ideology of self-congratulation, it would
never have inspired Americans to do the hard work of reducing the gap between
dream and reality. Think about the explosive force of Jefferson's self-evident
truth. First white working men, then women, then blacks, then the disabled, then
gay Americans -- all have used his words to demand that the withheld promise be
delivered to them. Without Jefferson, no Lincoln, no Emancipation Proclamation.
Without the slave-owning Jefferson, no Martin Luther King Jr. and the dream of
white and black citizens together reaching the Promised Land.

Jefferson's words have had the same explosive force abroad. American men and
women in two world wars died believing that they had fought to save the freedom
of strangers. And they were not deceived. Bill Clinton saluted the men who died
at Omaha Beach with the words, ''They gave us our world.'' That seems literally
true: a democratic Germany, an unimaginably prosperous Europe at peace with
itself. The men who died at Iwo Jima bequeathed their children a democratic
Japan and 60 years of stability throughout Asia.

These achievements have left Americans claiming credit for everything good that
has happened since, especially the fact that there are more democracies in the
world than at any time in history. Jefferson's vaunting language makes
appropriate historical modesty particularly hard, yet modesty is called for.
Freedom's global dispersion owes less to America and more to a contagion of
local civic courage, beginning with the people of Portugal and Spain who threw
off dictatorship in the 1970's, the Eastern Europeans who threw off Communism in
the 90's and the Georgians, Serbs, Kyrgyz and Ukrainians who have thrown off
post-Soviet autocratic governments since. The direct American role in these
revolutions was often slight, but American officials, spies and activists were
there, too, giving a benign green light to regime change from the streets.

This democratic turn in American foreign policy has been recent. Latin Americans
remember when the American presence meant backing death squads and military
juntas. Now in the Middle East and elsewhere, when the crowds wave Lebanese
flags in Beirut and clamor for the Syrians to go, when Iraqi housewives proudly
hold up their purple fingers on exiting the polling stations, when Afghans
quietly line up to vote in their villages, when Egyptians chant ''Enough!'' and
demand that Mubarak leave power, few Islamic democrats believe they owe their
free voice to America. But many know that they have not been silenced, at least
not yet, because the United States actually seems, for the first time, to be
betting on them and not on the autocrats.

In the cold war, most presidents opted for stability at the price of liberty
when they had to choose. This president, as his second Inaugural Address made
clear, has soldered stability and liberty together: ''America's vital interests
and our deepest beliefs are now one.'' As he has said, ''Sixty years of Western
nations excusing and accommodating the lack of freedom in the Middle East did
nothing to make us safe -- because in the long run stability cannot be purchased
at the expense of liberty.''

It is terrorism that has joined together the freedom of strangers and the
national interest of the United States. But not everyone believes that democracy
in the Middle East will actually make America safer, even in the medium term.
Thomas Carothers of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, for one, has
questioned the ''facile assumption that a straight line exists between progress
on democratization and the elimination of the roots of Islamic terrorism.'' In
the short term, democratization in Egypt, for example, might only bring the
radical Muslim Brotherhood to power. Even in the medium term, becoming a
democracy does not immunize a society from terrorism. Just look at democratic
Spain, menaced by Basque terrorism.

Moreover, proclaiming freedom to be God's plan for mankind, as the president has
done, does not make it so. There is, as yet, no evidence of a sweeping tide of
freedom and democracy through the Middle East. Lebanon could pitch from Syrian
occupation into civil strife; Egypt might well re-elect Mubarak after a
fraudulent exercise in pseudodemocracy; little Jordan hopes nobody will notice
that government remains the family monopoly of the Hashemite dynasty; Tunisia
remains a good place for tourists but a lousy place for democrats; democratic
hopes are most alive in Palestine, but here the bullet is still competing with
the ballot box. Over it all hangs Iraq, poised between democratic transition and
anarchy.

And yet . . . and yet. . . . More than one world leader has been heard to ask
his advisers recently, ''What if Bush is right?''

III.

Other democratic leaders may suspect Bush is right, but that doesn't mean they
are joining his crusade. Never have there been more democracies. Never has
America been more alone in spreading democracy's promise.

The reticence extends even to those nations that owe their democracy to American
force of arms. Freedom in Germany was an American imperial imposition, from the
cashiering of ex-Nazi officials and the expunging of anti-Semitic nonsense from
school textbooks to the drafting of a new federal constitution. Yet Chancellor
Gerhard Schroder can still intone that democracy cannot be ''forced upon these
societies from the outside.'' This is not the only oddity. As Thomas
Kleine-Brockhoff of the German weekly Die Zeit points out, the '68-ers now in
power in Germany all spent their radical youth denouncing American support for
tyrannies around the world: ''Across the Atlantic they shouted: Pinochet!
Somoza! Mubarak! Shah Pahlevi! King Faisal! Now it seems as though an American
president has finally heard their complaints. . . . But what is coming out of
Germany? . . . Nothing but deafening silence!''

The deafening silence extends beyond Germany. Like Germany, Canada sat out the
war in Iraq. Ask the Canadians why they aren't joining the American crusade to
spread democracy, and you get this from their government's recent foreign-policy
review: ''Canadians hold their values dear, but are not keen to see them imposed
on others. This is not the Canadian way.'' One reason it is not the Canadian way
is that when American presidents speak of liberty as God's plan for mankind,
even God-fearing Canadians wonder when God began disclosing his plan to
presidents.

The same discomfort with the American project extends to the nation that, in the
splendid form of the Marquis de Lafayette, once joined the American fight for
freedom. The French used to talk about exporting Liberte, Egalite et Fraternite,
but nowadays they don't seem to mind standing by and watching Iraqi democrats
struggling to keep chaos and anarchy at bay. Even America's best friend, Tony
Blair, is circumspect about defining the Iraq project as anything more than
managing the chaos. The strategy unit at 10 Downing Street recently conducted a
study on how to prevent future international crises: debt relief, overseas aid
and humanitarian intervention were all featured, but the promotion of democracy
and freedom barely got a mention. European political foundations and overseas
development organizations do promote free elections and rule of law, but they
bundle up these good works in the parlance of ''governance'' rather than in the
language of spreading freedom and democracy. So America presides over a loose
alliance of democracies, most of whose leaders think that promoting freedom and
democracy is better left to the zealous imperialists in Washington.

The charge that promoting democracy is imperialism by another name is baffling
to many Americans. How can it be imperialist to help people throw off the
shackles of tyranny?

It may be that other nations just have longer memories of their own failed
imperial projects. From Napoleon onward, France sought to export French
political virtues, though not freedom itself, to its colonies. The British
Empire was sustained by the conceit that the British had a special talent for
government that entitled them to spread the rule of law to Kipling's ''lesser
breeds.'' In the 20th century, the Soviet Union advanced missionary claims about
the superiority of Soviet rule, backed by Marxist pseudoscience.

What is exceptional about the Jefferson dream is that it is the last imperial
ideology left standing in the world, the sole survivor of national claims to
universal significance. All the others -- the Soviet, the French and the British
-- have been consigned to the ash heap of history. This may explain why what so
many Americans regard as simply an exercise in good intentions strikes even
their allies as a delusive piece of hubris.

The problem here is that while no one wants imperialism to win, no one in his
right mind can want liberty to fail either. If the American project of
encouraging freedom fails, there may be no one else available with the
resourcefulness and energy, even the self-deception, necessary for the task.
Very few countries can achieve and maintain freedom without outside help. Big
imperial allies are often necessary to the establishment of liberty. As the
Harvard ethicist Arthur Applbaum likes to put it, ''All foundings are forced.''
Just remember how much America itself needed the assistance of France to free
itself of the British. Who else is available to sponsor liberty in the Middle
East but America? Certainly the Europeans themselves have not done a very
distinguished job defending freedom close to home.

During the cold war, while most Western Europeans tacitly accepted the division
of their continent, American presidents stood up and called for the walls to
come tumbling down. When an anonymous graffiti artist in Berlin sprayed the wall
with a message -- ''This wall will fall. Beliefs become reality'' -- it was
President Reagan, not a European politician, who seized on those words and
declared that the wall ''cannot withstand faith; it cannot withstand truth. The
wall cannot withstand freedom.''

This is why much of the European support for Bush in Iraq came from the people
who had grown up behind that wall. It wasn't just the promise of bases and money
and strategic partnerships that tipped Poles, Romanians, Czechs and Hungarians
into sending troops; it was the memory that when the chips were down, in the
dying years of Soviet tyranny, American presidents were there, and Western
European politicians looked the other way.

It is true that Western Europe has had a democracy-promotion project of its own
since the wall came down: bringing the fledgling regimes of Eastern Europe into
the brave new world of the European Union. This very real achievement has now
been delayed by the ''no'' votes in France and the Netherlands. Sponsoring the
promotion of democracy in the East and preparing an Islamic giant, Turkey, for a
later entry is precisely what the referendum votes want to stop. So who will be
there to prevent Islamic fundamentalism or military authoritarianism breaking
through in Turkey now that the Europeans have told the Turks to remain in the
waiting room forever? If democracy within requires patrons without, the only
patron left is the United States.

IV.

While Americans characteristically oversell and exaggerate the world's desire to
live as they do, it is actually reasonable to suppose, as Americans believe,
that most human beings, if given the chance, would like to rule themselves. It
is not imperialistic to believe this. It might even be condescending to believe
anything else.

If Europeans are embarrassed to admit this universal yearning or to assist it,
Americans have difficulty understanding that there are many different forms that
this yearning can take, Islamic democracy among them. Democracy may be a
universal value, but democracies differ -- mightily -- on ultimate questions.
One reason the American promotion of democracy conjures up so little support
from other democrats is that American democracy, once a model to emulate, has
become an exception to avoid.

Consider America's neighbor to the north. Canadians look south and ask
themselves why access to health care remains a privilege of income in the United
States and not a right of citizenship. They like hunting and shooting, but can't
understand why anyone would regard a right to bear arms as a constitutional
right. They can't understand why the American love of limited government does
not extend to a ban on the government's ultimate power -- capital punishment.
The Canadian government seems poised to extend full marriage rights to gays.

Some American liberals wistfully wish their own country were more like Canada,
while for American conservatives, ''Soviet Canuckistan'' -- as Pat Buchanan
calls it -- is the liberal hell they are seeking to avoid. But if American
liberals can't persuade their own society to be more like other democracies and
American conservatives don't want to, both of them are acknowledging, the first
with sorrow, the other with joy, that America is an exception.

This is not how it used to be. From the era of F.D.R. to the era of John
Kennedy, liberal and progressive foreigners used to look to America for
inspiration. For conservatives like Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan was a
lodestar. The grand boulevards in foreign capitals were once named after these
large figures of American legend. For a complex set of reasons, American
democracy has ceased to be the inspiration it was. This is partly because of the
religious turn in American conservatism, which awakens incomprehension in the
largely secular politics of America's democratic allies. It is partly because of
the chaos of the contested presidential election in 2000, which left the
impression, worldwide, that closure had been achieved at the expense of justice.
And partly because of the phenomenal influence of money on American elections.

But the differences between America and its democratic allies run deeper than
that. When American policy makers occasionally muse out loud about creating a
''community of democracies'' to become a kind of alternative to the United
Nations, they forget that America and its democratic friends continue to
disagree about what fundamental rights a democracy should protect and the limits
to power government should observe. As Europeans and Canadians head leftward on
issues like gay marriage, capital punishment and abortion, and as American
politics head rightward, the possibility of America leading in the promotion of
a common core of beliefs recedes ever further. Hence the paradox of Jefferson's
dream: American liberty as a moral universal seems less and less recognizable to
the very democracies once inspired by that dream. In the cold war, America was
accepted as the leader of ''the free world.'' The free world -- the West -- has
fractured, leaving a fierce and growing argument about democracy in its place.

V.

The fact that many foreigners do not happen to buy into the American version of
promoting democracy may not be much of a surprise. What is significant is how
many American liberals don't share the vision, either.

On this issue, there has been a huge reversal of roles in American politics.
Once upon a time, liberal Democrats were the custodians of the Jeffersonian
message that American democracy should be exported to the world, and
conservative Republicans were its realist opponents. Beginning in the late
1940's, as the political commentator Peter Beinart has rediscovered, liberals
like Eleanor Roosevelt, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Adlai Stevenson realized that
liberals would have to reinvent themselves. This was partly a matter of
principle -- they detested Soviet tyranny -- and partly a matter of pragmatism.
They wanted to avoid being tarred as fellow travelers, the fate that had met
Franklin Roosevelt's former running mate, the radical reformer Henry Wallace.
The liberals who founded Americans for Democratic Action refounded liberalism as
an anti-Communist internationalism, dedicated to defending freedom and democracy
abroad from Communist threat. The missionary Jeffersonianism in this reinvention
worried many people -- for example, George Kennan, the diplomat and
foreign-policy analyst who argued that containment of the Communist menace was
all that prudent politics could accomplish.

The leading Republicans of the 1950's -- Robert Taft, for example -- were
isolationist realists, doubtful that America should impose its way on the world.
Eisenhower, that wise old veteran of European carnage, was in that vein, too:
prudent, risk-avoiding, letting the Soviets walk into Hungary because he thought
war was simply out of the question, too horrible to contemplate. In the 1960's
and 70's, Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger remained in the realist mode. Since
stability mattered more to them than freedom, they propped up the shah of Iran,
despite his odious secret police, and helped to depose Salvador Allende in
Chile. Kissinger's guiding star was not Jefferson but Bismarck. Kissinger
contended that people who wanted freedom and democracy in Eastern Europe were
lamentable sentimentalists, unable to look at the map and accommodate themselves
to the eternal reality of Soviet power.

It was Reagan who began the realignment of American politics, making the
Republicans into internationalist Jeffersonians with his speech in London at the
Palace of Westminster in 1982, which led to the creation of the National
Endowment for Democracy and the emergence of democracy promotion as a central
goal of United States foreign policy. At the time, many conservative realists
argued for detente, risk avoidance and placation of the Soviet bear. Faced with
the Republican embrace of Jeffersonian ambitions for America abroad, liberals
chose retreat or scorn. Bill Clinton -- who took reluctant risks to defend
freedom in Bosnia and Kosovo -- partly arrested this retreat, yet since his
administration, the withdrawal of American liberalism from the defense and
promotion of freedom overseas has been startling. The Michael Moore-style left
conquered the Democratic Party's heart; now the view was that America's only
guiding interest overseas was furthering the interests of Halliburton and Exxon.
The relentless emphasis on the hidden role of oil makes the promotion of
democracy seem like a devious cover or lame excuse. The unseen cost of this
pseudo-Marxist realism is that it disconnected the Democratic Party from the
patriotic idealism of the very electorate it sought to persuade.

John Kerry's presidential campaign could not overcome liberal America's fatal
incapacity to connect to the common faith of the American electorate in the
Jeffersonian ideal. Instead he ran as the prudent, risk-avoiding realist in 2004
-- despite, or perhaps because of, the fact that he had fought in Vietnam.
Kerry's caution was bred in the Mekong. The danger and death he encountered gave
him some good reasons to prefer realism to idealism, and risk avoidance to
hubris. Faced with a rival who proclaimed that freedom was not just America's
gift to mankind but God's gift to the world, it was understandable that Kerry
would seek to emphasize how complex reality was, how resistant to American
purposes it might be and how high the price of American dreams could prove. As
it turned out, the American electorate seemed to know only too well how high the
price was in Iraq, and it still chose the gambler over the realist. In 2004, the
Jefferson dream won decisively over American prudence.

But this is more than just a difference between risk taking and prudence. It is
also a disagreement about whether American values properly deserve to be called
universal at all. The contemporary liberal attitude toward the promotion of
democratic freedom -- we like what we have, but we have no right to promote it
to others -- sounds to many conservative Americans like complacent and timorous
relativism, timorous because it won't lift a finger to help those who want an
escape from tyranny, relativist because it seems to have abandoned the idea that
all people do want to be free. Judging from the results of the election in 2004,
a majority of Americans do not want to be told that Jefferson was wrong.

VI.

A relativist America is properly inconceivable. Leave relativism, complexity and
realism to other nations. America is the last nation left whose citizens don't
laugh out loud when their leader asks God to bless the country and further its
mighty work of freedom. It is the last country with a mission, a mandate and a
dream, as old as its founders.

All of this may be dangerous, even delusional, but it is also unavoidable. It is
impossible to think of America without these properties of self-belief.

Of course, American self-belief is not an eternal quantity. Jefferson airily
assumed that democracy would be carried on the wings of enlightenment, reason
and science. No one argues that now. Not even Bush. He does speak of liberty as
''the plan of heaven for humanity and the best hope for progress here on
Earth,'' but in more sober moments, he will concede that the promotion of
freedom is hard work, stretching out for generations and with no certain end in
sight.

The activists, experts and bureaucrats who do the work of promoting democracy
talk sometimes as if democracy were just a piece of technology, like a water
pump, that needs only the right installation to work in foreign climes. Others
suggest that the promotion of democracy requires anthropological sensitivity, a
deep understanding of the infinitely complex board game of foreign (in this case
Iraqi) politics.

But Iraqi freedom also depends on something whose measurement is equally
complex: what price, in soldiers' bodies and lives, the American people are
prepared to pay. The members of the American public are ceaselessly told that
stabilizing Iraq will make them more secure. They are told that fighting the
terrorists there is better than fighting them at home. They are told that
victory in Iraq will spread democracy and stability in the arc from Algeria to
Afghanistan. They are told that when this happens, ''they'' won't hate
Americans, or hate them as much as they do now. It's hard to know what the
American people believe about these claims, but one vital test of whether the
claims are believed is the number of adolescent men and women prepared to show
up at the recruiting posts in the suburban shopping malls and how many already
in the service or Guard choose to re-enlist and sign up for another tour in
Ramadi or Falluja. The current word is that recruitment is down, and this is a
serious sign that someone at least thinks America is paying too high a price for
its ideals.

Of all human activities, fighting for your country is the one that requires most
elaborate justification. Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. once said that ''to fight out
a war, you must believe something and want something with all your might.'' He
had survived Antietam and the annihilating horror of the Battle of the
Wilderness, so he knew of what he spoke. The test that Jefferson's dream has to
pass is whether it gives members of a new generation something they want to
fight for with all their might.

Two years from now is the earliest any senior United States commander says that
Americans can begin to come home from Iraq in any significant numbers. Already
the steady drip of casualties is the faintly heard, offstage noise of
contemporary American politics. As this noise grows louder, it may soon drown
out everything else. Flag-draped caskets are slid down the ramps of cargo planes
at Dover Air Force Base and readied for their last ride home to the graveyards
of America. In some region of every American's mind, those caskets raise a
simple question: Is Iraqi freedom worth this?

It would be a noble thing if one day 26 million Iraqis could live their lives
without fear in a country of their own. But it would also have been a noble
dream if the South Vietnamese had been able to resist the armored divisions of
North Vietnam and to maintain such freedom as they had. Lyndon Johnson said the
reason Americans were there was the ''principle for which our ancestors fought
in the valleys of Pennsylvania,'' the right of people to choose their own path
to change. Noble dream or not, the price turned out to be just too high.

There is nothing worse than believing your son or daughter, brother or sister,
father or mother died in vain. Even those who have opposed the Iraq war all
along, who believe that the hope of planting democracy has lured America into a
criminal folly, do not want to tell those who have died that they have given
their lives for nothing. This is where Jefferson's dream must work. Its ultimate
task in American life is to redeem loss, to rescue sacrifice from oblivion and
futility and to give it shining purpose. The real truth about Iraq is that we
just don't know -- yet -- whether the dream will do its work this time. This is
the somber question that hangs unanswered as Americans approach this Fourth of
July.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawings (Drawings by Christoph Niemann)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (88%); US PRESIDENTS (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (72%); ANNIVERSARIES (72%); POLITICS (70%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
United States Politics and Government; United States International Relations

PERSON: JOHN F KENNEDY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (74%) George W (Pres) Bush; Thomas
(1743-1826) Jefferson; Michael Ignatieff

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             678 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogating Ourselves

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 122 words



Lelyveld writes that ''clear evidence of the effectiveness of torture lite is
hard to come by.'' The experience of the British police does provide relevant
though not definitive evidence. In comparing a 10-year period when terrorist
suspects were subject to torture lite by military interrogators with a 10-year
period when the police were required to do ''humane'' interviewing, there was no
difference in the confession rate. The success of the humane interviewing, in
the judgment of the British police, was a result of providing each police
officer with 40 hours of training in how to conduct interviews, how to assess a
suspect's emotional state, how to build rapport, how to ask productive
questions, etc.

Paul Ekman
San Francisco


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); TERRORISM
(71%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: paul eckman

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (90%)

REGION: Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             679 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogating Ourselves

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 67 words



I commend Joseph Lelyveld's balanced reporting of a very complex issue (June
12). The war on terror is a war of ideas, and as Americans we must occupy the
high moral ground if we hope to succeed in this struggle. When we resort to
torturing prisoners, we confirm in the minds of Islamic extremists what they
already hate about America, thus ensuring a flood of future terrorist acts.

Jeffrey Levant
Chicago


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Andres Serrano

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (85%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (83%); RELIGION (52%) Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Joseph Lelyveld; jeffrey levant

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             681 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 28, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Zimbabwe: Britain To Continue Deportations

BYLINE: By Alan Cowell (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 110 words


Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain ruled out a halt in the deportation of
Zimbabwean asylum seekers who have been refused permission to remain in Britain.
More than 50 failed asylum seekers have been on hunger strike in British
detention centers for six days to protest plans to repatriate them, claiming
they will face torture back home. Zimbabwean officials said deportees would be
safe. Mr. Blair said Britain would not deport people likely to face persecution
but did not wish to expose its asylum system to abuse. The debate coincides with
a vast crackdown on urban shanties in Zimbabwe that has left tens of thousands
of people homeless.   Alan Cowell (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (93%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (93%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(91%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); HOMELESSNESS (50%) Asylum
(Political); Hunger Strikes; Deportation; Demonstrations and Riots; Torture;
Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (90%) Alan Cowell; Tony (Prime Min) Blair

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); AFRICA (85%)

REGION: Zimbabwe; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             695 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 1, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fresh Details Emerge on Harsh Methods at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1809 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


Sometime after Mohamed al-Kahtani was imprisoned at Guantanamo around the
beginning of 2003, military officials believed they had a prize on their hands
-- someone who was perhaps intended to have been a hijacker in the Sept. 11
plot.

But his interrogation was not yielding much, so they decided in the middle of
2003 to try a new tactic. Mr. Kahtani, a Saudi, was given a tranquilizer, put in
sensory deprivation garb with blackened goggles, and hustled aboard a plane that
was supposedly taking him to the Middle East.

After hours in the air, the plane landed back at the United States naval base at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he was not returned to the regular prison compound
but put in an isolation cell in the base's brig. There, he was subjected to
harsh interrogation procedures that he was encouraged to believe were being
conducted by Egyptian national security operatives.

The account of Mr. Kahtani's treatment given to The New York Times recently by
military intelligence officials and interrogators is the latest of several
developments that have severely damaged the military's longstanding public
version of how the detention and interrogation center at Guantanamo operated.

Interviews with former intelligence officers and interrogators provided new
details and confirmed earlier accounts of inmates being shackled for hours and
left to soil themselves while exposed to blaring music or the insistent meowing
of a cat-food commercial. In addition, some may have been forcibly given enemas
as punishment.

While all the detainees were threatened with harsh tactics if they did not
cooperate, about one in six were eventually subjected to those procedures, one
former interrogator estimated. The interrogator said that when new interrogators
arrived they were told they had great flexibility in extracting information from
detainees because the Geneva Conventions did not apply at the base.

Military officials have gone to great lengths to portray Guantanamo as a largely
humane facility for several hundred prisoners, where the harshest sanctioned
punishments consisted of isolation or taking away items like blankets,
toothpaste, dessert or reading material. Maj. Gen. Geoffrey D. Miller, who was
the commander of the Guantanamo operation from November 2002 to March 2004,
regularly told visiting members of Congress and journalists that the approach
was designed to build trust between the detainee and his questioner.

''We are detaining these enemy combatants in a humane manner,'' General Miller
told reporters in March 2004. ''Should our men or women be held in similar
circumstances, I would hope they would be treated in this manner.''

His successor, Brig. Gen. Jay W. Hood, told reporters in November that he was
''satisfied that the detainees here have not been abused, they've not been
mistreated, they've not been tortured in any way.''

Journalists who were permitted to view an interview session from behind a glass
wall during General Hood's tenure were shown an interrogator and detainee
sharing a milkshake and fries from the base's McDonald's and appearing to chat
amiably. It became apparent to reporters comparing notes in August, however,
that the tableau of the interrogator and prisoner sharing a McDonald's meal was
presented to at least three sets of journalists.

In addition to the account of Mr. Kahtani's treatment, the new interviews
provide details and confirm some of the accounts in other recent disclosures
about procedures at Guantanamo: the November report in which the International
Committee of the Red Cross complained privately last summer to the United States
government that the procedures at Guantanamo were ''tantamount to torture'';
memorandums from F.B.I. officials, most of which were released in December as
part of a lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union; and another set
of interviews with The Times in October in which other former Guantanamo
officials described coercive and abusive techniques regularly employed there.

The information from the various sources frequently matched, providing
corroboration of the use of specific procedures, which included prolonged sleep
deprivation and shackling prisoners in uncomfortable positions for many hours.
One F.B.I. agent wrote his superiors that he saw such restraining techniques
several times. In the most gruesome of the bureau memorandums, he recounted
observing a detainee who had been shackled overnight in a hot cell, soiled
himself and pulled out tufts of hair in misery.

Military officials who participated in the practices said in October that
prisoners had been tormented by being chained to a low chair for hours with
bright flashing lights in their eyes and audio tapes played loudly next to their
ears, including songs by Lil' Kim and Rage Against the Machine and rap
performances by Eminem.

In a recent interview, another former official added new details, saying that
many interrogators used a different audio tape on prisoners, a mix of babies
crying and the television commercial for Meow Mix in which the jingle consists
of repetition of the word ''meow.''

The people who spoke about what they saw or whose duties made them aware of what
was occurring said they had different reasons for granting interviews. Some said
they objected to the methods, others said they objected to what they regarded as
a chaotic and badly run system, while others offered no reason. They all
declined to be identified by name, some saying they feared retaliation.

Lt. Col. Leon H. Sumpter, the spokesman for the military command at Guantanamo,
said in a statement that officials would not comment on accusations about the
treatment of any individual detainee including Mr. Kahtani, who was captured in
Afghanistan.

''We do not discuss specific interrogation techniques nor do we identify any
specific detainee,'' Colonel Sumpter said in a statement. ''All detainees are
safeguarded and are assured food, drink, clothing, shelter, health care and
basic rights, all in accordance with the Geneva Convention. The U.S. does not
permit, tolerate or condone torture by any of its personnel or employees.''

Colonel Sumpter said that the interrogation regimen at Guantanamo had produced
useful intelligence ''based on trust and not out of fear or duress.''

The intelligence officials who spoke with The Times said that the interrogation
personnel and their assigned prisoners were divided into five groups. Four were
geographically based -- one for Saudi Arabia, one for the Gulf States, another
for Pakistan and Afghanistan and the last for Asia, Europe and the Americas. The
fifth, termed ''special projects,'' included Mr. Kahtani.

There was a high confidence among military intelligence officials that Mr.
Kahtani was a dangerous operative of Al Qaeda. The federal commission
investigating the Sept. 11 attacks concluded in its June report that he was
denied entry into the United States on Aug. 4, 2001, at the Orlando airport, the
same day that Mohamed Atta, the plot's ringleader, was there and most likely
intended to meet him.

The officials who spoke about the detainees' treatment said, however, that very
few of the other prisoners had much value. ''So much of the questioning was
about Afghanistan,'' one intelligence official said. ''Most of it was dated.
Information about facilitators and recruiters was useful only in style, not in
facts.''

The clearest indication that senior commanders at Guantanamo were aware of and
supported what was occurring may be in some F.B.I. memorandums. One, dated May
10, 2003, and written by an unidentified agent, describes a sharp exchange
between bureau officials and General Miller and Maj. Gen. Michael Dunlavey, who
was in charge of the intelligence operations at Guantanamo then.

''Both sides agreed that the bureau has its way of doing things and the D.O.D.
has their marching orders from SecDef,'' the memorandum said, using
abbreviations for the Department of Defense and the secretary of defense.
''Although the two techniques differed drastically, both generals believed they
had a job to do.''

The frustration caused by Mr. Kahtani's refusal to cooperate set off a
high-level review of allowable interrogation techniques, according to documents
released earlier by the Pentagon. After officials at Guantanamo asked for more
leeway in dealing with Mr. Kahtani, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld in
December 2002 approved a list of 16 techniques for use there in addition to the
17 methods in the Army Field Manual. He suspended those approvals the next month
after some Navy lawyers complained that they were excessive and possibly
illegal. But after a review, Mr. Rumsfeld issued a final policy in April 2003,
approving 24 techniques, some of which needed his permission to be used.

None of the approved techniques, however, covered some of what people have now
said occurred. Mr. Kahtani was, for example, forcibly given an enema, officials
said, which was used because it was uncomfortable and degrading.

Pentagon spokesmen said the procedure was medically necessary because Mr.
Kahtani was dehydrated after an especially difficult interrogation session.
Another official, told of the use of the enema, said, however, ''I bet they said
he was dehydrated,'' adding that that was the justification whenever an enema
was used as a coercive technique, as it had been on several detainees.

In order to carry on the charade that he was not at Guantanamo, the military
arranged it so Mr. Kahtani was not visited by the Red Cross on a few of its
regular visits, creating a window of several months, said a person who dealt
with him at Guantanamo. Officials at the Washington office of the Red Cross,
which makes periodic visits to each of the Guantanamo detainees, said they would
not discuss their meetings with any prisoners as part of their agreement with
the United States government.

Two interrogators confirmed several of the complaints in the Red Cross report,
including the notion that interrogators were able to obtain prisoners' medical
records easily, which human rights groups say could discourage inmates from
seeking medical care. The interrogators also discussed another factor in the Red
Cross report, the use of a Behavioral Science Consultation Team, known as
Biscuit, comprising a psychologist or psychiatrist and psychiatric workers. The
team was used to suggest ways to make prisoners more cooperative in
interrogations.

''They were supposed to help us break them down,'' one said.

The same former interrogator said the Red Cross report was correct in asserting
that some female interrogators used sexual taunts to harass the detainees.

It is unclear whether the Justice Department's new, broader definition of
torture, posted on the department's Web site late Thursday, would have affected
operations at Guantanamo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); HIJACKING (90%);
INTERVIEWS (87%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (79%); NAVIES (78%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); AL-QAEDA (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (70%); TORTURE (70%); AIRLINES (70%); WRITERS (65%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; World Trade Center
(NYC); Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; Terrorism; Pentagon Building

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) New York Times; Al Qaeda
(Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis; Mohamed Al- Kahtani

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Afghanistan; New York City; Washington
(DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             698 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 3, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales Is Likely to Face Hard Questions in Hearings

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS; David E. Sanger in Crawford, Tex., contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


When the Senate Judiciary Committee begins hearings on Thursday to consider
President Bush's nomination of Alberto R. Gonzales to be attorney general, two
starkly different portraits of Mr. Gonzales will be on display.

His supporters are expected to emphasize the one depicting the nominee as an
exquisitely American success story: one of eight children of Mexican immigrants
who spoke little English and raised their family in a home with no hot water or
telephone, Mr. Gonzales eventually graduated from Harvard Law School. He then
became a legal adviser to Mr. Bush when he was governor of Texas, a member of
that state's supreme court and now White House counsel.

His critics, both on the committee and among witnesses testifying after Mr.
Gonzales's own appearance on Thursday, will portray him as a lawyer who made
colossal misjudgments in supervising the administration's legal strategy for
dealing with Al Qaeda and other terrorist threats.

Mr. Gonzales will be the first of Mr. Bush's second-term cabinet nominees to
face a confirmation test.

Although few believe Mr. Gonzales is in danger of being denied confirmation, he
may nonetheless face the most vigorous interrogation because of his role in
overseeing internal legal memorandums that appeared to condone mistreatment,
perhaps even torture, of detainees.

The timing of the hearings has proven especially awkward for the administration.
They are coming just after a new round of disclosures about the treatment of
detainees held by the United States military in Iraq and at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and reports that the administration may hold detainees in Cuba
indefinitely.

Underlying the debate about Mr. Gonzales's role in the treatment of detainees is
a widely held belief that he might be nominated by Mr. Bush to the Supreme
Court, depending on the number of vacancies that occur in his second term.

Even some of Mr. Gonzales's detractors say they do not expect to prevent him
from becoming the nation's 80th attorney general, as well as the first Hispanic
holder of the office.

Instead, they say, they hope to lay down a record that will make it difficult
for him to be confirmed to the Supreme Court.

Rear Adm. John D. Hutson, who served as the Navy's judge advocate general from
1997 to 2000 before he retired, has said that while Mr. Gonzales may have an
inspiring personal story he was at the forefront of an effort to subject
detainees to coercive practices that was on the wrong side of history and
betrayed longstanding American principles.

Admiral Hutson is one of several military legal experts, all former generals or
admirals, who will release a letter on Monday asserting that Mr. Gonzales's
legal judgments might disqualify him for the post of attorney general.

The letter to the Judiciary Committee said Mr. Gonzales's actions ''fostered
greater animosity toward the United States, undermined our intelligence
gathering efforts, and added to the risks facing our troops serving around the
world.''

Senator Charles E. Schumer, a New York Democrat on the committee, said in an
interview that despite reservations about Mr. Gonzales, he is likely to be
confirmed and with broad Democratic support.

Mr. Schumer said the threshold for winning confirmation to a president's cabinet
was far lower than for lifetime nominations to the Supreme Court, which have
produced intense battles.

''Generally, for an executive branch position the president gets the benefit of
the doubt,'' he said. ''The general feeling on the committee is that he has
probably met that lowered threshold.''

But other Democrats on the committee are expected to bore in on Mr. Gonzales's
role in creating the administration's legal framework for detainees and their
treatment.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the committee's ranking Democrat, has
complained in letters to the White House that officials there have sought to
hide the full extent of Mr. Gonzales's participation in the set of legal
memorandums.

The questions about Mr. Gonzales's actions in this area include these points:

$(6$)His role in developing the administration's claim of authority to imprison
indefinitely ''unlawful enemy combatants,'' which could include United States
citizens and would not be reviewable by the courts.

$(6$)His role in supervising a legal task force that concluded that Mr. Bush was
not bound either by an international treaty prohibiting torture or by federal
law because he had the authority as commander in chief to approve any technique
needed to protect the nation.

$(6$)The Jan. 25, 2002, memorandum he wrote to the president saying the Geneva
Conventions did not apply to the conflict in Afghanistan. He described the
conventions as ''quaint'' because he said they required ''that captured enemy be
afforded such things as commissary privileges, scrip (i.e., advances of monthly
pay), athletic uniforms and scientific instruments.''

White House officials said that Mr. Gonzales expected to be questioned closely
about the memorandums on detainee treatment and that they did not believe his
nomination was in any jeopardy. One official said the word ''quaint'' referred
to the items the prisoners should receive but not to the protections themselves.

But the language in Mr. Gonzales's memorandum appears to misstate the nature of
the provision to make the conventions seem unduly soft. The conventions do not
require that prisoners of war be given items like athletic uniforms and
scientific instruments but that the authorities allow such items to be received
in the mail.

A commissary and scrip are not requirements, but if they exist they must conform
to regulations in the conventions.

Mr. Gonzales will also be questioned about his role in the tightly constructed
definition of torture in an August 2002 Justice Department memorandum.

On Thursday night, with no public announcement, the department renounced the
2002 memorandum that said, for example, to qualify as torture physical pain
''must be of an intensity akin to that which accompanies serious physical injury
such as death or organ failure.''

But the new definition did not provide clear alternative definitions and limits.

Leonard S. Rubenstein, the executive director of Physicians for Human Rights,
more than a hundred of whose members also signed a letter objecting to the
Gonzales candidacy, said the new memorandum still left the door open to improper
practices.

''The question he has to answer is whether he is going to finally take a
position that the responsibility of the attorney general is to say, 'This is
what you may not do.'''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto R. Gonzales, left, with Karen P. Hughes, President-elect
Bush and Condoleezza Rice, right, in 2000 as Mr. Bush named staff members.
(Photo by Tannen Maury/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CHILDREN (76%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (73%); NAVIES (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%)
Appointments and Executive Changes; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) Justice Department  ; Supreme Court (US); Al Qaeda
(Terrorist Group); Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (93%); GEORGE W BUSH (92%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (56%) Neil
A Lewis; Alberto Gonzalez; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             699 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 3, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In War-Torn Africa, Young Girls Are Very, Very Old

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial Observer; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 738 words


About three months ago, while visiting my birth country, Liberia, I walked into
a local restaurant for a prearranged meeting with the father of an old school
friend. His daughter and I had attended grammar school together as children, and
although I don't see her much these days, I still identify her with my
childhood: Girl Scout troop meetings; field trips up country to the zoo;
sixth-grade class dances. I was delivering to her father some shirts he had
requested from Ghana.

He was sitting at a table in the corner of the restaurant with a young girl. As
soon as I saw them, I felt the anger rising in my throat. She couldn't have been
any more than 16; he is pushing 70. ''This is my little friend,'' he introduced
her to me.

There was no shame or embarrassment in his tone; he was perfectly comfortable
with parading a teenage war orphan with no other means of support around town as
his new girlfriend.

Indeed, his behavior was not out of the ordinary. Just the night before, another
mature man of means, this one a former government minister, had bragged at a
wedding reception that his current ''girlfriend'' was getting too old for him.
''She just turned 17,'' he said, laughing. People around him shook their heads
in a ''boys will be boys'' way.

The news last month that the United Nations has uncovered 150 allegations of
sexual abuse committed by its peacekeepers stationed in Congo against an already
traumatized population of mostly teenage girls was a sad reminder of what young
women are up against in Africa.

The allegations leveled against United Nations personnel in Congo include sex
with under-age partners and rape. Investigators said they found evidence that
United Nations peacekeepers paid $1 to $3 for sex or bartered sexual relations
for food or promises of employment.

To be sure, sexual, psychological and physical abuse of teenage girls is not
limited to Africa. Indeed, the United Nations reports that the accused
peacekeepers came from Nepal, Pakistan, Morocco, Tunisia, South Africa and
Uruguay -- a veritable gallery of international perverts. But in Congo, as in
other places where endless war has broken down normal social constraints,
innocence is robbed with impunity, and unrelenting poverty and desperation make
old, bitter and used women out of the young girls.

African girls have long lived with the fear of being raped by power-drunk
soldiers representing various government or rebel groups. The life of a teenage
girl on the continent is almost never easy, and the threats she faces are
uncountable, from female genital mutilation to teenage prostitution. The raping
of women and young girls has become practically de rigueur in Africa's wars,
from Sierra Leone to the Ivory Coast, from Burundi to Rwanda to Sudan.

Beyond rape in war zones, there's a mentality that says that sex between a
desperate refugee and a wealthy old man is somehow consensual. In Monrovia,
which is a postwar mess with war orphans sleeping alongside open roads,
electricity a distant dream and food scarce, young girls living in the refugee
camps engage in a ritual as old as time.

In the evenings, as the sun is beginning to set, they leave the fetid,
trash-strewn camps and assemble along the main roads. Dressed in the best attire
they can muster -- tight jeans, strappy high-heeled sandals and halter tops --
they wait for the fancy S.U.V.'s that slow down, then stop to pick them up and
take them into the city for the night.

The United Nations says home countries are responsible for punishing any of
their military personnel who violate the U.N. code of conduct. That's a
prescription for inaction, because, regrettably, too many leaders, and not just
in Africa, see no problem with picking up young girls on the side of the road at
night.

Looking at the face of my friend's father that afternoon in the restaurant, I
could see my friend's features. His lunch companion was the same age my friend
and I had been when we cavorted around as teenagers. We watched ''Charlie's
Angels'' and experimented with makeup and went to the Saturday afternoon
matinees. Our biggest problems revolved around crushes on various boys and
hoping against hope that whoever we liked wouldn't find out we liked them.

I wondered if the old man ever thought about his own daughter when he looked at
his ''little friend.'' My guess is, probably not.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); RESTAURANTS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (88%); SEX OFFENSES (86%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (86%); CHILDREN (78%);
SCHOOL FIELD TRIPS (78%); ADOLESCENTS (78%); ORPHANS (78%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CIVIL WAR (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); WOMEN (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (67%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (67%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (66%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (64%);
GENOCIDE (64%); PROSTITUTION (60%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (51%) Sex Crimes; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Women; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) United Nations

PERSON: Helene Cooper

COUNTRY: AFRICA (96%); LIBERIA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%);
SUDAN (79%); RWANDA (79%); MOROCCO (79%); GHANA (79%); BURUNDI (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%)

REGION: Africa; Africa

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             701 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 5, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abbas Denounces Israel After Tank Fire Kills 7 Youths

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE; Taghreed el-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Jan. 4


Just days before the Palestinian presidential election, Israeli tank fire in the
northern Gaza Strip on Tuesday killed seven Palestinian youths harvesting
strawberries, witnesses said, prompting the leading candidate, Mahmoud Abbas, to
deliver an unusually caustic attack on Israel, which he called ''the Zionist
enemy.''

Israel quickly responded, with the vice prime minister, Ehud Olmert, saying Mr.
Abbas's statements were ''intolerable, unacceptable, and they cannot serve as
the basis for any cooperation in the future.''

The death of the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat on Nov. 11 ushered in a brief
period of reduced violence and less hostile oratory. But the deaths on Tuesday,
and the bitter recriminations that followed, felt more like the darker days of
the past four years and marked a breakdown of the relatively restrained public
exchanges between Mr. Abbas and Israeli leaders.

The troubles began when Palestinians fired four mortar rounds in the morning,
wounding an Israeli civilian in an industrial zone on the northern edge of the
Gaza Strip, the Israeli military said. One shell nearly hit a school bus
carrying children in northern Gaza, the military added.

Soon afterward, an Israeli tank fired on a group of Palestinians believed to
have been responsible for firing the mortars from farmland on the outskirts of
Beit Lahiya, the Israeli military said.

Seven Palestinian youths working in a strawberry field, ages 11 to 17, were
killed, according to relatives, witnesses and Palestinian officials at Kamal
Adwan Hospital, who said an additional 11 Palestinian civilians had been
wounded.

Dr. Mahmoud al-Asli, the hospital's director, said six members of the Ghaben
family, including three brothers, had been killed. The Ghaben family confirmed
the names and ages given by the hospital, The Associated Press reported.

Mr. Abbas, who was campaigning in southern Gaza at the time of the exchange,
said, ''We are praying for the souls of the martyrs who were killed today by the
shells of the Zionist enemy.''

Mr. Abbas, commonly known as Abu Mazen, has a reputation for temperate language
and has previously refrained from such references to Israel, which are routinely
employed by militant factions like Hamas.

An Israeli military official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said five of
the dead belonged to Hamas, but acknowledged that civilians might have been hit.
Hamas, which usually issues boastful statements when its members are killed,
said it had suffered no deaths in the incident.

Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades distributed video of the mortar attacks and said it had
carried them out with another faction, the Popular Resistance Committees.

Islam Aldaabalah, a 16-year-old farm worker who suffered multiple cuts to his
face, arms and legs, said that he had seen the militants fire mortars from the
fields and that an Israeli tank soon arrived and fired one shell but did not hit
anyone.

The militants hid behind a building, then re-emerged and cut loose with
additional mortar fire, he said. About 15 minutes later a tank fired a second
shell, but the militants had left the area, leaving only the farm workers, Mr.
Aldaabalah said.

''We were just standing there when the shell came toward us,'' he said from his
bed at the hospital. ''I was hurt, and my friends were killed.''

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights said it had investigated the shooting
and found that ''all victims of the attack were children working on their
agricultural land.''

Col. Avi Levy, a brigade commander in northern Gaza, told Israel radio that ''we
understand that the fire actually hit that cell.''

But he acknowledged the possibility of civilian casualties. ''In the event that
our fire hit civilians, then this is the place to protest against terrorists who
fire mortars from the midst of civilians,'' he added.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has said he would be willing to meet with Mr. Abbas,
and Israel has been quietly supportive of him while seeking to avoid direct
involvement in the Palestinian election, scheduled to take place on Sunday.
Israeli officials have generally withheld comment on Mr. Abbas's campaign
speeches, but they responded on Tuesday.

''Israel is very concerned by the recent statements by Abu Mazen, which are very
militant statements,'' said Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom.

After making his initial comments in the southern Gaza town of Khan Yunis, Mr.
Abbas went to Kamal Adwan Hospital. Just as his car was pulling up, the area was
rocked by two blasts, the sound of outgoing Palestinian rockets being fired at
Israel, according to witnesses. Hamas later claimed responsibility.

Instead of getting out, Mr. Abbas was quickly driven from the area. He left Gaza
and appeared later in the day at a campaign rally in the West Bank city of
Ramallah.

Until Mr. Arafat's death, Mr. Abbas, 69, was known as a quiet behind-the-scenes
negotiator who had little, if any, popular support on the Palestinian street.
During the campaign he has sought to walk a tightrope.

He has appeared at rallies with gun-toting militants and appealed to them,
saying he would try to protect them from Israeli military raids. Such statements
have drawn cheers, and Mr. Abbas appears to be making a connection to at least
some of the younger Palestinians.

But he has also said that the solution to the Middle East conflict is
negotiations, and that Palestinian attacks against Israel are counterproductive
to the Palestinian goal of achieving statehood. He has consistently criticized
Palestinian rocket attacks, and did so again on Tuesday.

''This is wrong,'' Mr. Abbas said. ''I'm still condemning the rockets, and I
won't apologize. In most of the rocket firings, we pay the price.''

A Hamas spokesman, Mushir al-Masri, said Mr. Abbas was mistaken for calling for
an end to the rocket attacks.

''The Palestinian leadership must support the choice of the people and defend
them instead of promoting itself to the enemy,'' Mr. Masri said. He accused the
Palestinian leadership of ''giving compromises, free compromises.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mahmoud Abbas, top, followed by a bodyguard, campaigning in
Ramallah. Muhammad Kaseeh, above, carried the body of his brother Jaber, killed
when an Israeli tank responded to a mortar attack. (Photo by Ruth Fremson/The
New York Times)
 (Photo by Mohammed Salem/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); FRUITS & VEGETABLES
(90%); STRAWBERRY FARMING (90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); TESTIMONY (89%); HAMAS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); FARM LABOR (73%); CHILDREN (72%);
FACIAL INJURIES (68%); RELIGION (50%) Palestinians

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%) Hamas (Palestinian Group)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (93%); EHUD OLMERT (58%) Mahmoud Abbas; Greg Myre

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             702 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 5, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush's Counsel Sought Ruling About Torture

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1370 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, intervened directly with Justice
Department lawyers in 2002 to obtain a legal ruling on the extent of the
president's authority to permit extreme interrogation practices in the name of
national security, current and former administration officials said Tuesday.

Mr. Gonzales's role in seeking a legal opinion on the definition of torture and
the legal limits on the force that could be used on terrorist suspects in
captivity is expected to be a central issue in the Senate Judiciary Committee
confirmation hearings scheduled to begin on Thursday on Mr. Gonzales's
nomination to be attorney general.

The request by Mr. Gonzales produced the much-debated Justice Department
memorandum of Aug. 1, 2002, which defined torture narrowly and said that Mr.
Bush could circumvent domestic and international prohibitions against torture in
the name of national security.

Until now, administration officials have been unwilling to provide details about
the role Mr. Gonzales had in the production of the memorandum by the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Counsel. Mr. Gonzales has spoken of the memorandum
as a response to questions, without saying that most of the questions were his.

Current and former officials who talked about the memorandum have been provided
with firsthand accounts about how it was prepared. Some discussed it in an
effort to clear up what they viewed as a murky record in advance of Mr.
Gonzales's confirmation hearings. Others spoke of the matter apparently
believing that the Justice Department had unfairly taken the blame for the
memorandum.

A White House spokeswoman, Erin Healy, said Tuesday that while Mr. Gonzales
personally requested the August opinion, he was only seeking ''objective legal
advice and did not ask the Office of Legal Counsel to reach any specific
conclusion.''

As the White House's chief lawyer, Mr. Gonzales supervised the production of a
number of legal memorandums that shaped the administration's legal framework for
conducting its battle against Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups. Of the
documents that have been made public, only one was written by Mr. Gonzales. In
that memorandum, dated January 2002, he advised Mr. Bush that the Geneva
Conventions did not apply to fighters captured in Afghanistan. The next month
the White House decided that the Geneva Conventions would be applied to Taliban
captives but not to detainees linked to Al Qaeda.

As a result, a major area of questioning at his confirmation hearing is expected
to be the role he played in the production of the other documents, like the
August 2002 memorandum. That memorandum concluded that interrogators had great
leeway to question detainees using coercive techniques that they could assert
were not torture.

The Justice Department formally rescinded the August memorandum last week and in
its place issued a legal opinion saying that torture should be more broadly
defined and that there was no need to say that Mr. Bush had the authority to
sanction torture because he has said unequivocally that it is not permitted.

The revision stated that ''torture is abhorrent both to American law and values
and international norms.'' It rejected the language in the earlier memorandum,
which said that only physical pain ''of an intensity akin to that which
accompanies serious physical injury such as death or organ failure'' constituted
torture punishable by law.

Administration officials said over the last few days that Mr. Gonzales had
played a role in the decision to issue the new legal opinion as well, but they
did not offer specifics.

Mr. Gonzales's request resulting in the original August 2002 memorandum was
somewhat unusual, the officials said, because he went directly to lawyers at the
Office of Legal Counsel, bypassing the office of the deputy attorney general,
which is often notified of politically delicate requests for legal opinions made
by executive-branch agencies, including the White House.

The memorandum has become one of the most hotly debated legal documents in the
so-called war on terror. Democrats and human rights groups have complained that
it created a permissive atmosphere that led to serious abuses of detainees in
Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The memorandum was addressed to Mr.
Gonzales and was signed by Jay S. Bybee, then the head of the Office of Legal
Counsel at the Justice Department.

Officials dispute how much senior Justice Department officials knew of the
memorandum as it was being prepared. A former official and a current one said
that neither Attorney General John Ashcroft nor his deputy, Larry D. Thompson,
were aware of the memorandum until it was about to be submitted to the White
House.

Another former official said, however, that they were given progress reports as
the memorandum took shape.

John Yoo, a senior Justice Department lawyer who wrote much of the memorandum,
exchanged draft language with lawyers at the White House, the officials said.
Mr. Yoo, now a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley, said
in an article published Sunday in The San Jose Mercury News that Mr. Gonzales
did not apply any pressure on him to tailor the memorandum to accommodate the
White House.

Instead, Mr. Yoo said that Mr. Gonzales was merely seeking to ''understand all
available options'' in a perilous time, when the United States faced
unprecedented threats.

But a senior administration official disagreed, saying that the memorandum's
conclusions appeared to closely align with the prevailing White House view of
interrogation practices. The official said the memorandum raised questions about
whether the Office of Legal Counsel had maintained its longstanding tradition of
dispensing objective legal advice to its clients in executive-branch agencies.

While the nature of Mr. Gonzales's specific discussions with the Justice
Department remains unclear, administration officials said that Mr. Gonzales's
customary way of dealing with Justice Department lawyers was to pose questions
about issues rather than offer his own conclusions, although one said his
preferences could sometimes be inferred easily from his questions.

Justice Department officials said that the timing of the revised memorandum,
which was posted on the Justice Department's Internet site without announcement
late on Dec. 30, was a result of instructions from James B. Comey, the deputy
attorney general.

Mr. Comey, the officials said, told lawyers to complete the revised opinion
before the end of the year. At the same time, officials said they were mindful
that issuance of the new opinion might help neutralize the issue for Mr.
Gonzales even as it served as a sharp critique of the earlier opinion.

Mr. Gonzales talked about the August 2002 memorandum in a meeting with reporters
last June, when the White House sought to defend its actions at the height of
the uproar over abuses of prisoners in Iraq.

Without discussing his own role in soliciting the document, Mr. Gonzales said
that the memorandum was not a policy directive to officials in the field but a
response to questions about the scope of the federal law prohibiting torture and
the international convention on torture.

''The president has given no order or directive that would immunize from
prosecution anyone engaged in conduct that constitutes torture,'' Mr. Gonzales
said. ''All interrogation techniques actually authorized have been carefully
vetted, are lawful, and do not constitute torture.''

Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary
Committee, who has signaled an intent to question Mr. Gonzales vigorously about
his role in the memorandums, said Tuesday that he has been continually
frustrated by the White House in trying to obtain answers and documents.

In a letter to Mr. Gonzales on Tuesday, Mr. Leahy wrote, ''I am disappointed
that, contrary to your promises to me to engage in an open exchange and answer
my questions in connection with your confirmation process, you have not answered
my letters'' requesting documents.

But Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania and the new chairman of
the committee, said that Mr. Leahy's complaints appeared unjustified.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto R. Gonzales, left, the White House counsel, with Andrew
H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff, in October 2003. (Photo by Doug
Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A21)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); AL-QAEDA
(76%); TALIBAN (76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism;
Attorneys General; Appointments and Executive Changes; Torture

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice
Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (94%) George W (Pres) Bush; Alberto R Gonzales; Patrick
J (Sen) Leahy; Jay Bybee; John (Prof) Yoo; John (Atty Gen) Ashcroft; David
Johnston; Neil A Lewis

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             704 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Nominee Plans to Stand Firm on War-Captive Memo

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1285 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Alberto R. Gonzales, who goes before the Senate on Thursday as President Bush's
pick for attorney general, plans to offer an unapologetic defense of a draft
memorandum he wrote in 2002 describing parts of the Geneva Conventions as
''quaint'' and ''obsolete,'' administration officials said on Wednesday.

Critics of the Bush administration, who stepped up their attacks on Mr.
Gonzales, the White House counsel, on Wednesday, have called on him to repudiate
the memorandum, which held that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to
prisoners taken in the war in Afghanistan.

But a senior administration official who is involved in preparing Mr. Gonzales
for what could prove a contentious hearing said that he would not back down from
the legal rationale he had laid out in the memorandum.

''He'll explain what he meant -- that he stands by the decision not to grant
full protection to Al Qaeda and the Taliban under the Geneva Conventions and
that that position was correct legally and for important public policy
reasons,'' the administration official said.

On Wednesday night, The Associated Press released the text of what it said was
the opening statement that Mr. Gonzales planned to deliver on Thursday, in which
he said he would abide by treaties prohibiting the torture of prisoners.

''After the attacks of 9/11, our government had fundamental decisions to make
concerning how to apply treaties and U.S. law to an enemy that does not wear a
uniform, owes no allegiance to any country, is not a party to any treaties and
-- most importantly -- does not fight according to the laws of war,'' the
statement said.

Asserting that the president was committed to defending the country ''always in
a manner consistent with our nation's values and applicable law, including our
treaty obligations,'' the statement continued, ''I pledge that if I am confirmed
as attorney general, I will abide by those commitments.''

Over the last several weeks, Mr. Gonzales has been meeting with aides at the
White House in mock court sessions -- or ''murder boards,'' as aides call them
-- to prepare for Thursday's hearing, officials said. Aides play the part of
senators, questioning him about his positions on issues including guns,
affirmative action and federal cutbacks in financing for local police programs.

Unlike his predecessor, Attorney General John Ashcroft, whose views on most
major issues were well known from his days in the Senate, Mr. Gonzales comes
into his confirmation hearing as an enigma on many policy questions.

In the sessions, officials have spent the bulk of their time questioning Mr.
Gonzales about his positions on the treatment of prisoners in the global
campaign against terrorism. The sessions have focused on two documents that have
opened Mr. Gonzales to criticism: the 2002 memorandum he wrote on the Geneva
Conventions, and a Justice Department opinion that he solicited that year that
gave a narrow definition of torture, saying it ''must inflict pain that is
difficult to endure.'' The administration has since repudiated that
much-criticized definition.

''We know that those two documents are where the Democrats are going to try to
beat him up the most,'' the administration official said.

In the memorandum on the Geneva Conventions, Mr. Gonzales suggested that the new
war on terrorism had changed the ground rules for the treatment of enemy
prisoners.

''In my judgment, this new paradigm renders obsolete Geneva's strict limitations
on questioning of enemy prisoners and renders quaint some of its provisions
requiring that captured enemy be afforded such things as commissary privileges,
scrip (i.e., advances of monthly pay), athletic uniforms and scientific
instruments,'' he said.

In fact, the conventions do not require that prisoners of war be given things
like athletic uniforms and scientific instruments, but rather that the
authorities allow such items to be received by mail.

Officials said that while Mr. Gonzales might distance himself a bit from the use
of words like ''quaint'' and ''obsolete'' to describe provisions in the Geneva
Conventions, he planned to stand strongly behind the general thrust of the
memorandum.

But in the case of the Justice Department's memorandum on torture, he is
expected to offer a more nuanced explanation, officials said.

He is likely to explain that he sought out the opinion from the department's
Office of Legal Counsel because he wanted to explore all the legal options
available to the administration in interrogating Al Qaeda suspects and to get
the best possible legal advice, officials said. But as he has done in the past,
Mr. Gonzales will be careful to distance himself from the opinion's severe
conclusions and offer strong opposition to the use of torture against prisoners,
the officials said.

Last June, in defending the administration against accusations that its polices
had fostered torture, Mr. Gonzales said that ''all interrogation techniques
actually authorized have been carefully vetted, are lawful and do not constitute
torture.''

The White House reiterated that position on Wednesday, with Scott McClellan, the
White House spokesman, telling reporters that ''the policy of the administration
has been very clear from the beginning that we adhere to our laws and our treaty
obligations.'' He added that President Bush had made it clear ''that we do not
condone torture and he would never authorize the use of torture.''

Human rights groups, however, said Mr. Gonzales should be held accountable for
legal policies that they say opened the way for the physical abuse of prisoners
at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and others in American custody. Some former
military officials have also challenged Mr. Gonzales, saying that his positions
on the Geneva Conventions and torture had endangered American troops who might
themselves be taken into custody.

A coalition of groups critical of American policy in Iraq, including MoveOn.org
and Amnesty International, intensified attacks on Mr. Gonzales on Wednesday by
announcing the start of a ''campaign to stop torture.'' The campaign will
include advertisements and lobbying of senators in opposition to Mr. Gonzales's
nomination, coalition leaders said.

Wes Boyd, who helped create MoveOn.org, a liberal group that opposed President
Bush in the recent election, asked: ''What does it say to the rest of the world
-- let alone our own citizens -- when we nominate as the highest law enforcement
officer in the United States the man who developed the rationale for
circumventing the Geneva Conventions to permit the use of torture by American
forces?''

White House officials said they were unconcerned by the surge of attacks this
week against Mr. Gonzales.

''Keep in mind that a number of the groups and individuals raising these issues
were supporters of the president's opponent in the last election,'' said Erin
Healy, a White House spokeswoman.

''Obviously, Judge Gonzales looks forward to going before the Senate Judiciary
Committee to address these issues,'' she added. ''Judge Gonzales has done an
outstanding job in his current position as White House counsel, and we have
every faith and confidence that he will make a great attorney general.''

Members of both parties in the Senate say they expect Mr. Gonzales to win
confirmation. But in a sign that the White House is seeking to solidify its
support in the face of the new attacks, Mr. Gonzales has asked a Democrat -- Ken
Salazar, a newly elected senator from Colorado -- to help introduce him at his
hearing on Thursday.

''It will certainly help Gonzales to have one of the Democrats' rising stars
sitting next to him,'' said a Congressional official who spoke on the condition
of anonymity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(89%); TORTURE (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); TALIBAN (76%); NAVIES (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); POLICE FORCES (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); AL-QAEDA
(67%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (50%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Torture; Geneva
Conventions

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department  ;
Justice Department

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); ALBERTO GONZALES (92%) Eric Lichtblau; George W
(Pres) Bush; Alberto R Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Torture Yourself (That's His Job)

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD.

E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: Washington


The Associated Press headline that came over the wire yesterday said it all:
''Gonzales Will Follow Non-Torture Policies.''

You know how bad the situation is when the president's choice for attorney
general has to formally pledge not to support torture anymore.

Alberto Gonzales may have been willing to legally justify something that was
abhorrent to everything America stands for, but it's all relative. Given that
Mr. Gonzales is replacing the odious John Ashcroft, Democrats didn't seem
inclined to try to derail the Hispanic nominee, even though his memo fostered
the atmosphere that led to disgusting scandals in Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo.

Just to get things started on the right foot, though, Mr. Gonzales planned to go
the extra mile and offer the quaint, obsolete Senate Democrats a more nuanced
explanation of why he called the Geneva Conventions ''quaint'' and ''obsolete.''

Before he helped President Bush circumvent the accords and reserve the right to
do so ''in this or future conflicts,'' you had to tune in to an old movie with
Nazi generals or Vietcong guards if you wanted to see someone sneeringly shrug
off the international treaty protecting prisoners from abuse. (''You worthless
running dog Chuck Norris! What do we care about your silly Geneva
Conventions?'')

How are you to believe Mr. Gonzales when he says he's through with torture? His
mission is clearly to do whatever he thinks Mr. Bush wants.

All gall is divided into parts, so what's next?

The Commerce Department nominee promising that giveaways to big business will be
done with subtlety?

The Environmental Protection Agency nominee promising that the toxin content in
water will never rise to Yushchenko level?

It's comforting to start the new year in the hands of a party that cares so much
about morals and values.

Tom DeLay and oily House Republicans inaugurated their new term by gutting
ethics rules just in case any of them get caught in whatever misconduct they are
plotting.

Rummy continued on his oblivious, dissembling path, refusing to admit that he's
tapped out the Army and broken the Army Reserve with what Lt. Gen. James Helmly,
the frustrated chief of the Army Reserve, calls ''dysfunctional'' policies.
We've gotten so numb on Iraq that when eight American soldiers and over 80 Iraqi
police officers get killed, when the governor of Baghdad gets assassinated, and
when our puppets plead with Mr. Bush to delay the elections, it all seems like
just another week of pre-election maneuvering.

In The Los Angeles Times, we learn that Bush fave Supreme Court Justice Clarence
Thomas ''has accepted tens of thousands of dollars worth of gifts since joining
the high court, including $1,200 worth of tires, valuable historical items and a
$5,000 personal check to help pay a relative's education expenses.''

A guy we pay nearly $200,000 a year can't pop for his own tires? Whatever
happened to the dignity of the robe? At least we know where our possible future
chief justice stands: on the side of personal corruption.

''He also took a free trip aboard a private jet to the exclusive Bohemian Grove
club in Northern California -- arranged by a wealthy Texas real estate investor
who helped run an advocacy group that filed briefs with the Supreme Court,'' the
paper said.

The L.A. Times reviewed the disclosures of all nine justices for the years 1998
through 2003 and found that ''Thomas accepted $42,200 in gifts, making him the
top recipient. Next in that period was Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who accepted
$5,825 in gifts, mostly small crystal figurines and other items.''

Clarence Thomas follows Antonin Scalia's lead on the law. Why not also on
ethics? Justice Scalia defended taking his relatives on a ride on Air Force Two
to Louisiana with Dick Cheney to go duck hunting, even though the v.p. had an
important case before the court, by saying that it would have been a
''considerable inconvenience'' to fly commercial.

Going through a blistering confirmation hearing where his inappropriate behavior
was questioned didn't teach Clarence Thomas much. Can we hope for anything
better from Mr. Gonzales after he's waved through to be the man in charge of
enforcing our laws?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (90%); ARMIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (85%); ETHICS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(75%); LAWYERS (74%); SCANDALS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (72%); CORRECTIONS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); GENOCIDE (68%); WAR &
CONFLICT (67%); MILITARY WEAPONS (65%); MISCONDUCT (64%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS
(64%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (63%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (61%); TERRORISM
(60%); POLICE FORCES (60%); NAVIES (60%) Torture; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners
of War; Geneva Conventions; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (60%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (60%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); CLARENCE THOMAS (51%)
Maureen Dowd; Alberto Gonzales; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (71%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Tribunals

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 191 words



To the Editor:

Eric A. Posner's denunciation of both the International Court of Justice and the
recently established International Criminal Court in The Hague (''All Justice,
Too, Is Local,'' Op-Ed, Dec. 30) repudiates the highest ideals espoused by the
United States during the Nuremberg war crimes trials. I take issue with his
depiction of the records, purposes and powers of these tribunals. He does not
note that every nation has the right to try its own citizens.

The prosecutor is subject to strict controls, including close supervision by
Britain, Canada and a host of other nations that are being alienated by
bellicose intimidation and demands for immunity for all Americans. Mr. Posner
expresses fear of politicization, yet favors Security Council control of the
court.

Only lawbreakers need fear the rule of law. Mr. Posner warns international
organizations to ''adapt to great power politics'' or ''wither on the vine.'' We
may all ''wither'' if we continue the power politics that inevitably leads to
war rather than law.

Benjamin B. Ferencz
Delray Beach, Fla., Dec. 30, 2004

The writer was a prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crimes trials.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (94%); WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); RULE OF
LAW (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (92%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%) International
Criminal Court; International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Eric (Prof) Posner; Benjamin B Ferencz

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: Nuremberg (Germany)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             709 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Eases Stand on Doctor Who Criticized Peacekeeping Role

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 532 words


The United Nations has given a two-month reprieve to a doctor it had effectively
dismissed after he helped write a book that said the United Nations had failed
to prevent massacres in the Balkans, Somalia and Rwanda during the 1990's,
according to the doctor's lawyers and a United Nations spokesman.

Lawyers for the doctor, Andrew Thomson, 41, who was with the United Nations
medical services division for nearly 11 years, said yesterday that Secretary
General Kofi Annan had accepted an internal panel's recommendation that the
expiration of his annual contract on Dec. 31 be frozen for two months while the
case is reviewed. The three-member panel voted 2 to 1 for the freeze.

Farhan Haq, the spokesman, confirmed the action, calling Dr. Thomson ''a
qualified doctor with valuable experience in the field.''

Andre Sirois, a New York-based lawyer representing Dr. Thomson, called the
reprieve exceptional. ''United Nations employees almost never win such
appeals,'' he said.

Tom Devine, co-counsel for Dr. Thomson and the legal director of the Government
Accountability Project, a Washington-based group that supports such internal
critics, welcomed the panel's recommendation as a ''breakthrough for freedom of
expression within the United Nations.''

He also praised Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican who is the chairman of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, whose staff members met with Mr. Devine
and others to discuss claims that the United Nations was trying to punish Dr.
Thomson for his book by not renewing his contract and by canceling competition
for a more senior post for which he had applied.

The book, ''Emergency Sex and Other Desperate Measures: A True Story From Hell
on Earth'' (Miramax, 2004), which he wrote with two other United Nations
employees, Kenneth Cain and Heidi Postlewait, discussed abuses of power,
kickbacks, mismanagement and threats to public health and safety that, the
authors assert, United Nations officials ignored during peacekeeping missions.

United Nations spokesmen have denied that the decision not to renew Dr.
Thomson's contract was influenced by the publication of the book. They said that
his contract had simply expired, and that the competition for the more senior
post he was seeking was canceled because too few people had applied. They also
noted that the United Nations had extended the contract of Ms. Postlewait, who
works in the department of peacekeeping. Mr. Cain has left the United Nations.

They said Dr. Thomson had been reprimanded in June not for his views, but for
having published the book without securing permission in advance.

But, faced with growing congressional and public concern about United Nations
employment practices and allegations of corruption surrounding the oil-for-food
program in Iraq, senior United Nations representatives indicated they were eager
to find an amicable settlement to the dispute that would not encourage other
United Nations employees to disregard rules and procedures.

''Even if the post for which he applied is no longer available, there is always
room in the U.N. system for a qualified doctor with experience in the field,''
one diplomat said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); WRITERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); BRIBERY (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%);
ETHICS (71%); EMPLOYMENT (67%); CORRUPTION (62%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (51%)
Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; Ethics; Bribery; Medicine and Health;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY PROJECT (55%)
United Nations; United Nations

PERSON: DICK LUGAR (57%) Judith Miller; Andrew (Dr) Thomson

STATE: INDIANA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); UNITED STATES (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); IRAQ
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); SERBIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (75%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Somalia; Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             710 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Man With Gavel Finds Relish In the Role

BYLINE: By CARL HULSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; THE CABINET NOMINEES: THE CHAIRMAN;
Pg. 18

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


It took Arlen Specter almost a quarter-century to get the job but only a few
moments Thursday to cut to the chase.

Presiding over a confirmation hearing for the first time as chairman of the
Senate Judiciary Committee, Mr. Specter, in the committee's first question to
Alberto R. Gonzales, pointedly asked, ''Do you approve of torture?''

Mr. Gonzales, whose nomination to be attorney general has been dogged by his
involvement in administration policy on the treatment of terror detainees, and
who replied that he ''absolutely'' did not endorse torture, was of course the
star witness at the session.

Yet almost as much attention was being paid to Mr. Specter, a Pennsylvania
Republican elected to the Senate in 1980, who long coveted the chairmanship but
who ascended to it only after weathering a challenge from conservative groups
suspicious of his views on abortion and whether his support for President Bush's
judicial nominees would be sufficiently strong.

Mr. Specter clearly relished his new role Thursday as the man in charge. He
opened the session right on the dot of 9:30 a.m., and held questioners to their
allotted 10 minutes.

While scrupulously monitoring the clock, though, he allowed multiple rounds of
questioning. As Mr. Gonzales testified into the evening, Democrats were given
ample room for tough questions, and the chairman himself pressed the nominee on
issues like torture and his interpretation of the USA Patriot Act.

''I think it is very important that confirmation be rigorous,'' Mr. Specter
said, ''and with the president's party as much concerned about establishing
qualifications as the loyal opposition.''

In an interview during a break in the proceeding, the senator, a onetime
practicing lawyer who for eight years was the district attorney in Philadelphia,
said of the chairmanship, ''I have been in training for it my whole professional
career.''

It is training he will need as he tries to bridge a deep divide between
Republican and Democratic members of the committee. Thursday's close questioning
of Mr. Gonzales amounted to a warm-up for major fights over looming Supreme
Court vacancies. Foreshadowing those battles, senators sparred over whether
Democrats had a right to filibuster judicial nominations, as they did in
President Bush's first term.

Democrats used the filibuster last session to block confirmation of 10 appeals
court nominees they considered too conservative, drawing the ire of Republicans,
who say the minority is exceeding its constitutional role in refusing to allow a
vote on the nominations.

''The judicial gridlock is especially problematic,'' acknowledged Mr. Specter,
who said he had been meeting with committee members to find a way to avoid a
procedural showdown that could tear the Senate apart.

But Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, warned at the hearing that
even a strong vote in favor of Mr. Gonzales's taking the Justice Department post
should not be interpreted as a sign that Democrats would easily accept the
president's selections for the Supreme Court, even if Mr. Gonzales turned out to
be one of them.

''The standard that I am going to use -- and I think most of us are going to use
-- to judge you as attorney general will be different than we would use for
Supreme Court justices, should you or anybody else be the nominee,'' Mr. Schumer
said. ''No one should mistake the votes here as a ratification, because it's a
different job, it's a lower standard.''

Those battles are down the road, though, and while Thursday may have been a
trial for Mr. Gonzales, it was a pleasure for Mr. Specter, who dismissed the
nominee at the end of the session with a remark that reached back to the
senator's days in the courtroom.

''As the expression goes,'' he said, ''you are excused.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Arlen Specter, right, and his predecessor as Judiciary
Committee chairman, Orrin G. Hatch. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); POLITICS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); FILIBUSTER (89%);
CONSERVATISM (88%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); WITNESSES
(77%); TESTIMONY (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); TERRORISM (75%); US PATRIOT ACT (75%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); ABORTION (68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(60%); APPEALS COURTS (60%); GENOCIDE (53%) Terrorism; Torture; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism;
Appointments and Executive Changes

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ARLEN SPECTER (93%); ALBERTO GONZALES (89%); CHARLES SCHUMER (57%);
ORRIN HATCH (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%) Carl Hulse; Arlen (Sen) Specter; Alberto
R Gonzales

CITY: PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (76%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             711 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Promoting Torture's Promoter

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 741 words


If the United States were to look into a mirror right now, it wouldn't recognize
itself.

The administration that thumbed its nose at the Geneva Conventions seems equally
dismissive of such grand American values as honor, justice, integrity, due
process and the truth. So there was Alberto Gonzales, counselor to the president
and enabler in chief of the pro-torture lobby, interviewing on Capitol Hill
yesterday for the post of attorney general, which just happens to be the highest
law enforcement office in the land.

Mr. Gonzales shouldn't be allowed anywhere near that office. His judgments
regarding the detention and treatment of prisoners rounded up in Iraq and the
so-called war on terror have been both unsound and shameful. Some of the
practices that evolved from his judgments were appalling, gruesome, medieval.

But this is the Bush administration, where incompetence and outright failure are
rewarded with the nation's highest honors. (Remember the Presidential Medal of
Freedom awarded last month to George Tenet et al.?) So not only is Mr.
Gonzales's name being stenciled onto the attorney general's door, but a plush
judicial seat is being readied for his anticipated elevation to the Supreme
Court.

It's a measure of the irrelevance of the Democratic Party that a man who played
such a significant role in the policies that led to the still-unfolding prisoner
abuse and torture scandals is expected to win easy Senate confirmation and
become attorney general. The Democrats have become the 98-pound weaklings of the
21st century.

The Bush administration and Mr. Gonzales are trying to sell the fiction that
they've seen the light. In answer to a setup question at his Judiciary Committee
hearing, Mr. Gonzales said he is against torture. And the Justice Department
issued a legal opinion last week that said ''torture is abhorrent both to
American law and values and international norms.''

What took so long? Why were we ever -- under any circumstances -- torturing,
maiming, sexually abusing and even killing prisoners? And where is the evidence
that we've stopped?

The Bush administration hasn't changed. This is an administration that believes
it can do and say whatever it wants, and that attitude is changing the very
nature of the United States. It is eroding the checks and balances so crucial to
American-style democracy. It led the U.S., against the advice of most of the
world, to launch the dreadful war in Iraq. It led Mr. Gonzales to ignore the
expressed concerns of the State Department and top military brass as he blithely
opened the gates for the prisoner abuse vehicles to roll through.

There are few things more dangerous than a mixture of power, arrogance and
incompetence. In the Bush administration, that mixture has been explosive.
Forget the meant-to-be-comforting rhetoric surrounding Mr. Gonzales's
confirmation hearings. Nothing's changed. As detailed in The Washington Post
earlier this month, the administration is making secret plans for the possible
lifetime detention of suspected terrorists who will never even be charged.

Due process? That's a laugh. Included among the detainees, the paper noted, are
hundreds of people in military or C.I.A. custody ''whom the government does not
have enough evidence to charge in courts.'' And there will be plenty more
detainees to come.

Who knows who these folks are or what they may be guilty of? We'll have to trust
in the likes of Alberto Gonzales or Donald Rumsfeld or President Bush's new
appointee to head the C.I.A., Porter Goss, to see that the right thing is done
in each and every case.

Americans have tended to view the U.S. as the guardian of the highest ideals of
justice and fairness. But that is a belief that's getting more and more
difficult to sustain. If the Justice Department can be the fiefdom of John
Ashcroft or Alberto Gonzales, those in search of the highest standards of
justice have no choice but to look elsewhere.

It's more fruitful now to look overseas. Last month Britain's highest court
ruled that the government could not continue to indefinitely detain foreigners
suspected of terrorism without charging or trying them. One of the justices
wrote that such detentions ''call into question the very existence of an ancient
liberty of which this country has until now been very proud: freedom from
arbitrary arrest and detention.''

That's a sentiment completely lost on an Alberto Gonzales or George W. Bush.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); LAW OF WAR
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORISM (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (83%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LOBBYING (78%); SCANDALS (77%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(76%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); IRAQ WAR (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(73%); GENOCIDE (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); NAVIES (69%) Terrorism;
Torture; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Appointments and Executive Changes

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%) Bob Herbert; Alberto Gonzales; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             712 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Judiciary Committee Hearing on Attorney General Nominee

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; THE CABINET NOMINEES; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1504 words


Following are excerpts from the statements of Alberto R. Gonzales before the
Senate Judiciary Committee about his nomination to be attorney general and from
the opening statements of Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, and
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, as recorded by Federal News
Service, a private transcription agency:

From Senator Specter

 The focus of media attention has been on the issue of Judge Gonzales's roles in
analysis and recommendations on the handling of detainees. Judge Gonzales had
issued an opinion to the president that the Geneva Convention did not apply with
respect to certain of the combatants. In his memorandum of Jan. 25, 2000, he
said, quote: ''My judgment, this new paradigm'' -- referring to the war on
terrorism -- ''renders obsolete Geneva's strict limitations on questioning of
enemy prisoners.''

The committee will seek further amplification on a number of substantive issues
from that memorandum, including Judge Gonzales's statement that in the treatment
of detainees, the United States ''will continue to be constrained by its
commitment to treat the detainees humanely, and to the extent appropriate and
consistent with military necessity, in a manner consistent with'' the principles
of the Geneva Convention. This statement raises the question of what is the
meaning of military necessity and to what extent, if at all, does military
necessity impact on the, quote, ''commitment'' to treat a detainee humanely?

From Senator Leahy

 We've seen what happens when the rule of law plays second fiddle to a
president's policy agenda. Attorney General Ashcroft, and with the White House
Counsel's Office, has impulsively facilitated rather than cautiously vetted
serious constitutional issues. The administration has taken one untenable legal
position after another regarding the rule of law as we fight terrorism.

From Mr. Gonzales

 With the consent of the Senate, I will no longer represent only the White
House, I will represent the United States of America and its people. I
understand the differences between the two roles. In the former, I have been
privileged to advise the president and his staff. In the latter, I would have a
far broader responsibility to pursue justice for all the people of our great
nation; to see that the laws are enforced in a fair and impartial manner for all
Americans.

Wherever we pursue justice -- from the war on terror to corrupt fraud to civil
rights -- we must always be faithful to the rule of law. And I want to make very
clear that I am deeply committed to the rule of law. I have a deep and abiding
commitment to the fundamental American principle that we are a nation of laws
and not of men. I would not have the audacity to appear before this committee
today if that commitment were not the core principle that has guided all of my
professional endeavors.

While I look forward to answering your specific questions concerning my actions
and my views, I think it is important to stress at the outset that I am and will
remain deeply committed to ensuring that the United States government complies
with all of its legal obligations as it fights the war on terror, whether those
obligations arise from domestic or international law.

These obligations include, of course, honoring Geneva Conventions whenever they
apply. Honoring our Geneva obligations provide critical protection for our
fighting men and women and advances norms for the community of nations to follow
in times of conflict.

Contrary to reports, I consider the Geneva Conventions neither obsolete nor
quaint. After the attacks of 9/11, our government had fundamental decisions to
make concerning how to apply treaties and U.S. law to an enemy that does not
wear a uniform, owes no allegiance to any country, is not a party to any
treaties, and most importantly, does not fight according to the laws of war. As
we have debated these questions, the president has made clear that he is
prepared to protect and defend the United States and its citizens and will do so
vigorously, but always in a manner consistent with our nation's values and
applicable law, including our treaty obligations.

Having said that, like all of you, I have been deeply troubled and offended by
reports of abuse. The photos from Abu Ghraib sickened and outraged me and left a
stain on our nation's reputation. And the president has made clear that he
condemns the conduct and that these activities are inconsistent with his
policies. He has also made clear that America stands against and will not
tolerate torture under any circumstances. I share his resolve that torture and
abuse will not be tolerated by this administration and commit to you today that,
if confirmed, I will ensure the Department of Justice aggressively pursues those
responsible for such abhorrent actions. ...

Let me -- let me emphasize for the record that the president was not involved
personally in deciding which kinds of methods could be used to question
terrorists who might have information that might save American lives.

The president was not involved personally in connection with that. What he
expected and what he deserved was -- and I think what he got -- was people
within the administration trying to understand what the law was and conforming
their conduct to legal requirements. ..

As a human being I am sickened and outraged by those photos, but as someone who
may be head of the department, I obviously don't want to provide any kind of
legal opinion as to whether or not that conduct might be criminal. ...

It is not the policy of the administration to tolerate torture or inhumane
conduct toward any person that the United States is detaining. ...

I think the decision not to apply Geneva in our conflict with Al Qaeda was
absolutely the right decision for a variety of reasons. First of all, it really
would be a dishonor to the Geneva Convention. It would honor and reward bad
conduct. It would actually make it more difficult, in my judgment, for our
troops to win in our conflict against Al Qaeda. It would limit our ability to
solicit information from detainees. It would require us to keep detainees housed
together where they could share information, they could coordinate their story,
they could plan attacks against guards. It would mean that they would enjoy
combat immunity from prosecutions for certain war crimes. And so for a variety
of reasons, it makes absolutely no sense.

In addition to that, Senator, it is contrary to decades of executive branch
positions. There was an attempt in 1977, Protocol 1, to provide prisoner of war
legal status to terrorists. Now that protocol included some wonderful
humanitarian provisions dealing with extraditions and hostages and things of
that nature. But the United States and many other countries never ratified that
protocol. And the reason is because the protocol arguably provided prisoner of
war legal status to terrorists, and so it has been a consistent executive branch
position since then, is that we're not going to do that because it hurts our
soldiers. It's contrary to the spirit of Geneva to do so.

And so I do believe the decision by the president was absolutely the right thing
to do. Now, that's not to say that we don't -- we are not -- we don't operate
without legal limitations and that we don't treat people consistent with our
values as Americans. The president was very clear in providing directives that
even though Geneva would not apply as a matter of law, that we would treat
detainees humanely and subject to military necessity and as appropriate
consistent with the principles of Geneva. In my judgment there's been a very
strong attempt to do so at Guantanamo.

Now let me emphasize -- and I want to -- I can't emphasize this strongly enough:
There are certain basic values that this country stands for and this president
strongly believes in, and those values are reflected in the directives that he
has issued regarding the treatment of Al Qaeda detainees, and those who do not
meet those standards are going to be held accountable. In addition, there are,
of course, other legal restrictions -- for example, the Convention Against
Torture -- that would be applicable, Army regulations that would be applicable.
All those exist to conscript the type of conduct that our military can engage in
with respect to detainees.

And so we want to, of course, meet basic standards of conduct with respect to
treatment of Al Qaeda, but information is very, very important. And if there are
ways we can get that information, especially, for example, through inducements,
it seems to me that there is a responsibility of this government to exercise
those means. ...

We in the executive branch, of course, understand that there are limits upon
presidential power; very, very mindful of Justice O'Connor's statement in the
Hamdi decision that ''a state of war is not a blank check for the president of
the United States'' with respect the rights of American citizens. I understand
that, and I agree with that.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto R. Gonzales (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW OF
WAR (89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); WAR ON TERROR (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); TORTURE (75%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (69%); NAVIES (69%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (64%)
Terrorism; Torture; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Terrorism; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Appointments and Executive Changes

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (92%); ARLEN SPECTER (90%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) Arlen
(Sen) Specter; Patrick J (Sen) Leahy; Alberto Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             713 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Gonzales Speaks

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 528 words


It was nice to hear Alberto Gonzales tell the Senate Judiciary Committee in his
opening statement yesterday that he doesn't approve of torture and that as
attorney general, he'll uphold the law. But things went rapidly downhill after
that. By the time the hearing ended, Mr. Gonzales, now the White House counsel,
had turned it into one of those depressing exercises in avoiding straight
answers and evading accountability. The spectacle brought to mind the hearings
last spring when Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his team dutifully
denounced the horrors of Abu Ghraib and then refused to accept any
responsibility.

Mr. Gonzales said the Abu Ghraib photos ''sickened and outraged'' him. But he
would not acknowledge that he or any other senior administration official was to
blame, even though he was a central figure in the policy decisions that laid the
groundwork for the abuse at Abu Ghraib and other American military prisons.

In broad terms, Mr. Gonzales offered the politically necessary repudiation of
the Justice Department memo that said Mr. Bush could authorize Americans to
torture prisoners with impunity and that redefined torture to exclude almost any
brutality.

But it took a half-dozen questions by almost as many senators to get Mr.
Gonzales to say declaratively that he now rejects that specific view, which the
administration allowed to stand for nearly two years, until it was disclosed by
news accounts. And then he equivocated astonishingly when asked whether American
soldiers or intelligence agents could ''legally engage in torture under any
circumstances.''

''I don't believe so, but I'd want to get back to you on that and make sure I
don't provide a misleading answer,'' said Mr. Gonzales, who went through many
hours of preparation for these very questions.

Blaming a faulty memory, Mr. Gonzales would not provide anything close to a
clear account of his role in the formulation of the policy on the treatment of
prisoners. At one point, he said the 2002 memo was just the opinion of the
Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel. Then he called it the ''binding
interpretation'' of anti-torture statutes and treaties. Later, Mr. Gonzales
called it ''an arguable interpretation of the law.''

Even his vows of allegiance to the rule of law were rather peculiar. He said
that as White House counsel, he had represented ''only the White House,'' while
as attorney general, he ''would have a far broader responsibility: to pursue
justice for all the people of our great nation, to see that the laws are
enforced in a fair and impartial manner for all Americans.'' We thought that was
also the obligation of the president and his staff.

Mr. Gonzales is said to face a sure confirmation. But thanks to the members of
the committee, including some Republicans, who met their duty to question Mr.
Gonzales aggressively, the hearing served to confirm that Mr. Bush had made the
wrong choice when he rewarded Mr. Gonzales for his loyalty. The nation deserves
an attorney general who is not the public face for inhumane, illegal and clearly
un-American policies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LAWYERS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); TERRORISM (74%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); PRISONS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%);
NAVIES (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (60%) Terrorism; Editorials; Torture; Geneva Conventions; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of
War; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice
Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (93%) Alberto Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             714 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Says HUD Erred on Public Housing

BYLINE: By GARY GATELY

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Jan. 6


Black public housing tenants have been systematically consigned to segregated,
poor neighborhoods of Baltimore City as a result of the policies of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, a federal judge concluded on
Thursday.

By not placing more public housing residents in suburban counties, HUD has
failed to meet its obligations under the Fair Housing Act, Judge Marvin J.
Garbis of Federal District Court ruled in a decade-old civil rights lawsuit.

Judge Garbis's decision is the latest turn in nationwide efforts intended to
reverse public housing policy that has historically sent public housing tenants
to poor neighborhoods consisting of minority residents.

In the 322-page decision, Judge Garbis said HUD must adopt a ''regional
approach'' to public housing that would disperse poor, black residents instead
of concentrating them in city neighborhoods.

The decision came in a class-action lawsuit brought by the American Civil
Liberties Union against HUD, the Baltimore Housing Authority and elected city
officials. The suit, filed on behalf of 14,000 Baltimore public housing tenants,
claimed local and federal government policies had created ''black ghettos.''

Judge Garbis ruled that the plaintiffs did not prove their claim that the City
of Baltimore had failed to take adequate steps to try to reverse the effects of
previous race discrimination in public housing.

But the judge rebuked HUD for not ensuring public housing ''free from
discrimination.''

Speaking before a packed courtroom in downtown Baltimore, Judge Garbis said HUD
has been ''effectively wearing blinders'' through its failure to provide more
public housing beyond the city's boundaries.

''It is high time that HUD live up to its statutory mandate'' and consider
''regional approaches to promoting fair housing opportunities for
African-American public housing residents in the Baltimore region,'' Judge
Garbis said.

In his decision, the judge wrote, ''Baltimore City should not be viewed as an
island reservation for use as a container for all of the poor of a contiguous
region'' that includes surrounding counties.

In Baltimore, the decision noted, 97 percent of public housing for families went
to black families, mostly in poverty-stricken neighborhoods.

In 2000, the judge said, the city was 64 percent black, while the Baltimore
region, comprising the city and five suburban counties, was about 15 percent
black.

As a result of a consent decree issued earlier in the A.C.L.U. case, Baltimore
demolished numerous high-rise projects and replaced them with new housing in the
1990's. While praising those improvements, Judge Garbis said, ''There have not
been significant opportunities for African-American residents of Baltimore City
public housing to reside in racially mixed, rather than predominantly
African-American, areas.''

The case, the judge said, will now move to the ''remedial phase,'' in which the
court will hear evidence and take action intended to ensure HUD officials
adequately consider a regional approach to the desegregation of public housing
in the Baltimore region.

Lawyers for the plaintiffs, along with national housing and civil rights
advocates, hailed the decision and said it underscores the importance of
spreading public housing beyond the city.

''The core of the case has been a failure of political will to locate public
housing anywhere other than the poorest, blackest neighborhoods,'' said Andrew
D. Freeman, a lawyer representing the A.C.L.U. HUD, Mr. Freeman said, is largely
responsible for concentrating public housing in poor areas of the city and has
an obligation to break the pattern by dispersing public housing.

Philip Tegeler, executive director of the Poverty and Race Research Action
Council in Washington, said that in the 1990's the Clinton administration had
settled 17 class-action complaints stemming from public housing discrimination
claims, agreeing to create public housing outside of areas of minority
concentration, allocate more housing vouchers to be used outside high-poverty
areas and revitalize public housing.

William F. Ryan Jr., a lawyer representing Baltimore City, said the decision
heartened him. ''Our position from the beginning was that the city has done
everything it could over the last 50 years to provide good housing for its
citizens,'' Mr. Ryan said. ''And the city needs all the help it can get from the
federal government and other sectors.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cherry Hill Homes in Baltimore is among the public housing
complexes listed in a lawsuit against the city. (Photo by Steve Ruark for The
New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PUBLIC HOUSING (97%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (94%); LITIGATION (92%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); CITIES (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); JUDGES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%);
ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); COUNTIES
(89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); SUBURBS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); POOR
POPULATION (78%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (78%); REAL PROPERTY LAW (78%); CONSENT
DECREES & ORDERS (78%); SLUM DWELLINGS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); REAL ESTATE
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); VERDICTS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CLASS ACTIONS (76%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (76%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (76%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%)
Housing; Decisions and Verdicts; Suits and Litigation; Public Housing; Blacks;
Law and Legislation; Housing

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION (83%) Housing and Urban Development Department; American Civil
Liberties Union

PERSON: Gary Gately; Marvin J (Judge) Garbis

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (94%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Baltimore (Md); United States

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             715 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 77 words



To the Editor:

Let me get this straight. If Alberto R. Gonzales, President Bush's nominee for
attorney general, had paid his nanny under the table, recent history shows that
there is no way he could be confirmed.

But Mr. Gonzales is merely the architect of a White House policy on torture that
even Republicans believe has endangered the lives of American troops. Therefore,
his confirmation does not appear in doubt.

Diane Runyan Bech
Swarthmore, Pa., Jan. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (88%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (87%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (85%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM
(59%) Terrorism; Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) Diane Runyan Bech; Alberto R
Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             716 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 54 words



To the Editor:

Who, in Alberto R. Gonzales's position, would not disavow torture when asked if
he approved of it? What is more of a question is how Mr. Gonzales defines
torture.

He should give the Senate Judiciary Committee, and the country, his clear,
precise, succinct definition.

Robert Patterson
Philadelphia, Jan. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); TERRORISM (84%) Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (92%) Robert Patterson; Alberto R Gonzales

COUNTRY: IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             717 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 27 words



To the Editor:

Re ''We Are All Torturers Now'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 6): I hardly recognize my own
country. I am incredibly sad.

Andrew S. Kenoe
Northbrook, Ill., Jan. 6, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(86%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); TERRORISM (84%) Torture; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%) Andrew S Kenoe; Mark Danner; Alberto R Gonzales

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (65%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (90%); UNITED STATES (65%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             718 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 148 words



To the Editor:

Re ''We Are All Torturers Now,'' by Mark Danner (Op-Ed, Jan. 6):

During World War II, I was a prisoner of the secret branch of the Japanese
military police for 18 months. Except for being hung by my wrists on a wall for
three days and being beaten by a sadistic lieutenant (an exception to the
typical investigators), I was humanely treated, both in the interrogation center
at Fort Santiago in Manila and in the disciplinary barracks where I was confined
for seven months.

I felt very strongly that one reason I and my companions were not tortured was
that the United States Army had treated its Japanese captives on Bataan decently
in accordance with the laws of war.

Alberto R. Gonzales and his political superiors should be less contemptuous of
the Geneva Conventions, which were designed to protect fighting men everywhere.

Thomas S. Jones
Safety Harbor, Fla., Jan. 6, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); LAW OF WAR (88%); ARMIES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
WORLD WAR II (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); ARMED
FORCES (71%); GENOCIDE (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%); TERRORISM (59%)
Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Geneva
Conventions; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF ARMY (56%) Justice
Department  ; Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%) Thomas S Jones; Alberto R Gonzales

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); JAPAN (92%); IRAQ (92%); PHILIPPINES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             719 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

A common thread runs through ''Don't Torture Yourself (That's His Job),'' by
Maureen Dowd (column, Jan. 6), and ''We Are All Torturers Now,'' by Mark Danner
(Op-Ed, Jan. 6): the popular liberal leitmotif of the awful America appallingly
torturing innocent people.

Maybe we should worry a little less about how terrorists are being treated in
prison and a little more about what they are doing to us.

Yes, I know that as Americans we should be expected to hold ourselves to higher
standards, but this is the war on terror, and these are terrorists. They aren't
an organized army; they are violent insurgents who brutally torture American
soldiers and civilians for the sole reason that they are Americans.

If a few embarrassing pictures were taken, it is hardly grounds for the scathing
attacks on Alberto R. Gonzales, John Ashcroft or America in general.

Jamie Valeriano
Wexford, Pa., Jan. 6, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WAR ON TERROR (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%);
ARMIES (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (69%); ARMED FORCES (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(67%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department  ; Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%) Alberto R Gonzales; Jamie Valeriano; Alberto R
Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             720 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 48 words



To the Editor:

Apparently the policy on torture of Alberto R. Gonzales and the Bush
administration can be summarized in a single sentence: This administration does
not engage in torture and will not condone torture -- and besides, they deserve
it.

Paul Rocklin
Watertown, Mass., Jan. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); TERRORISM (84%) Torture; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; Terrorism;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department  ; Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%) Paul Rocklin; George W (Pres) Bush; Alberto R
Gonzales

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             721 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 149 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Mr. Gonzales Speaks'' (editorial, Jan. 7):

In his Senate confirmation testimony, Alberto R. Gonzales, the nominee for
attorney general, said that it would ''dishonor'' the Geneva Conventions to
allow these treaties to be invoked by terror suspects seeking protection from
coercive interrogation techniques by coalition forces.

Mr. Gonzales has clearly demonstrated through well-reasoned arguments and
citations to relevant Geneva treaty passages that he is not, and never was, the
architect of the torture that occurred at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, nor is
he the ''public face'' for the policies that appear to have condoned that
torture, however indirectly.

To the contrary, Mr. Gonzales is a competent jurist who is eminently qualified
to serve the president, and the American people, as the nation's chief
prosecutor.

Carl David Birman
Mamaroneck, N.Y., Jan. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(87%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (87%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
GENOCIDE (71%); TERRORISM (70%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%) Torture; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (93%) Carl David Birman; Alberto R Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             722 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 75 words



To the Editor:

I watched Alberto R. Gonzales at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings as he
continually refused to answer or evaded questions about whether or not he
supported torture.

Any nominee for the position of attorney general who has to defend himself from
charges of supporting torture is already an unfit candidate.

Any senator voting for this man is unfit to represent his or her constituents.

Wendy Miller
San Rafael, Calif., Jan. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (84%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (84%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM (59%) Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%) Wendy Miller; Alberto R Gonzales

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             723 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gonzales and the Torture Question

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 67 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Gonzales Speaks Against Torture During Hearing'' (front page, Jan. 7):

Have we sunk so low that a nominee for attorney general, the highest law
enforcement position in the nation, must publicly disavow the torture of
prisoners, a practice he himself tried to sanitize at the behest of the
president? What has become of our country?

James Eisenstein
South Pasadena, Calif., Jan. 7, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Joel Holland)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); LAWYERS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (87%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (84%); TERRORISM (59%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Terrorism; Oceans; Editorials; Fish and Other
Marine Life; Water Pollution; Agriculture; Urban Areas

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%) James Eisenstein; Alberto R Gonzales; George W
(Pres) Bush; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             724 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Congo: Sex Abuse By Peacekeepers Said To Persist

BYLINE: By Warren Hoge (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 114 words


Sexual abuse of girls by United Nations peacekeepers in Congo has continued
despite recent revelations of past incidents and preventive measures that the
head of the operation, the American diplomat William Swing, said he had put in
place.

''In our view, the problem was and continues to be widespread,'' said Barbara
Dixon of the United Nations watchdog group that investigated 72 allegations
against soldiers and civilian workers. She said commanders were resisting
measures to curb the abuses, and Mr. Swing said he had sent two of them back to
their home nations. Among the charges against peacekeepers have been gang rape
and using food to bribe children for sex.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); CHILD
SEXUAL ABUSE (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); CIVIL WAR (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (84%); ARMED FORCES (83%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (82%) Children and Youth; Women; United States International
Relations; Sex Crimes; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Politics and Government;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Barbara Dixon; William Swing

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire); Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             726 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court-Martial Will Hear Taped Testimony of Prisoners

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: ABUSE CASE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex., Jan. 7


Three Iraqi detainees who say they were abused by soldiers at Abu Ghraib prison
will testify against the reservist accused of being the leader of the abuse,
prosecutors said Friday, as the court completed jury selection for the
court-martial.

The reservist, Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., 36, is the first soldier to
face a contested trial in the abuse case, which broke open last spring with the
publication of photographs that showed, among other things, naked detainees
piled in a pyramid and simulating sex. The photographs show Specialist Graner
and other military captors grinning and giving the thumbs-up sign.

A military judge said the opening statements in the court-martial would begin
Monday.

On Thursday, prosecutors dropped four counts against Specialist Graner,
including allegations that he committed adultery with another soldier and tried
to coerce a different soldier into remaining silent about the abuses he had
seen. Specialist Graner still faces a maximum of 17 1/2 years in prison if
convicted on charges of assault, maltreatment, dereliction of duty and indecent
acts.

The testimony of the detainees, who were not identified, was taken in videotaped
statements in Iraq last month. The list of 35 witnesses includes Specialist
Joseph M. Darby, the reservist who gave the photographs to investigators and
told them that Specialist Graner had bragged about mistreating prisoners. Also
scheduled to appear are four soldiers who have agreed to testify as part of plea
agreements and the commander of their unit, the 372nd Military Police Company,
based in Cresaptown, Md.

Specialist Graner sat passively on Friday as his lawyer entered his plea of not
guilty, but he expressed confidence as he greeted a phalanx of cameras and
reporters outside. ''There's been ups and downs, but the ups have so outweighed
the downs,'' he said. ''Whatever happens is going to happen, but I still feel
it's going to be, you know, on the positive side.''

His lawyer, Guy Womack, repeated his insistence that Specialist Graner -- he has
been demoted from corporal -- was following orders to ''soften up prisoners.''
''If he was following lawful orders, it's an absolute defense to all the
charges,'' Mr. Womack said. ''If he was following unlawful orders but did not
know they were unlawful, if a reasonable person would not know, that's an
absolute defense.''

''We have to hold the order-givers to a higher standard,'' he added.

Mr. Womack said he had not decided whether to call Specialist Graner to testify
in his own defense but called him articulate, ''an outstanding candidate to be a
witness.''

The trial was moved to Fort Hood from Baghdad because the military feared it
could not find enough soldiers there to serve as a jury. It took just an hour to
choose the jury of 10 here -- all male, 4 officers and 6 enlisted soldiers, all
of whom lawyers described as combat veterans.

A conviction requires the agreement of seven members of the jury. Eight members
must agree for a sentence of 10 years or more.

The judge, Col. James Pohl, and lawyers asked an initial pool of 12 jurors
whether they could be impartial, given the intense news coverage of the case.
Most soldiers said they had followed the coverage, but not closely. But one of
the two dismissed hinted at how the scandal has affected morale in the ranks.

''Frankly, I've got to tell you, it had a strong impact on me,'' said Col. Allen
Batschelet. ''As an Army officer, I was embarrassed by what I saw in the
media.''

He added, ''The values I hold dear as a soldier were called into question by the
whole affair.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr. faces charges including
assault. (Photo by Deborah Lykins for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY COURTS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); JURY
TRIALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); WITNESSES
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LAWYERS (77%); JURY DUTY (77%); PLEA
AGREEMENTS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); ASSAULT
& BATTERY (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); JUDGES (72%); TERRORISM (59%) Courts-Martial;
Recordings (Video); Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Charles a Jr (Specialist) Graner

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             727 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2005 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Freed

BYLINE: By Marilynne Robinson.

Marilynne Robinson teaches at the Iowa Writers' Workshop. Her most recent novel
is ''Gilead.''

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2499 words



THOUGH THE
HEAVENS MAY FALL
The Landmark Trial That Led to the End of Human Slavery.
By Steven M. Wise.
Illustrated. 282 pp.
Da Capo Press. $25.

BURY THE CHAINS
Prophets and Rebels
in the Fight to Free
an Empire's Slaves.
By Adam Hochschild.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
Houghton Mifflin
Company. $26.95.

  ''THE air of England is too pure for a slave to breathe in.'' This phrase,
with slight variations, recurs through long years in the rhetoric of movements
to abolish first African slavery within England, then the Atlantic traffic in
African people that England dominated for more than a century and then the
institution of slavery in the British Empire, whose populations included
hundreds of thousands of slaves. It is an axiom traditionally believed to have
been invoked in 1772, in principle if not verbatim, by Lord Mansfield, the judge
in Somerset v. Steuart, which Steven M. Wise in ''Though the Heavens May Fall''
calls the ''trial that led to the end of human slavery.'' Somerset was an
African who accompanied Steuart, his owner, to England. He escaped, was
recaptured and sued successfully for his freedom.

Both Wise and Adam Hochschild celebrate this trial and the events and
personalities that brought it about. No doubt they should. It is a melancholy
fact, however, that the phenomenon of African slavery loomed as it did over the
Atlantic world because, from the reign of Elizabeth I to the reign of George
III, England assumed that the air of its colonies, or of any other colony ready
to buy, was impure enough to accommodate slavery very nicely.

Wise, the president of the Center for the Expansion of Fundamental Rights,
traces with reverent care how the question of the legality of slavery developed
within England, culminating in this famous trial. The hero of his narrative is
Granville Sharp, a minor government clerk who educated himself in the law in the
course of defending the rights of Africans brought into England as slaves. He
devoted himself and his slender resources to this work over decades with the
object of finally putting an end to slavery itself. The trial, which is said to
have abolished slavery within England by legal precedent, was centered on the
question of Steuart's right to sell Somerset into the West Indies. Lord
Mansfield ruled in favor of Somerset on the grounds that slavery ''is so odious
that nothing can be suffered to support it but positive law.'' There being no
such law in England, ''the black must be discharged.'' This decision freed an
estimated 15,000 Africans then held as slaves in England.

Wise follows Sharp and the lawyers sympathetic to him through a series of trials
in which they attempt to obtain rulings to vindicate the argument that English
law does not countenance slavery. He has an eye for evocative detail and an
interest in the trappings and procedures of an 18th-century courtroom that do as
much to engage the reader as the drama of the trials themselves. And he has a
good lawyer's love of those moments in which the true poetry of humane justice
finds its voice. More insight into the actual operations of the law would have
been useful -- some discussion, for example, of the yawning gulf between the
principle of the right to trial and the fact that in early-19th-century England,
an average felony trial lasted less than nine minutes, sometimes ending so
quickly that the accused did not know he had been tried. In practice, common law
seems only a little too supple to be called a rope of sand. Yet Wise assumes,
more or less, that by means of it England pulled itself out of the abyss of
slavery and pulled America and the world after it.

In this instance, though the purport of the Mansfield judgment was taken to be
that ''as soon as any slave sets foot on English ground, he becomes free,'' the
emancipated black population fell into a wretchedness so extreme as to justify
their expulsion to -- such paradoxes are endless -- the region of Sierra Leone
that was also the center of the British slave trade and from which Africans were
shipped into the West Indies. Their destitution was exploited and exacerbated by
none other than Granville Sharp, who ''distributed handbills asking London's
gentlemen to cease dispensing charity to poor blacks in order to nudge them
toward Africa.'' This coercion was apparently not at odds with the high view of
English liberty with which he had swayed public and judicial opinion. Sharp,
Wise says, ''believed wild tales of how mild and fertile'' Sierra Leone was --
surely a remarkable feat of credulity, given England's long experience with the
place. In any case, in 1787 several hundred former slaves sailed to Sierra Leone
''with dozens of white prostitutes whom the English authorities, anxious to rid
themselves of as many undesirables as possible, black and white, had married to
the settlers while the women were drunk'' -- if true, a further light on English
liberty. The population of the colony promptly fell by two-thirds largely
because of famine and disease.

This is not to give away the end of the story, which for Wise is in fact the
triumph of law and the beginning of the abolition of human slavery. He
acknowledges anomalies like this one in a late chapter but, he concludes,
''Somerset's chief legacy'' was that human slavery ''was so odious the common
law would never support it.'' And he continues: ''Mansfield's proved just the
opening salvo in a legal barrage that, within a century, splintered all of human
slavery's bulwarks.'' That century brought the world to 1872, when colonialism
was at its height and its depredations were only accelerating. Colonialism
disrupted and destroyed far more African lives than did slavery. Indeed, the
distinction between the two seems no more than convenient.

Yet the Atlantic slave trade was an enormity stunning in its scale and its
duration. In ''Bury the Chains,'' Adam Hochschild says: ''So rapidly were slaves
worked to death, above all on the brutal sugar plantations of the Caribbean,
that between 1660 and 1807, ships brought well over three times as many Africans
across the ocean to British colonies as they did Europeans. And, of course, it
was not just to British territories that slaves were sent. From Senegal to
Virginia, Sierra Leone to Charleston, the Niger delta to Cuba, Angola to Brazil,
and on dozens upon dozens of crisscrossing paths taken by thousands of vessels,
the Atlantic was a vast conveyor belt to early death in the fields of an immense
swath of plantations that stretched from Baltimore to Rio de Janeiro and
beyond.'' The subject of this interesting and valuable book is the tiny cadre of
reformers that undertook to arouse public feeling against this great abuse.
Hochschild says: ''For 50 years, activists in England worked to end slavery in
the British Empire. None of them gained a penny by doing so, and their eventual
success meant a huge loss to the imperial economy.'' Vast, entrenched and
profitable as the slave trade was, how did they manage to bring it to an end?

That they did end it is assumed by Hochschild rather than proved by him. It
seems a little odd in a historian to use the improbability of a movement's
success as grounds for heightened admiration, rather than for heightened
attention to other contributing factors. Given that the whole infernal
enterprise was sustained by the immense wealth it generated, one might, without
cynicism, look to the economic considerations in play. When the British outlawed
the exportation of Africans to the colonies for sale in 1807, they had had
almost 20 years' notice that the Americans intended to ban the importation of
Africans in 1808. And it was just about this time that Napoleon, cut off by the
British Navy from French colonies in the Caribbean, began looking into the
domestic cultivation of the sugar beet.

And there were the rebellions in the West Indies, particularly the Haitian
rebellion. The sections of the book that deal with them bring to light an
astounding, and forgotten, episode in Western history. Since Haiti alone
produced as much foreign trade at that time as the whole of the 13 colonies of
North America, it was potentially a great loss. It belonged to France, but
Britain supplied it with slaves, a valuable trade since the slaves were
intentionally worked to death -- it was cheaper to replace them than to sustain
them -- so the market for Africans was very brisk. Uprisings had long been
frequent in the West Indies, but at long last rage in Haiti converged with the
tactical brilliance of Toussaint L'Ouverture and others and the slaves seized
the island. This part of the story is familiar. But there is more.

First the British and then the French under Napoleon sent huge forces against
the Haitians. The British sent a larger army against Haiti than it had
dispatched to fight in the American Revolution. And it buried 60 percent of
those soldiers in Haiti. The two greatest powers on earth went up against a
population of half-starved, desperate people and were utterly defeated. It is no
surprise that these two abysmal wars of empire have fallen out of history. One
cannot read about them without concluding that the Haitian Africans contributed
mightily to making the Caribbean slave system untenable. All in all, in 1807 the
prospects of the traffic in human beings were not good. It is perhaps
coincidental that in adopting the abolitionist stance Britain was able to seize
the moral high ground and attempt (together with the United States) to suppress
the slave trade among its economic rivals. Certainly this posture was gallant
enough to make a great part of the world forget that Britain was for so long
pre-eminent among the despoilers of Africa.

Hochschild has written eloquently about the importance of this kind of
historical forgetting in ''King Leopold's Ghost,'' his account of the policies
of the Belgian king Leopold II in the Congo in the early 20th century, which are
estimated to have taken 10 million lives. There he writes, ''The world we live
in -- its divisions and conflicts, its widening gap between rich and poor, its
seemingly inexplicable outbursts of violence -- is shaped far less by what we
celebrate and mythologize than by the painful events we try to forget.'' How
consistently and with what lethal effect we choose not to be aware.

Nevertheless, Hochschild interprets the success of the British abolitionist
movement as a triumph of empathy, a humane response to horrors of which the
public only gradually became conscious. His heroes are Thomas Clarkson, William
Wilberforce, Granville Sharp and the former slave Olaudah Equiano, among others.
These men did indeed work patiently and passionately for emancipation. Certainly
it is uplifting to find empathy and law together championing justice, as they do
in the narratives of both Hochschild and Wise. The intention of the writers is
clearly the honorable one of finding an instance in history in which justice has
prevailed and the world has been changed, and of finding as well a model of the
kinds of activism by which present enormities are, or might be, addressed. Yet,
again to the credit of both writers, these narratives include elements
incompatible with this kind of interpretation, indeed consistent with the
opposite and very bleak conclusion that movements based on empathy and law, when
proceeding from exalted tributes to the essential decency of a population, can
flatter indifference or complicity.

In fact, the slave trade was at home in a world where the appropriation of lives
and the extortion of labor were astonishingly commonplace. Hochschild describes
the virtual abductions by which slave ships were manned, and tells how these
sailors were subject to flogging and starving, and died in numbers as great as
did the abducted Africans they helped to transport. And the British Navy was
manned in the same way. None of this was at all exceptional, as it would have to
have been if there were indeed a presumption of freedom embedded in English
culture, as both books assert. No consensus in support of freedom can be
demonstrated. The industrialist Robert Owen, writing in 1813, years after the
Mansfield decision, describes the transfer to factories of the children of
British paupers by the hundreds, 6-, 7- and 8-year-olds who worked 13 hours a
day through seven-year apprenticeships. These little workers died quickly and
were replaced by other pauper children. They were not slaves in the strictest
sense. The system did resemble Caribbean slavery, however, in that it set a
negative value on their well-being.

The literature on such practices is immense because they were pervasive and long
lived and of interest to many generations of activists. Indeed, if there were
not economic motives behind British abolition, then the speed with which that
reform came about is miraculous compared with the laggardly pace of reforms
affecting the laboring classes who were the great majority of the British
population. Owen asks, ''Shall the well-being of the poor, half-naked,
half-famished, untaught and untrained . . . not call forth one petition, one
delegate, one rational effective legislative measure?'' Just at the time of the
emancipation of the British West Indies, a reform bill passed by Parliament
created the ''Poor Law Bastilles,'' a system of punitive incarceration for the
indigent. Hochschild describes how the Parliament paid the West Indian
slaveholders extravagant sums for their emancipated slaves, who then became
their oppressed and wretchedly paid employees, driven to frequent rebellion just
as the slaves had been. If Britain taught the world by ending actual slavery, it
gave the world a second lesson in establishing virtual slavery. As Hochschild
remarks in ''King Leopold's Ghost,'' empathy is fickle.

The primacy of England in these narratives slights the fact that a consensus
against slavery had been building for a generation in New England, and longer in
Quaker Philadelphia. The role of England in sustaining slavery in its colonies
is demonstrated in the abolition of slavery immediately after the American
Revolution, in Vermont in 1777 and in Massachusetts in 1780. The institution of
human bondage became truly peculiar to the South only after the Revolution,
because it was legal everywhere in the colonies while they were under British
law. And years after the emancipation of slaves in the empire, Britain came near
intervening in the American Civil War on the side of the slave states. The
arguments in Somerset v. Steuart treat the laws of the colonies as alien to
England, though members of the royal family were major stockholders in the slave
trade, and what is more English than the Church of England, which was a great
slaveholder in Jamaica? While every good effect of an important precedent must
be welcomed, the fact remains that the claim to an exclusive English purity that
is the basis for the legal arguments associated with Steuart v. Somerset was and
is a denial of history, a part of the great forgetting.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 6, 2005



CORRECTION: A book review on Jan. 9 about two volumes on the abolition of
slavery and the slave trade Though the Heavens May Fall, by Steven M. Wise, and
Bury the Chains, by Adam Hochschild referred incorrectly in one passage to the
Somerset case of 1772, in which a court ruled that the owner of a slave in
England could not compel him to go abroad to be sold. While many scholars
consider the courts decision a symbolic step toward ending slavery, the ruling
by itself did not free the estimated 15,000 African slaves in Britain.

 The review also referred incorrectly to the abolition of slavery in Vermont in
1777 and Massachusetts in 1780; those events occurred during the American
Revolution, not after it.

GRAPHIC: Drawings (Drawings by Ed Lam
 Chad Roberts)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (93%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); BRITISH MONARCHS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (69%); LITERATURE (62%) Books and Literature; Reviews

COMPANY: DA CAPO PRESS (91%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (91%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (91%)

PERSON: Marilynne Robinson; Steven M Wise; Adam Hochschild

COUNTRY: ENGLAND (95%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (72%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

German's Claim of Kidnapping Brings Investigation of U.S. Link

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr. and SOUAD MEKHENNET

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2637 words

DATELINE: MUNICH


On the afternoon of Dec. 31, 2003, Khaled el-Masri was traveling on a tourist
bus headed for the Macedonian capital, Skopje, where he was hoping to escape the
''holiday pressures'' of home life during a weeklong vacation.

When the bus reached the Serbia-Macedonia border, Mr. Masri said, he was asked
the usual questions: Where are you going? How long will you be staying? Mr.
Masri, a German citizen, did not think much of it, until he realized that the
border guards had confiscated his passport.

The bus moved on, but an increasingly panicked Mr. Masri was ordered to stay
behind. A few hours later, Mr. Masri, a 41-year-old unemployed car salesman,
said he was taken to a small, windowless room and was accused of being a
terrorist by three men who were dressed in civilian clothes but carrying
pistols.

''They asked a lot of questions -- if I have relations with Al Qaeda, Al
Haramain, the Islamic Brotherhood,'' recalled Mr. Masri, who was born in
Lebanon. ''I kept saying no, but they did not believe me.''

It was the first day of what Mr. Masri said would become five months in
captivity. In an interview, he said that after being kidnapped by the Macedonian
authorities at the border, he was turned over to officials he believed were from
the United States. He said they flew him to a prison in Afghanistan, where he
said he was shackled, beaten repeatedly, photographed nude, injected with drugs
and questioned by interrogators about what they insisted were his ties to Al
Qaeda.

He was released without ever being charged with a crime. The German police and
prosecutors have been investigating Mr. Masri's allegations since he reported
the matter to them last June, two weeks after his return to Germany.

Martin Hofmann, a senior national prosecutor in Munich who handles terrorism
cases and is in charge of the Masri investigation, and another official, a
senior organized crime investigator in southern Germany, say they believe Mr.
Masri's story. They said investigators interviewed him for 17 hours over two
days, that his story was very detailed and that he recounted it consistently. In
addition, the officials said they had verified specific elements of the case,
including that Mr. Masri was forced off the bus at the border.

Still, much of Mr. Masri's story has not been corroborated. His assertion that
he was held by Americans in Afghanistan, for example, is solely based on what he
said he observed or was told after he was taken off the bus in Macedonia.

Mr. Masri said he was confounded by his captors' insistence that he was a Qaeda
operative. He attends a mosque in Ulm, Germany, that has been closely watched by
the authorities because several suspected terrorists have worshiped there. But
those authorities say Mr. Masri has never been a suspect.

Mr. Masri's lawyer, Manfred R. Gnjidic, said he suspected that his client was
swept into the C.I.A.'s policy of ''renditions'' -- handing custody of a
prisoner from United States control to another country for the purposes of
interrogation -- because he has the same name, with a slightly different
spelling, as a man wanted in the Sept. 11 attacks. The policy has come under
increasing criticism as other cases have come to light recently.

Although the German authorities say they have no specific suspects in the Masri
case, they say they are looking into the possible role of the United States and
other countries.

''It is an unusual case,'' Mr. Hofmann said. ''The political dimension is huge.
Under German law, we can charge a person with kidnapping, but not a country.
Countries cannot kidnap people.''

Officials at Germany's national intelligence agency said they are also
investigating. They said they asked the F.B.I. for assistance last fall but have
received little help.

A senior administration official said the Bush administration had been aware of
these allegations for some time, but he referred questions to the F.B.I. and the
C.I.A.

In a series of interviews, neither the C.I.A. nor the F.B.I. would deny or
confirm Mr. Masri's allegations. A C.I.A. spokeswoman said the agency would not
comment at all. Senior F.B.I. officials in Washington acknowledged that they
received a request for help from the Germans last October, and said they were
assisting in the investigation. The officials disputed that they had not worked
aggressively on the case.

''This is a very ongoing thing, and we are working together with the Germans to
resolve it,'' a senior official said. ''Our hope is we can get to the bottom of
it.'' The official declined to discuss whether the bureau had had any contact
with the C.I.A. or Pentagon about the allegations.

Golan Pavlovski, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry of the Republic of
Macedonia, said he had no information about Mr. Masri's case.

When he returned home last June, Mr. Masri said, he felt relief but also rage.
Asked whom he blames, Mr. Masri, a burly, soft-spoken man, looked at his hands
for a long moment before saying, ''Of course, I blame the Americans first.''

Similar Cases

 Mr. Masri's allegations bear similarities to the case of Maher Arar, a Canadian
born in Syria who was suspected of being a Qaeda operative. Mr. Arar, who was
detained in New York in 2002, says he was sent by the United States to Syria,
where he says he was repeatedly tortured during 10 months in prison.

A second detainee, Mamdouh Habib, an Australian, has asserted in court papers
that he was tortured in an Egyptian prison for nearly six months in 2001 before
being transferred to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The allegations were contained in a
motion filed with a federal court recently. Mr. Habib's lawyer has asked the
federal district court in Washington to block the Bush administration from
sending him back to Egypt, asserting that he would be tortured again there.

The C.I.A. began the renditions program in the early 1990's, but its use has
increased since the Sept. 11 attacks. Human rights organizations, who say the
policy is tantamount to government-sponsored kidnapping, estimate that dozens of
''high value'' detainees are being held in secret locations around the world.
C.I.A. officials have acknowledged that the agency conducts renditions, but say
they do not condone the use of torture during interrogations.

Mr. Masri, who had not gone public with his case, agreed to give an interview
last month after being approached by The New York Times. During the interview,
he spoke without notes, and in great detail, about his case. He said he was able
to recount his time in captivity because he wrote down his experiences right
after he was released.

The timeline was corroborated by documents, including a bus ticket and a stamp
on his passport in Albania on May 29, the date he said he was released. He
returned to Germany on June 3. His account also matched details in a report
about his case written by Amnesty International, whose officials interviewed Mr.
Masri on June 21.

''Mr. Masri had been questioned twice for a lot of hours, and he always has said
the same things, he never changed details,'' Mr. Hofmann said in an interview
about his country's investigation. ''Therefore I don't think it would be
possible that someone could invent such a story.''

Mr. Masri said his ordeal began after he decided to go on a short vacation
without his family after arguing with his wife, choosing Skopje because it was
inexpensive and friends had recommended it.

After being interrogated the first night in Macedonia, Mr. Masri, who speaks
German and Arabic, was taken to a motel on the outskirts of Skopje, where he
said several men held him for 23 days. ''They told me: 'You are not arrested.
You aren't handcuffed, are you?''' Mr. Masri recalled. But he said he was not
permitted to leave.

Questions About Al Qaeda

 He said the men continued to question him about Al Qaeda. After several days,
Mr. Masri said he lost his temper, demanded to speak with officials from the
German government and tried to escape. ''One man put his pistol in his hand and
showed it to me, to stop me from leaving,'' Mr. Masri said.

Another week went by, he said, before another man arrived to question him. ''He
was nice to me,'' he recalled. ''He said we'll make a deal -- you say you are an
Al Qaeda member, and sign a paper saying that, and we'll put you back on a plane
and you will be deported to Germany.''

Mr. Masri said he refused. The man left but returned two days later, he said,
and this time he was more combative. ''He said I'm not cooperative, I bring
problems on myself, they know everything about me,'' Mr. Masri said. He said the
man asserted that Mr. Masri was originally from Egypt and had been to a Qaeda
training camp in Pakistan -- allegations that Mr. Masri said he repeatedly
denied.

After three and a half weeks, Mr. Masri said he was told that he could return to
Germany. The Macedonians took a statement from him on videotape to show he was
in good health when he left their country, he said. Afterward, Mr. Masri said,
he was permitted to leave the motel, but a few steps down the road, a pickup
truck pulled up next to him, and several men grabbed him.

Mr. Masri said that a hood was put over his head but that he believed he was
driven to the airport because he could hear the roar of planes. He said he was
taken to a room and beaten. He said his clothes were cut off with knives, and he
heard the sounds of cameras taking pictures. ''After I was naked they took off
my mask so I could see, and all the people were in black clothes and black
masks,'' he said. ''There were seven or eight people.''

Mr. Masri said a couple of men put him in a blue warm-up suit, handcuffed him
and tied his hands to his belt, put plugs in his ears and blindfolded him. He
said he was put on a plane, where he was forced to lie on the floor. Someone
injected his arm, he said, and he fell into a deep sleep.

After an unknown number of hours, he said, he awoke to find that the plane had
landed. He said he was taken to a building and imprisoned in a tiny, cold cell.
''Everything was dirty -- a dirty blanket, dirty water, like from a fish
aquarium,'' he said.

On the walls in his cell were words written in Arabic and what he believed was
Farsi. Mr. Masri said that his captors and fellow prisoners told him he was in
Kabul, Afghanistan.

That first evening in prison, Mr. Masri said, a man he assumed was a doctor,
wearing a thin black mask, came to his cell to take a vial of blood. He said he
believed that the doctor was American because he spoke English. Mr. Masri said
he was repeatedly punched in the head and neck by several guards who accompanied
the doctor. He also said he was forced to run up and down stairs with his arms
shackled behind his back.

The following morning, Mr. Masri said, an interrogator walked into his cell and,
in a thick Lebanese accent, began shouting at him. ''He told me, 'Where you are
right now there is no law, no rights, no one knows you are here, and no one
cares about you.'''

Mr. Masri said the man had a stack of documents and told him they knew
''everything'' about him, including that he was an associate of Mohamed Atta,
one of the Sept. 11 hijackers, and Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who is believed to have
helped the hijackers. They also accused him of being a senior Qaeda operative
who was trained in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, he said. ''I denied everything -- I
kept saying, 'No, no, no.'''

His lawyer, Mr. Gnjidic, said he thought that his client had been confused with
the Sept. 11 suspect Khalid al-Masri, because that man is believed by American
authorities to have had contact with Mr. bin al-Shibh and Mr. Atta and to have
been partly responsible for directing them to a Qaeda training camp in
Afghanistan. It was there that the two men met Osama bin Laden, who enlisted
them for the Sept. 11 mission.

More weeks went by, and Mr. Masri said he then met a man who presented himself
as a top lieutenant at the prison. He believes that man was also an American,
based on his accent.

''They asked me about Ulm, how many people go to the mosque, how often do they
pray,'' he said. ''I told them. When I asked why I was there, I never got an
answer.''

A Hunger Strike

 In March, Mr. Masri said he began a hunger strike. On the 35th day, he said an
Afghan prison guard told him, ''The Americans don't care if you live or die.''

Two days later, he said, he was beaten again and forcibly fed liquid through a
tube shoved down his throat.

Mr. Masri said he then ended his hunger strike. He said he was getting to know
his fellow prisoners -- there were two Pakistani brothers and a man from
Tanzania who had been there for several months. He also said there was a
Pakistani man who had been there nearly two years.

''I'm sure those men will take revenge, after what was done to them,'' Mr. Masri
said. ''Some said to me -- we hope to get out of here and then have the power to
make something happen against the Americans.''

Weeks went by. In May, Mr. Masri said he met a man he believed was German and
who was introduced as ''Sam.'' The man posed the same series of questions --
mostly about any dealings he may have had with Mr. Atta and Mr. bin al-Shibh.
''He was friendly,'' Mr. Masri said. ''So I said, 'Can you please tell me if my
family knows where I am?' And the German said, 'No, they don't know.'''

The German authorities said they were unable to confirm Mr. Masri's account of a
German agent.

The Return Home

 A week later, Mr. Masri said, he was blindfolded, taken to the airport and put
on a flight, and then placed on a bus and driven for six or seven hours. His
blindfold was removed, and a man told him to walk down a deserted, winding
mountain road, he said. ''I had the feeling after a few steps, they'd shoot me
in the back.''

He walked around the bend and came upon a border crossing, where three men in
uniforms waited for him, he said. Mr. Masri said he told one of the men about
his five months in captivity. ''The man was laughing at me,'' he said. ''He
said: 'Don't tell that story to anyone because no one will believe it. Everyone
will laugh.'''

Mr. Masri asked where they were; the man said in northern Albania, near the
Macedonian border. The border officer handed Mr. Masri a plastic box containing
the belongings that were taken from him on the first day of his captivity,
including his passport and cash, he said. The man told him he was free to go,
and his passport was stamped by the nation of Albania, on May 29, 2004.

From there, he bought an airplane ticket and flew to Frankfurt. Once in Germany,
Mr. Masri said he returned to his hometown, Ulm, but his wife and four sons,
ages 2 to 6, were not at home. ''I feared the worst -- I feared something
happened to my family,'' he said. Four days later, he found them at his wife's
mother's home in Lebanon.

In an interview, Mr. Masri's wife, Aischa, said she had moved back to Lebanon
after not hearing from her husband. She said she began thinking, ''Maybe he has
gone to marry another woman.''

Mrs. Masri, 29, said she did not expect to see him again. ''The boys have cried
a lot in Lebanon. They always have asked me, ''Why are we here, Mom, and where
is Daddy?''' she said, and then began to weep. ''From time to time, I called his
friends in Germany and asked them if they heard anything from him or about him.
But no one knew anything.''

Mr. Masri said he was still trying to rebuild his life. He said he had no steady
employment, and almost no friends. ''The phone doesn't ring -- people have
heard, and they don't want to see me,'' he said.

It was not until last August that Mr. Masri was told by his lawyer that he had
the same name as the Sept. 11 suspect.

Mr. Masri said he was bedeviled by questions that he and the German authorities
still could not answer. ''There are so many questions,'' he said. ''How did it
happen? Why did it happen? I don't know.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khaled el-Masri said he left his wife and children for a
weeklong vacation and returned to them after five months of captivity. (Photo by
Dieter Mayr for The New York Times)(pg. 6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); INTERVIEWS (87%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(86%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); TRAVEL  HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(74%); ORGANIZED CRIME (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); TORTURE (70%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (67%); RELIGION (67%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking;
Kidnapping; Torture; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; World Trade Center (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Orgn); Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Don Jr Van Natta; Souad Mekhennet; Khaled El- Masri

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (92%); NEW YORK, NY,
USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (95%); UNITED STATES (94%);
GERMANY (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); SERBIA (92%); ALBANIA (79%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)  ; Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic);
Albania; Germany; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             736 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Central Figure In Iraq Abuse Goes on Trial

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex., Jan. 10


Prosecutors unveiled new graphic photographs and videos from Abu Ghraib prison
on Monday as they tried to portray the soldier accused as the ringleader of the
abuse scandal there as a sadistic thug who punched detainees for sport, posed
smiling next to the bloody face of a detainee and bragged about forcing an Iraqi
woman to let him photograph her naked.

In opening arguments here at the court-martial for the soldier, Specialist
Charles A. Graner Jr., his lawyers insisted that he was simply following orders
and using lessons from his civilian life as a prison guard to try to maintain
discipline in a war zone. Using naked and hooded detainees to make a human
pyramid was much like what cheerleaders ''all over America'' do at football
games, the lawyer, Guy Womack, argued, and putting naked prisoners on leashes
was much like what parents in airports do with their toddlers.

''They're not being abused,'' Mr. Womack told the jury of 10 soldiers, ''they're
being kept in control.''

But prosecutors called soldiers who testified that Specialist Graner had laughed
and joked as detainees moaned, screamed and begged him to stop beating them.

A source close to the case said prosecutors had discovered more than 2,000
e-mail messages that Specialist Graner had sent home, sometimes attaching
pictures of detainees and boasting about how he had disciplined them, suggesting
one had been ''a real upper body workout.'' In none of those e-mail messages did
he mention being ordered to commit any of the abusive acts, the source said.

The prosecutor, Maj. Michael Holley, said, ''There was a lot wrong at Abu
Ghraib,'' adding, ''There were training problems, there were logistics problems,
there were certainly leadership problems.''

Still, Major Holley told the jury, ''What we're presenting to you is the serious
misconduct that anyone would say, 'That's illegal, that's beyond the pale,
there's no way anyone would say that's right.'''

Specialist Graner, a 36-year-old reservist from the 372nd Military Police
Company based in Maryland, faces up to 17 and a half years in prison on several
counts of assault, maltreatment, dereliction of duty and indecent acts stemming
from the scandal that broke last spring with the publication of humiliating
photographs of detainees. The scandal set off high-level military investigations
that have exposed a wider range of mistreatment of detainees in Afghanistan,
Iraq and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. But the question of who authorized such
treatment remains largely unanswered.

Witnesses here testified that commanders and military intelligence soldiers had
authorized harsh treatment like keeping detainees chained to railings all night
to force them to stay awake. Pvt. Ivan L. Frederick II, one of four soldiers who
has accepted a plea agreement in the Abu Ghraib case, testified that he asked
military police from the unit the 372nd replaced why detainees were naked and
handcuffed, or wearing women's underwear on their heads. He said he was told
that it was the way things were done.

Even Specialist Graner asked superiors whether it was right to handcuff
detainees to a railing to keep them awake, Private Frederick testified. But the
military police were told that if military intelligence asked for ''sleep
management,'' it was fine, he said. Describing instructions for sleep management
from one military intelligence soldier, Private Frederick testified: ''He told
me, 'I don't care what you do, just don't kill him.'''

Still, Private Frederick and other soldiers testified, commanders did not know
about the kind of treatment shown in the photographs and would not have
sanctioned it.

Several soldiers described their alarm as they watched the abuse unfold,
particularly on one evening that began with several soldiers running and jumping
into a pile of detainees.

''It made me kind of sick, almost; I didn't know what to do,'' said one,
Specialist Matthew Wisdom, who has not been charged. ''It just didn't seem
right.''

Describing how Specialist Graner punched a detainee in the temple so hard that
it knocked him unconscious, Specialist Wisdom said, ''If I was that detainee, I
know that would have been very painful.''

Photographs of detainees being mistreated were shown on a large screen in the
courtroom, occasionally remaining for several minutes as witnesses narrated
them.

''He walked over to the detainee that had 'I'm a rapist' written on his leg and
punched the detainee in the temple, sir,'' Pvt. Jeremy Sivits, who is serving a
year in prison for taking photographs of the abuse, testified about Specialist
Graner. ''And then he kind of shook his hand and said, 'Ow. Damn, that hurt.'''

Private Sivits said the detainees had not posed any threat. ''The detainee just
kind of shook and lay there on the floor,'' he said. ''He just kind of moved his
feet and lay there.''

Explaining a new video that shows a detainee writhing as Private Sivits tries to
cut off a pair of handcuffs, he said Specialist Graner had attached them so
tightly, the detainee's hands were turning purple. ''I personally thought he was
going to lose his hands,'' he said.

Another new photograph taken by Specialist Graner showed a 19-year-old Iraqi
woman exposing her breasts. Private Sivits said that Specialist Graner said he
had tried to photograph her pubic area but that she would not let him.

Asked to explain photos of detainees masturbating, Private Frederick said
Specialist Graner ''said it was a present for our birthday.'' Soldiers also said
commanders explicitly told them not to take photographs.

Mr. Womack, Specialist Graner's lawyer, said that the photos were part of a plan
to force information from detainees and that government officials blamed his
client only after the pictures set off outrage around the world.

Over and over, he said, military intelligence complimented Specialist Graner.
''The M.I.'s and other folks came to him and said, 'You're doing a great job,
keep it up,''' Mr. Womack said. The jury, all men, listened intently to the
testimony. Specialist Graner betrayed little emotion inside the courtroom but
smiled and joked outside. Walking in Monday morning, he told Reporters: ''We're
going to find out what kind of a monster I am today.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialist Charles A. Graner in Fort Hood, Tex., during a break
yesterday in his court-martial. (Photo by LM Otero/Associated Press)(pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
PRISONS (89%); SEX SCANDALS (89%); SCANDALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); JURY TRIALS
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (79%); CRIMINAL
ASSAULT & BATTERY (79%); MILITARY COURTS (79%); WITNESSES (79%); MISCONDUCT
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CHEERLEADING (77%);
LAWYERS (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); CORRECTIONS
WORKERS (73%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (70%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%); TERRORISM
(59%); EXERCISE & FITNESS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Courts-Martial; Photography; Recordings (Video); United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
Terrorism; Computers and the Internet; Electronic Mail

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Charles A (Specialist) Graner; Guy Womack

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (65%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             738 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. to Commemorate Holocaust

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 405 words


The United Nations said yesterday that it would hold a special session of the
General Assembly on Jan. 24 to mark the 60th anniversary of the liberation of
the Nazi concentration camps, the first time it has officially commemorated the
event.

Stephane Dujarric, a spokesman for Secretary General Kofi Annan, said the United
Nations had never held such a high-level remembrance of the Holocaust, in which
six million Jews and millions of others, including Poles, Soviet citizens, gays
and Gypsies, were killed or held in Nazi labor camps.

The announcement came after a majority of the United Nations' 191 members
responded favorably to a poll in a letter from Mr. Annan. The original request
for the special session was made by the United States, Russia, the European
Union, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.

Mr. Dujarric called the session especially significant because the United
Nations ''was founded as the world was learning the full horror of the camps,
and is dedicated to doing everything in its power to protect human dignity and
prevent such horror from happening again.''

Until now, the United Nations, partly because of the antipathy of Arab and
Muslim countries for Israel, had refrained from commemorating the Holocaust.

Dan Gillerman, the Israeli ambassador, said he was especially gratified that
several Arab and Muslim nations, including Pakistan, Bangladesh, Oman and
Morocco, were among the 111 that had supported the session. He said that Egypt,
Saudi Arabia, Jordan and some others had still not responded, but that the
deadline was not until Thursday.

''This is a historic event that will be a milestone in United Nations history,''
he said.

Auschwitz, the infamous Nazi death camp in Poland, was liberated by Allied
forces on Jan. 27, 1945. In a letter to Mr. Annan, John C. Danforth, the
departing United States ambassador, urged that the session be held three days
before the anniversary so the commemoration would not conflict with Poland's.

Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, author and Auschwitz survivor, will
be a speaker at the session. In a telephone interview, from St. Petersburg,
Russia, he said the United Nations' acknowledgment of the Holocaust's importance
meant the organization was ''now open to the voice of memory, a cognitive theme
of my generation, so that future generations can be preserved from such crimes
against humanity.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); GENOCIDE (90%);
JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); ANNIVERSARIES (90%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (90%); EMBASSIES
& CONSULATES (78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%); NOBEL PRIZES (66%); AWARDS & PRIZES (66%) Nazi Policies
Toward Jews and Minorities; Concentration Camps

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%) United Nations

PERSON: Judith Miller

CITY: SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (77%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (92%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); POLAND (91%); NEW ZEALAND (79%); JORDAN (79%); MOROCCO
(79%); CANADA (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); EGYPT
(79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (71%); CENTRAL EUROPE (56%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             740 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Chile: Bail For Pinochet

BYLINE: By Larry Rohter (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 94 words


An appeals court authorized Gen. Augusto Pinochet's release from house arrest on
bail of $3,500 in connection with a case in which the 89-year-old former
dictator has been ruled fit to stand trial on 10 counts of kidnapping and
murder. But the same panel unanimously refused a request by an Argentine judge
that General Pinochet also be stripped of his blanket immunity from prosecution
in order to be questioned in another murder case, that of the 1974 assassination
in Buenos Aires of his predecessor as military commander, Gen. Carlos Prats.
Larry Rohter (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); BAIL (90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); VERDICTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (88%); ARRESTS
(88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (87%); IMMUNITY (86%); APPEALS COURTS (86%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); GENOCIDE (84%); MURDER
(57%) Politics and Government; Bail; Kidnapping; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts

PERSON: Larry Rohter; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (93%); ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: Chile

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             741 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 50 words


An obituary of the civil rights leader James Forman yesterday misstated a word
in describing his call, in 1969, for reparations to be paid by Protestant and
Jewish groups for the crimes of slavery. Mr. Forman asked for $500 million for
crimes perpetrated against generations of blacks, not ''by'' them.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(88%) Blacks; Correction Stories; Deaths (Obituaries); Biographical Information;
Reparations

PERSON: James Forman

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             746 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 72 words


A front-page article on Thursday about legislation restricting the use of
extreme interrogation measures by American intelligence officers referred
incorrectly to the release of a letter in which Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser, opposed the legislation. While the letter was indeed provided
on Wednesday in response to requests by The New York Times, it was initially
made public as a White House news release on Oct. 19.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); TERRORISM
(59%) Correction Stories; Law and Legislation; Intelligence Services; Prisoners
of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament
and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (87%) Condoleezza Rice

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq; United States

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             749 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Soldier Found Guilty In Iraq Prison Abuse Case

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: THE VERDICT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1425 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex., Jan. 14


The Army reservist accused of being the ringleader in the Abu Ghraib prison
abuse scandal was found guilty on all charges by a military jury here Friday
night, a year to the day after the Pentagon began an investigation into
photographs showing Iraqi detainees bound and brutalized or forced into sexually
humiliating positions.

The jury of 10 soldiers deliberated for five hours before convicting the
reservist, Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., of assault, conspiracy,
maltreatment of detainees, committing indecent acts, and dereliction of duty, as
well as one battery count that the jury reduced from assault.

The jury chose to move immediately into the sentencing phase of the trial Friday
night, hearing testimony from prosecution and defense witnesses -- one side
arguing that Specialist Graner was a patriotic soldier and a devoted son, the
other that his violent actions had permanently damaged the military and the
nation, as well as the lives of Iraqis who were abused.

The judge, Col. James Pohl, dismissed the jury Friday night and said he would
reconvene it on Saturday morning to finish hearing testimony and begin
deliberations on a sentence. Specialist Graner, a 36-year-old former prison
guard from Western Pennsylvania, had faced 17 and a half years in prison, and
with the reduced count now faces 15. His lawyers told the judge that Specialist
Graner would give a statement to the jury on Saturday.

Specialist Graner is the first soldier to face a contested court-martial in the
abuse scandal, which began after another reservist slipped a CD with the
photographs under the door of Army investigators at Abu Ghraib in the dark of
night, telling them when the investigation began the next day that he feared
Specialist Graner would abuse prisoners again. The photographs leaked out in
April, setting off a wave of international outrage against the United States as
well as nine high-level Pentagon investigations into reports of abuse of
detainees in Iraq and Afghanistan and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The prosecutor, Capt. Chris Graveline, urged jurors for a guilty verdict in his
closing arguments, saying: ''It will speak volumes to the accused. It will speak
volumes to our Army. It will speak volumes to our country. It will speak volumes
to the world.''

Specialist Graner, who chatted and smiled through much of the week, stood at
attention and showed no emotion as the jury foreman read the verdict. His
parents, who sat behind their son throughout testimony and expressed their love
for him before television cameras, also showed no reaction.

The jury heard from 23 witnesses, but not from Specialist Graner, despite early
statements from his lawyers that he would testify because he was the best person
to explain the acts seen in the photographs.

Friday night, the prosecution opened the sentencing phase by presenting three
witnesses who spoke to Specialist Graner's bad discipline and the damage caused
by the abuse.

Specialist Matthew Wisdom, 21, who served with Specialist Graner in the 372nd
Military Police Company, based in Maryland, told how he had entered the Army
wanting to pursue a career in the military. ''But after this, I don't,'' he
testified.

Specialist Wisdom, who came upon Specialist Graner and other soldiers jumping on
a pile of detainees, said he also stopped pursuing a criminal justice degree in
college.

Hussein Mutar, an Iraqi who arrived at Abu Ghraib after Iraqi policemen accused
him of car theft and ended up in the pile that Specialist Wisdom saw, spoke on
videotape about his pain and humiliation.

He testified earlier in the week about how, after jumping on him, Specialist
Graner and other guards ordered him to strip, masturbate and simulate oral sex,
and then photographed him and led him back to a cell they had soaked with water,
where he had to sleep naked.

''The Americans came to free the Iraqi people from Saddam -- I didn't expect
this was going to happen,'' he said. ''When they first came, it appeared that
they were good, but this incident changed the entire picture of what Americans
look like.''

''I think I'm going to have an emotional breakdown -- I wanted to try to kill
myself,'' he said. ''My friends, my family, people in my neighborhood all know
about this matter. How would I go and see these people?''

The defense, under military law, is allowed more latitude in calling witnesses
to offer mitigating evidence and had a longer list of witnesses, who began
speaking last night.

The defense did not say whether Specialist Graner would testify.

His mother, Irma Graner, testified, recalling her son's youth outside
Pittsburgh, his graduation with honor from Marine Corps training at Parris
Island, and his love for his children.

''I have medical problems, and if I needed my son to take me to the doctor or do
anything, all I had to do was call him, he was there lickety split,'' she said.
''I never had an ounce of problems with him growing up. He's a wonderful son,
he's kind, he's gentle, he'll do anything for anybody, and he's not the monster
he's being made out to be. To this day I get many calls from strangers that
think he's a hero, and in my eyes, he'll always be a hero.''

His father, Charles A. Graner Sr., wept as he recalled how he and his son had
made plans to go fishing when he returned from Iraq. When the scandal broke, he
said, he knew ''it was going to be postponed.''

''How long it's postponed is up to you,'' he told the jury. ''I'd get down and
beg, but I know he wouldn't want me to do it, so I won't.''

The defense also presented testimony from Sgt. Kenneth Davis, who spoke of
Specialist Graner as a ''faithful'' soldier who helped hand out Bibles to
Iraqis.

Michael John Zavada, Specialist Graner's former supervisor at a prison in
Pennsylvania, where Specialist Graner went to work shortly after getting out of
the Marines after the Persian Gulf war, said, ''He was very disciplined, he was
very easy to train.'' Mr. Zavada had chosen him for a special team that dealt
with difficult prisoners, saying Specialist Graner was ''way above average.''

Brian Cassidy, another supervisor, said Specialist Graner sometimes supervised
prisoners on death row and performed ''on a professional level at all times.''

But Mr. Cassidy also acknowledged that Specialist Graner was fired from the
prison for disobeying a direct order not to leave his shift. He said he had to
pick up his children, Mr. Cassidy said, and later got his job back.

Throughout the trial, Specialist Graner's lawyers argued that he had been
following orders to treat detainees harshly, and that the photographs resulted
from these orders. They argued that he was taking the fall for higher officers
-- some of whom have been implicated in Pentagon investigations, though none
have been charged.

But even defense witnesses admitted under questioning from the prosecution that
there had been no orders for the acts seen in the photographs.

Prosecutors portrayed Specialist Graner as a sadistic thug, abusing detainees
for the fun of it.

In closing arguments, they read his words to friends at the prison and from
e-mail messages sent home, in which he boasted about beating and bloodying
detainees.

''These are the words that give you insight and context into his actions,''
Captain Graveline said. ''These are the words that give a frame to the photos
taken at Abu Ghraib.''

Specialist Graner is one of seven soldiers to be charged in the Abu Ghraib
scandal. Three have pleaded guilty, including Specialist Jeremy C. Sivits, who
agreed last May to testify against the others. Three others have yet to face a
court-martial, including Lynndie R. England, who was seen in photographs holding
a leash attached to the neck of a naked Iraqi detainee.

                             --------------------


Soldier Convicted in Teen's Death

 BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 14 (AP) -- A United States military judge convicted an Army
sergeant of murder and sentenced him to a year's imprisonment Friday in the
death of an injured Iraqi teenager that was described as a mercy killing.

Staff Sgt. Jonathan J. Alban-Cardenas of Inglewood, Calif., was convicted of
shooting the wounded 16-year-old. Witnesses say the teen was found with severe
burns and abdominal wounds in a burning truck.

The Americans decided that the boy was beyond help and that ''the best course of
action'' was to put him ''out of his misery,'' a criminal investigator has said.

Staff Sgt. Johnny M. Horne Jr., also with the Fort Riley, Kan.-based 41st
Infantry regiment, was sentenced to three years in prison after pleading guilty
in the same killing.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr. after the verdict yesterday. He
was found guilty of abusing detainees at a prison in Iraq. (Photo by LM
Otero/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); SEX SCANDALS
(90%); ARMIES (90%); SCANDALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); PRISONS (89%); SENTENCING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); TERRORISM (71%); GENOCIDE (70%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (68%) United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Terrorism; Reserves (Military); Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Fort Hood (Tex); Photography

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Charles a Jr (Specialist) Graner

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (67%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             750 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

When the Price for Speaking Out Is Death

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ: CANDIDATES;
Pg. 10

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 15


Wijdan al-Khuzai would not give in.

The threats came usually by cellphone, a sinister voice promising a terrible end
if Ms. Khuzai pursued a seat in Iraq's national assembly. Sometimes, as she
drove around Baghdad, she would glance into the rear-view mirror and notice that
another car was following her.

''Terrorists,'' she would say, snapping her cellphone shut.

Then she would get on with her campaign, a quest she hoped would ultimately
raise the prospects of Iraqi women. Ms. Khuzai, a 40-year-old mother of five,
saw in the elections on Jan. 30 a rare moment to steer her country in a more
humane direction. She was determined to make the most of it.

''Wijdan always said, 'If you have a goal, go after it, and don't let anything
stop you,''' recalled her sister, Nada. ''She thought God would save her.''

The Americans found Wijdan al-Khuzai's body on Dec. 24, on the airport highway,
a grim stretch rife with insurgents. Ms. Khuzai had been shot five times, once
in the face. Her shoulder blades had been broken, and her hands had been cuffed
behind her back so tightly that her wrists bled.

''The police said she had been tortured,'' said her brother, Haider Jamal
al-Khuzai.

Ms. Khuzai's fate is indicative of the risk borne by nearly all the 7,400
candidates in this country, where the prospect of democratic elections has
inspired insurgents to embark on a new wave of intimidation. The violence has
sent most of the candidates into hiding. Few have publicly identified
themselves.

For all the violence that engulfs this land, Ms. Khuzai's death stands out. She
had begun her campaign on behalf of Iraq's women in the 1990's, helping to open
a woman's center in Hilla, in the south, where she distributed food and other
help to widows and mothers.

Ms. Khuzai caught the attention of Saddam Hussein's agents, who showed up one
day in 1995 and suggested that she become an informant.

''She refused,'' said her brother, and fled to the Kurdish region in the
northeast, beyond the control of Mr. Hussein's government. She stayed there,
away from her family, until the Americans toppled Mr. Hussein in April 2003.

When Ms. Khuzai returned, she got right back to work, taking up the cause for
women's rights. As elections neared, she was asked by one of the new political
parties, the Independent Progressive Movement, to become a candidate. In the
weeks before her death, she was one of the few candidates to openly promote her
candidacy, moving about and speaking of her plans, always without guards.

Ms. Khuzai disappeared on Dec. 23, just after the leaving her parents' home in
Ghazaliya, a predominantly Sunni neighborhood in western Baghdad known for its
fierce opposition to the American-backed occupation.

Hers is not the only death that her politically active family has had to endure.
About a week after her death, Ms. Khuzai's brother in law, Jinan Al-Khuzai, was
killed as well. He had been a member of a local advisory board in Sammara.

Nada Khuzai says she is confident she will one day find her sister's killers.
But she is less optimistic about the fate of her country.

''My sister figured that if she didn't do it, then no one would,'' Nada said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wijdan al-Khuzai, in a photo held by her son Ali Mousa. (Photo
by Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES
(78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); ASSASSINATION (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(76%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); POLITICS (75%); WOMEN (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (71%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (70%); SHOOTINGS
(66%) Elections; Legislatures and Parliaments; Assassinations and Attempted
Assassinations; United States Armament and Defense; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%) Dexter Filkins; Widjan Al- Khuzai; Jinan Al-
Khuzai; Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Sammara (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             754 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

81 Afghans Freed by U.S.; First Step in Broad Amnesty

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Douglas Jehl contributed reporting from Washington for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Jan. 16


The United States military released 81 Afghan prisoners from detention on Sunday
in what Afghanistan's chief justice, Fazel Hadi Shinwari, described as the first
stage of a reconciliation program under which many suspected Taliban fighters
held by the Americans might be freed during the coming months.

In an effort to end the insurgency by fighters for the Taliban movement, which
was ousted three years ago, the Afghan government has promised former Taliban
supporters an amnesty and a place in public life if they renounce violence and
return to a peaceful life. President Hamid Karzai has said he will seek to
prosecute only the top leadership of the movement -- about 100 people.

Their release was arranged by a senior adviser to Mr. Karzai, and by Mr.
Shinwari, who addressed the men in Kabul on Sunday before they were fed and sent
home.

In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Col. Barry Venable, said the United
States military had nothing to add to the announcements made by the Afghan
government. Unlike those who were transported to the American detention facility
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the Afghan prisoners released Sunday never left
Afghanistan, and defense officials said that for that reason Washington would
defer to Kabul in announcements about their release.

Col. David Lamm, chief of staff for the American military in Afghanistan, was
quoted by Agence France-Presse as saying that the release was a gesture of
reconciliation ahead of Muslim holidays this week. ''President Karzai has
indicated on many occasions this notion of a national forgiveness or
reconciliation,'' he was quoted as saying. ''If that occurs we would suspect
that many of the foot-soldier Taliban would be able to come back in and
reintegrate with Afghan society and participate in the peaceful democratic
political process.''

Some of the detainees were not seen as high-level threats to the 18,000 troops
led by the United States military who are stationed in the country, Colonel Lamm
was quoted as saying. Some had been arrested because they had been at the scene
of attacks on American or Afghan troops, he said. After the Taliban failed in
its effort to disrupt the election for president in October in any major
fashion, there have been signs that the American military is preparing to scale
down its offensive operations against those fighters in the southern and eastern
parts of the country. The Afghan government at the same time is clearly eager to
respond to the complaints of communities where American forces have continued to
raid houses and make arrests. Many families have complained that American troops
have detained innocent people on false information.

Most of the detainees interviewed Sunday on their release from detention at
Bagram Air Base, near Kabul, denied any involvement with the Taliban and
contended that they had been wrongly detained. Some had been held at Bagram for
as long as two years.

Some complained of mistreatment at the hands of American forces. Shah Alim 19,
from the eastern province of Kunar, said he was detained for six weeks at the
United States special forces base in Kunar, where another detainee died in
custody in 2003. ''They tortured me there and poured cold water on me and
prevented me from sleeping,'' he said. He was later sent to Bagram, where his
treatment was much better, he said.

Among the men released were two local officials, a former police chief and a
district chief, and the brother of a militia commander who remains in detention.
Others said they were farmers and shopkeepers.

They arrived from Bagram for a formal ceremony at the Supreme Court building in
central Kabul in a fleet of buses. Looking subdued and drawn, they wore orange
socks and black jackets, apparently parting gifts from the United States
military.

In his address to them, Mr. Shinwari called on them not to bear a grudge and to
accept their fate as coming from God.

What had happened to them was a result of 30 years of war and upheaval in
Afghanistan, and the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States, he
said.

The chief justice said the government was working to win the release of all
Afghan prisoners being held by the Americans in Afghanistan and in the American
detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. He said discussions were under way
with American officials. ''It is part of our reconciliation process,'' he said.

He said 400 men remained in detention in Afghanistan.

In Washington, Pentagon officials have acknowledged in recent weeks that
three-quarters of the 550 or so prisoners at Guantanamo are no longer seen as
having useful intelligence information and that they were no longer being
interrogated. Some of those prisoners may be released in coming months,
depending on what arrangements can be worked out with their home countries, the
officials have said. But the Pentagon has signaled that it expects to continue
to hold a large number of prisoners indefinitely at Guantanamo, and is nearing a
final decision on a proposal to spend at least $25 million to construct a more
permanent, long-term prison to house detainees on the base.

At least a few of those detained in Guantanamo are thought to be senior Taliban
commanders and could be charged with crimes committed against their own people
if they are returned to Afghanistan, said Patricia Gossman, author of several
human rights reports on Afghanistan.

The strategy of releasing large numbers of prisoners may be risky as the country
prepares for parliamentary elections this summer, which the Taliban leaders have
already said they would try to disrupt. A handful of detainees released earlier
from Guantanamo have rejoined the insurgency against government and American
forces.

Yet Afghan officials contend that fear of retribution and imprisonment has led
many former members of the Taliban to continue their insurgency, and that if
allowed to return home, they would give up the fight. ''If they stay away, they
will always be against us,'' said Zaher Qadir, commander of the Border Guards in
eastern Afghanistan. ''They need to come home and find something to do.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); AMNESTY (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ARRESTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
POLITICS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); NAVIES (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
PARDONS (72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (70%);
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (50%); ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (50%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Guantanamo Bay
Naval Base (Cuba); Amnesties and Pardons

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (54%)

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (79%) Carlotta Gall; Hamid (Pres) Karzai; Fazel Hadi (Chief
Justice) Shinwari

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             757 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: 2 Jailed In Srebrenica Massacre

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 157 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia handed down a
genocide conviction, just its second, and sentenced a former Bosnian Serb army
commander to 18 years in prison for his role in the 1995 massacre of more than
7,000 Muslim boys and men near the Bosnian town of Srebrenica. The judges ruled
that because the commander, Col. Vidoje Blagojevic, above, knew the mass murder
was being planned and helped transfer the captive men to where they were killed,
he was guilty of complicity in genocide, one step short of the full weight of
the charge of genocide. His co-defendant, Maj. Dragan Jokic, was found guilty of
murder, extermination and persecution and was given a nine-year sentence. The
judges said that while he did not take part in the massacre, he sent equipment
and men to dig mass graves. Prosecutors had asked for a term of up to 20 years
for Mr. Jokic and 32 years for Mr. Blagojevic.   Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); VERDICTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); ARMIES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(88%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences
(Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Dragan (Lt Col) Jokic; Vidoje (Col) Blagojevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             762 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Refugee's Tale of Abuse Dissolves Upon Later Scrutiny

BYLINE: By EDWARD WYATT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 795 words


Testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in July 2003 about the
rebuilding of Iraq, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz told the story of
Jumana Michael Hanna, an Iraqi woman who had recently come to the Coalition
Provisional Authority in Baghdad with a tale of her horrific torture at the
hands of Saddam Hussein's regime.

Ms. Hanna's tale -- more than two years of imprisonment that included being
subjected to electric shocks, repeatedly raped and sexually assaulted -- was
unusual in that she was willing to name the Iraqi police officials who
participated in her torture, ''information that is helping us to root out
Baathist policemen who routinely tortured and killed prisoners,'' Mr. Wolfowitz
said.

But Ms. Hanna's story, which 10 days before Mr. Wolfowitz's testimony had been
the subject of a front-page article in The Washington Post, appears to have
unraveled. Esquire magazine, in its January issue, published a lengthy article,
by a writer who was hired to help Ms. Hanna produce a memoir, saying that her
account had all but fallen apart.

And yesterday, The Post itself published a follow-up article saying that Ms.
Hanna, who was granted refugee status by United States officials on the basis of
her claims of imprisonment, torture and sexual abuse, ''appears to have made
false claims about her past, according to a fresh examination of her
statements.''

The articles in Esquire and The Post concluded that none of Ms. Hanna's
allegations about torture could be verified. Sara Solovitch, the author of the
Esquire article, wrote that the law under which Ms. Hanna was supposedly
imprisoned in Iraq never existed.

And the Post article, by Peter Finn, the correspondent who wrote the original
article in 2003, quoted several of Ms. Hanna's in-laws as saying that Ms.
Hanna's husband, who she previously said had been executed in the same prison
where she was tortured, was still alive.

David Hoffman, the foreign editor of The Post, said in an interview yesterday
that the newspaper would very likely continue its reporting on the subject,
including trying to determine how Ms. Hanna got refugee status and gained entry
into the United States.

''Clearly this is not the bottom of it,'' Mr. Hoffman said. ''We did feel that
it was time to publish what we found.''

The apparent debunking of Ms. Hanna's story raises questions about her embrace
by officials from the Coalition Provisional Authority, who in the summer of 2003
were eager to find Iraqis who would testify to some of the atrocities that the
United States had used as a reason to attack Iraq. People involved in the
investigation of her story for the authority told Ms. Solovitch that the case
was given high priority by top American officials.

Calls to Ms. Hanna yesterday were not returned. She is living in Chicago, where
she moved this month from northern California. It was there that she spent
several weeks talking to Ms. Solovitch, who had been recruited by a literary
agent to help Ms. Hanna put together a book proposal about her life.

In August of last year, as Ms. Solovitch began to try to verify details about
Ms. Hanna's experiences, inconsistencies began to appear. An Iraqi doctor who
examined her at the request of American authorities discounted her story of rape
and abuse, Ms. Solovitch reported. A National Guardsman who was assigned to
investigate Ms. Hanna's claims of a mass grave in the yard of the police academy
in Baghdad turned up some cow bones but nothing else. All nine of the men who
had been arrested on Ms. Hanna's word had been released for lack of evidence,
the Esquire article reported, with some of them being compensated for wrongful
imprisonment.

Officials at the State Department, the successor agency to the Coalition
Authority in Baghdad, and the Defense Department did not return phone calls
seeking comment yesterday, which was Inauguration Day in Washington.

The Post article yesterday said Mr. Finn met Ms. Hanna in July 2003 at the Human
Rights Society of Iraq in Baghdad and later accompanied her on a tour of the
police academy that had served as a prison under Mr. Hussein.

He interviewed her three times before the publication of the initial article,
''in the company of an Iraqi interpreter and a Post correspondent who spoke
fluent Arabic,'' The Post said.

Mr. Hoffman, the Post editor, said the newspaper was not aware of the potential
problems in her story until the Esquire article appeared. He said The Post's
original interviews ''were quite extensive, and we did do some due diligence
with her family.''

In retrospect, he said, it was an error not to include a disclaimer in the
original article noting that The Post was unable to independently verify her
allegations of abuse.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); REFUGEES (90%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (90%); TORTURE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); WRITERS (89%); FOREIGN
POLICY (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLICE FORCES (77%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(77%); CORRECTIONS (76%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%);
INVESTIGATIONS (70%) Asylum (Political); Torture; Sex Crimes; Hoaxes; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (56%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: Washington Post; Esquire (Magazine)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (78%) Edward Wyatt; Jumana Michael Hanna; Saddam (Pres)
Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             766 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Raves for Authors With a Solid Grasp of Serb Atrocities

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Belgrade Journal; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia


Milorad Ulemek, a first-time novelist, has been quite a success. In just two
weeks, his novel about the war in Bosnia, ''Iron Trench,'' has sold close to
70,000 copies, a record in Serbia, according to the publisher, Mihailo Vojnovic.

While pleased with sales, Mr. Vojnovic, the director of M Books, concedes that
the novel's success may have less do with its content than with its author's
notoriety.

Milorad Ulemek is Serbia's most infamous paramilitary soldier, a man who rights
groups say was responsible for some the worst atrocities in the Yugoslav wars of
the 1990's. He is more commonly known by his nom de guerre, Legija -- literally
''of the legion,'' from his time in the French Foreign Legion. He also
occasionally adopts the surname Lukovic, which he took from his former wife.

As a nationalist writer, though, he faces some competition. Dr. Radovan
Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs during the 1992-95 Bosnian conflict
and the man most wanted by the United Nations war crimes tribunal, has also
written a novel. And just this week, another former president of the Bosnian
Serb republic, Biljana Plavsic, who is in a Swedish prison serving a sentence
for war crimes, released her book about the war.

While Ms. Plavsic's book is the only one that sheds any light on the events of
the war, it is the other two that have prompted the most acclaim here.
Nationalist admirers of Mr. Ulemek and Dr. Karadzic have declared their works
masterpieces of Serbian literature, comparable in style to the works of Albert
Camus and James Joyce. Dr. Karadzic's ''The Miraculous Chronicle of the Night,''
published in October, was short-listed for Serbia's top literary award, the
Golden Sunflower.

Such comparisons have provoked indignation among more liberal commentators. Dr.
Karadzic, a psychiatrist by profession, is widely regarded by diplomats and
historians as the chief architect of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, while Mr.
Ulemek is seen as one of the policy's principal executioners.

Most commentators are agreed on one thing: the rave reviews for both novels
reflect the near mythic status still accorded here to the nationalist figures of
the 1990's, men who helped tear Yugoslavia apart in wars that killed more than
250,000 people.

Both authors managed to produce their books while on the run from various
authorities. The war crimes tribunal in The Hague believes Dr. Karadzic has been
on the move between Bosnia, Serbia and Montenegro. It is not clear how the
manuscript found its way to the publishers.

Mr. Vojnovic says Mr. Ulemek's common law wife passed on the manuscript shortly
after he surrendered to the Serbian police last year in Belgrade. A former
commander of the Serbian secret police's military branch, the Red Berets, Mr.
Ulemek is on trial not for war crimes but for the assassination of Prime
Minister Zoran Djindjic, who was shot and killed outside his office in March
2003.

Neither the accusations nor Mr. Ulemek's war record have deterred readers like
Ljiljana Tanic. ''It's a philosophical novel, quite similar to Camus's 'Plague,'
that shows Ulemek's understanding of human suffering,'' said the bespectacled
67-year-old, who works in a Belgrade bookstore.

The novel tells the story of a Serbian soldier lying critically wounded in a
trench. While blatantly anti-Muslim in tone, it questions what was gained by the
war in Bosnia. The dedication reads, ''To all my compatriots, those who are gone
and those who live questioning the meaning of their sacrifice.''

The book appears to reveal a previously unrecognized intellectual streak in Mr.
Ulemek, although some critics have questioned whether the former paramilitary
actually wrote it. ''I think the last piece of writing Legija did was his school
homework,'' said Zarko Trebjesanin, a psychology professor at Belgrade
University.

Dr. Karadzic's reputation as a writer is more firmly established. ''The
Miraculous Chronicle of the Night'' is his fourth publication since he went into
hiding in 1996. Other recent works include a children's book, a selection of his
poetry and a play. This is his first novel, and is centered on Sarajevo in
1980-81. The hero is an engineer who, like Dr. Karadzic, is sent to prison at
the time of Tito's death.

''It's like Joyce's 'Dubliners,''' said Momo Kapor, an artist who illustrated
Dr. Karadzic's children's book and a member of the Committee to Protect the
Truth of Radovan Karadzic, a Karadzic support group. ''It is equal to the best
pages in Serbian literature.''

Mr. Kapor said he sees Dr. Karadzic as belonging to a long tradition of writers
like Ezra Pound or Oscar Wilde, brilliant authors who were frequently condemned
by their contemporaries.

''We would have lost many precious pieces of literature if we ignored condemned
authors,'' he added.

Praise like this has angered rights activists, concerned that almost a decade
after the end of the war in Bosnia accused war criminals are being treated like
heroes. Natasha Kandic, director of the Humanitarian Law Center, a rights
organization based in Belgrade, said foreign publishers should have boycotted
the Belgrade book fair in October to protest the venue being used to launch Dr.
Karadzic's novel.

However, for readers like Ms. Tanic, the two novels provide a view that echoes
their own, depicting Serbia as the victim of an international conspiracy.

''People abroad don't know about us,'' she said. ''They are representing us as
wild people. They don't know who we really are. These books tell the truth.''

According to Ms. Kandic, that sense of victimization will linger as long as the
government refuses to confront Serbia's role in the wars of the 1990's. ''We
don't have a strong enough public opinion that will offer an alternative story,
or politicians who can offer an alternative view of Serbia,'' she said.

As for Mr. Vojnovic, Mr. Ulemek's publisher, he believes sales of ''Iron
Trench'' can only increase. ''When he is sentenced there will be an even bigger
demand,'' he said. Two more books by Mr. Ulemek are due to be published this
spring.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Luka Karadzic, brother of Dr. Radovan Karadzic, displays Dr.
Karadzic's fourth book since he went into hiding after the war in Bosnia. (Photo
by Ivan Milutinovic/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); WRITERS (91%); BOOK
REVIEWS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PUBLISHING (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); LITERATURE
(78%); COHABITATION (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); HISTORY (73%);
ASSASSINATION (72%); SENTENCING (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(70%); LIBERALISM (70%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (68%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (66%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (64%); LIBERAL MEDIA (62%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Assassinations and Attempted
Assassinations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Radovan Karadzic; Milorad Ulemek; Zoran (Prime Min)
Djindjic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (55%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%);
MONTENEGRO (93%); FRANCE (56%); NETHERLANDS (55%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             771 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1063 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-7

$300 Million Mystery Arises In Iraqi Election
According to officials, $300 million in cash was taken out of Iraq's central
bank earlier this month and sent to Lebanon to buy tanks and weapons from
international arms dealers for the Iraqi Army. But exactly where the money went,
and for precisely what, remains unknown. The money's disappearance became an
issue in Iraq's election campaign, generating accusations between Iraq's defense
minister and a rival.   A1

At least 16 Iraqis were killed and dozens were wounded in separate car bomb
attacks outside a mosque in Baghdad and near a wedding party south of the
capital, according to Iraqi government and hospital officials. With just over a
week before national elections, the wave of violence that officials had
predicted appeared to be gaining momentum.   A6

The abuse of Iraqi civilians by British soldiers at a base near Basra arose out
of an effort to stop persistent looting of relief supplies, the commanding
officer of the accused soldiers said at a British court-martial hearing on the
three men.   A6

More Than Tsunami Aid
Scattered reports of Christian aid workers from America proselytizing in Sri
Lanka, Indonesia and India are arousing concerns that the good will spread by
the American relief efforts could be undermined by resentment and that there
could be a violent backlash.   A1

A Move to Stop Attacks in Gaza
Palestinian security forces in modest numbers took up positions in northern Gaza
with orders from their new president, Mahmoud Abbas, to prevent militant groups
from firing mortars and Qassam rockets at Israeli settlements and towns.   A3

Conviction Reversed in Ireland
A Dublin appeals court overturned the conviction of Colm Murphy, the only person
jailed in connection with a 1998 car bombing in Northern Ireland that killed 29
people, saying the trial court failed to fully address tainted evidence. The
court ordered that he be retried later this year.   A7

NATIONAL   A8-13;16

Administration Releases Drug Benefit's Rules
The Bush administration unveiled rules for the new Medicare drug benefit that
guarantee patients access to a wide range of medicines while giving insurance
companies potent tools to control costs.   A11

Farmers Offered Amnesty
The Environmental Protection Agency said it would shield operators of large
livestock operations from prosecution for air pollution violations if they
participated in a new program to collect emissions data.   A8

A.C.L.U. Won't Pursue Action
The executive committee of the American Civil Liberties Union decided against
disciplinary action against two dissident board members.   A8

Search for Oil Slick in Pacific
An oil slick floating somewhere along a 90-mile stretch of Southern California
coastline has killed more than 700 sea birds.   A8

Complicity to Misconduct
The United States attorney's office strongly disputed arguments of government
misconduct and complicity in a human smuggling disaster that killed 19 in 2003,
saying that the border agents who stopped a trailer in South Texas had no idea
it held 74 illegal immigrants.   A13

New Drilling Planned in Alaska
Citing a need for energy, the government plans to open for exploratory oil and
natural gas drilling thousands of acres on Alaska's North Slope that have been
protected for decades because of migratory birds and caribou.   A16

A Teddy Bear Uproar
A teddy bear that has its paws restrained by a straitjacket has caused an uproar
in Vermont, where the bear is made by a popular company. The state's governor,
medical professionals, and mental health advocates say that the bear represents
an extreme and painful image of mental illness.   A8

Religion Journal   A13

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Ground Zero Developers Contribute to Pataki Group
Developers heavily involved in rebuilding Ground Zero gave unusually large
donations to a Virginia-based political action committee set up to burnish Gov.
George E. Pataki's national reputation.   B1

'Pay to Play' Ban Rebuked
A federal judge in New Jersey ruled that the federal government has the right to
withhold highway aid as long as the state enforces a ban on awarding contracts
to businesses that contributed to candidates or political parties.   B1

Where People Drink
It may not come as news to those who pour for a living, but New Yorkers drink a
lot, a new study by the city's Health Department shows. But what may not be so
obvious is that New Yorkers in some neighborhoods drink more than those in
others.   B1

Weiner Returns Donations
Representative Anthony D. Weiner will return $9,250 from his mayoral campaign
because of questions over whether the donations, some of which came in the form
of money orders, are in compliance with city campaign finance rules.   B1

Design Deadline Postponed
The Lower Manhattan Development Corporation has postponed by several months the
design deadline for a performing arts center at the new World Trade Center.   B3


SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

ARTS   B7-20

OBITUARIES   B6

John Hess
A journalist, essayist and author whose often provocative, even cranky, opinions
on subjects from food to the First Amendment appeared in The New York Times,
books and radio commentary, he was 87.   B6

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

F.C.C. Chief to Leave
Michael K. Powell, who has overseen the Federal Communications Commission during
a time when he sought to roll back regulation among telephone, television and
high-speed Internet services, announced that he would be stepping down from the
agency in two months.   A1

Fannie Mae Denies Bonuses
Fannie Mae, the buyer of home mortgages, said that it would deny its top
executives their 2004 bonuses and that it had replaced its controller. The
board's decision is the latest step in efforts to overhaul Fannie Mae.   C1

USAir Union Accepts Cut
Members of the machinists' union at US Airways voted in favor of $269 million in
wage and benefit cuts, completing the airline's efforts to win contract
concessions.   C4

New Designs for Humvees
Stung by criticism that its Humvees and transport vehicles are out of step with
fighting an insurgency in Iraq, the Army is looking closely at its next
generation of vehicles.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: A proposal to end poverty; Marylanders' right to know; nautical
nonsense; Helene Cooper on the silent majority in the Mideast.

Columns: David Brooks, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Bridge   B19
Crossword   B18
TV Listings   B20
Weather   A12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); MISCONDUCT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); DISASTER RELIEF (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (87%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (87%); PHARMACY BENEFITS (85%);
ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES (77%);
SMUGGLING (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
TSUNAMIS (74%); MEDICARE (74%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(72%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (72%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); NATURAL
DISASTERS (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); HOSPITALS (69%); APPEALS COURTS
(67%); PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE (66%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (66%); HEALTH
CARE ACCESS (65%); EMISSIONS (64%); COASTAL AREAS (64%); INSURANCE (60%);
FACTORY FARMS (60%); AIR POLLUTION (60%); OIL EXPLORATION (60%); ENVIRONMENT &
NATURAL RESOURCES (60%); AIR QUALITY (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (53%)

CITY: DUBLIN, IRELAND (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (92%); LEBANON (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (91%); INDIA (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); INDONESIA (79%); SRI LANKA (79%); IRELAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             772 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Major Says Looting Led to Abuse Of Prisoners

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ: COURT-MARTIAL;
Pg. 6

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: OSNABRUCK, Germany, Jan. 21


The abuse of Iraqi civilians by British soldiers at a base near Basra, which has
riveted British public opinion and provoked widespread condemnation, arose out
of an effort to stop persistent looting of relief supplies, the commanding
officer of the accused soldiers said at a British court-martial hearing on
Friday.

Testifying in the trial of three men accused of assaulting and sexually
humiliating detained Iraqi civilians, the officer, Maj. Dan Taylor, described a
desperate situation in which every other effort to stop the looting at Camp
Bread Basket, near the southern city of Basra had failed, and local residents
were telling the British troops simply to shoot them.

Major Taylor testified that he ordered his men to ''round up as many men as we
could, work them for an hour or so, and then release them,'' according to a
report by the British Press Association.

When asked by a prosecutor why he gave the order, Major Taylor replied: ''In an
effort to stop looting that was rife within the Bread Basket camp, and there did
not appear to be any other way we could prevent that looting, short of doing
what the locals wanted us to do, which was shoot people. ''I have to say what we
did failed because, if anything, the looting got worse,'' he said.

But Major Taylor, pressed by a lawyer for one of the accused men, persistently
denied that he had intended for any of his men to torment the Iraqi prisoners.
He denied that he was responsible for their actions.

The case, being heard at a British military base in this town in western
Germany, involves charges against Lance Cpl. Mark Cooley, 25, Cpl. Daniel
Kenyon, 33, and Lance Cpl. Darren Larkin, 30, accused of assaulting and abusing
Iraqi prisoners. One of the men, Corporal Larkin, has admitted to one charge of
assaulting an Iraqi man, but all three defendants deny the main charges.

In earlier sessions, the military jury of seven British officers was shown
photographs of abuse echoing similar images of abuse by American prison guards
at the Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad. The photographs in the British case show
Iraqi soldiers naked and seemingly forced to perform simulated sex acts with one
another while British soldiers pretend to punch and kick them.

All of the charges relate to events at a base known as Camp Bread Basket, near
Basra, which was under the control of the First Battalion, Royal Regiment of
Fusiliers, commanded by Major Taylor. According to Major Taylor, looting was a
problem, with Iraqi civilians, sometimes armed with knives or even hand
grenades, pilfering aid supplies.

''Initially we chased looters off,'' said Major Taylor, sitting alone at the
witness stand in his olive green uniform. ''If the soldiers saw them, they
chased them, and they would hop over the wall and run off.

''On the occasions we captured them,'' Major Taylor said, ''we took them to a
prisoner of war place in another of our locations.'' But that method proved to
be ineffectual, he said, because the military police simply released the
detained people on the grounds that they were not really prisoners of war.

So, Major Taylor said, he devised a different plan, code-named Operation Ali
Baba, taken from the name given to looters by local people. On the day in
question, May 15, 2003, some 22 Iraqis were taken into custody, forced to work
for an hour or so cleaning up the camp, and then released. It was that day that
the abuse took place.

Both the prosecution and the defense in the British case agreed Friday that the
order to ''work'' the looting suspects was a clear violation of the Geneva
Conventions, which prohibit an occupying power from forcing civilians to work
without pay.

But the court learned that a British general who investigated the Camp Bread
Basket incident had decided against bringing charges against Major Taylor. ''I
believe that you acted with well-meaning and sincere but misguided zeal,'' the
officer, Brig. Gen Nick Carter, wrote in a letter to Major Taylor that was read
out in court on Friday.

                             --------------------


5 Danes to Stand Trial

 COPENHAGEN, Jan. 21 (Reuters) -- A Danish intelligence officer and four
military police sergeants will be tried for abuse of Iraqi prisoners at a Danish
camp in southern Iraq, the Danish Army said Friday.

Reserve Capt. Annemette Hommel and the four soldiers could face up to one year
in prison if found guilty of breaking military law during interrogations last
year.

Captain Hommel, 37, was sent home in July, before her tour of duty was up, after
colleagues complained about the way she interrogated prisoners. She has denied
the abuse.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TESTIMONY
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); MILITARY BASES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(77%); WITNESSES (77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); GUILTY PLEAS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); LAWYERS (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(72%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (72%); GENOCIDE (71%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(71%); TERRORISM (59%) Looting; Prisoners of War; Courts-Martial; Armament,
Defense and Military Forces; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Richard Bernstein; Dan (Maj) Taylor; Mark (Lance Cpl) Cooley; Daniel
(Cpl) Kenyon; Darren (Lance Cpl) Larkin

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); UNITED STATES (79%); GERMANY (68%)

REGION: Iraq; Osnabruck (Germany); Iraq; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             776 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2005 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Atrocities in Plain Sight

BYLINE: By Andrew Sullivan.

Andrew Sullivan is a senior editor at The New Republic and a columnist at Time.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4353 words



THE ABU GHRAIB INVESTIGATIONS
The Official Report of the
Independent Panel and Pentagon on the Shocking Prisoner Abuse in Iraq.
Edited by Steven Strasser.
Illustrated. 175 pp.
PublicAffairs. Paper, $14.

TORTURE AND TRUTH
America, Abu Ghraib,
and the War on Terror.
By Mark Danner.
Illustrated. 580 pp.
New York Review Books.
Paper, $19.95.

IN scandals, chronology can be everything. The facts you find out first, the
images that are initially imprinted on your consciousness, the details that then
follow: these make the difference between a culture-changing tipping point and a
weatherable media flurry. With the prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib, the
photographs, which have become iconic, created the context and the meaning of
what took place. We think we know the contours of that story: a few soldiers on
the night shift violated established military rules and subjected prisoners to
humiliating abuse and terror. Chaos in the line of command, an overstretched
military, a bewildering insurgency: all contributed to incidents that were alien
to the values of the United States and its military. The scandal was an
aberration. It was appalling. Responsibility was taken. Reports were issued.
Hearings continue.

But the photographs lied. They told us a shard of the truth. In retrospect, they
deflected us away from what was really going on, and what is still going on. The
problem is not a co-ordinated cover-up. Nor is it a lack of information. The
official government and Red Cross reports on prisoner torture and abuse,
compiled in two separate volumes, ''The Abu Ghraib Investigations,'' by a former
Newsweek editor, Steven Strasser, and ''Torture and Terror,'' by a New York
Review of Books contributor, Mark Danner, are almost numbingly exhaustive in
their cataloging of specific mistakes, incidents and responsibilities. Danner's
document-dump runs to almost 600 pages of print, the bulk of it in small type.
The American Civil Liberties Union has also successfully engineered the release
of what may eventually amount to hundreds of thousands of internal government
documents detailing the events.

That tells you something important at the start. Whatever happened was exposed
in a free society; the military itself began the first inquiries. You can now
read, in these pages, previously secret memorandums from sources as high as the
attorney general all the way down to prisoner testimony to the International
Committee of the Red Cross. I confess to finding this transparency both
comforting and chilling, like the photographs that kick-started the public's
awareness of the affair. Comforting because only a country that is still free
would allow such airing of blood-soaked laundry. Chilling because the crimes
committed strike so deeply at the core of what a free country is supposed to
mean. The scandal of Abu Ghraib is therefore a sign of both freedom's endurance
in America and also, in certain dark corners, its demise.

The documents themselves tell the story. In this, Danner's book is by far the
better of the two. He begins with passionate essays that originally appeared in
The New York Review of Books, but very soon leaves the stage and lets the
documents speak for themselves. His book contains the two reports Strasser
publishes, but many more as well. If you read it in the order Danner provides,
you can see exactly how this horror came about -- and why it's still going on.
As Danner observes, this is a scandal with almost everything in plain sight.

The critical enabling decision was the president's insistence that prisoners in
the war on terror be deemed ''unlawful combatants'' rather than prisoners of
war. The arguments are theoretically sound ones -- members of Al Qaeda and the
Taliban are not party to the Geneva Convention and their own conduct violates
many of its basic demands. But even at the beginning, President

Bush clearly feared the consequences of so broad an exemption for cruel and
inhumane treatment. So he also insisted that although prisoners were not legally
eligible for humane treatment, they should be granted it anyway. The message
sent was: these prisoners are beneath decent treatment, but we should still
provide it. That's a strangely nuanced signal to be giving the military during
wartime.

You can see the same strange ambivalence in Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld's decision to approve expanded interrogation techniques in December
2002 for Guantanamo inmates -- and then to revoke the order six weeks later. The
documents show that the president was clearly warned of the dangers of the
policy he decided upon -- Colin Powell's January 2002 memo is almost
heart-breakingly prescient and sane in this regard -- but he pressed on anyway.
Rumsfeld's own revocation of the order suggests his own moral qualms about what
he had unleashed.

But Bush clearly leaned toward toughness. Here's the precise formulation he
used: ''As a matter of policy, the United States Armed Forces shall continue to
treat detainees humanely and, to the extent appropriate and consistent with
military necessity, in a manner consistent with the principles of Geneva.'' (My
italics.)

Notice the qualifications. The president wants to stay not within the letter of
the law, but within its broad principles, and in the last resort, ''military
necessity'' can overrule all of it. According to his legal counsel at the time,
Alberto R. Gonzales, the president's warmaking powers gave him ultimate
constitutional authority to ignore any relevant laws in the conduct of the
conflict. Sticking to the Geneva Convention was the exclusive prerogative of one
man, George W. Bush; and he could, if he wished, make exceptions. As Assistant
Attorney General Jay S. Bybee argues in another memo: ''Any effort to apply
Section 2340A in a manner that interferes with the president's direction of such
core war matters as the detention and interrogation of enemy combatants thus
would be unconstitutional.'' (Section 2340A refers to the United States law that
incorporates the international Convention Against Torture.)

The president's underlings got the mixed message. Bybee analyzed the relevant
statutes against torture to see exactly how far the military could go in
mistreating prisoners without blatant illegality. His answer was surprisingly
expansive. He argued that all the applicable statutes and treaty obligations can
be read in such a way as to define torture very narrowly. Bybee asserted that
the president was within his legal rights to permit his military surrogates to
inflict ''cruel, inhuman or degrading'' treatment on prisoners without violating
strictures against torture. For an act of abuse to be considered torture, the
abuser must be inflicting pain ''of such a high level of intensity that the pain
is difficult for the subject to endure.'' If the abuser is doing this to get
information and not merely for sadistic enjoyment, then ''even if the defendant
knows that severe pain will result from his actions,'' he's not guilty of
torture. Threatening to kill a prisoner is not torture; ''the threat must
indicate that death is 'imminent.' '' Beating prisoners is not torture either.
Bybee argues that a case of kicking an inmate in the stomach with military boots
while the prisoner is in a kneeling position does not by itself rise to the
level of torture.

Bybee even suggests that full-fledged torture of inmates might be legal because
it could be construed as ''self-defense,'' on the grounds that ''the threat of
an impending terrorist attack threatens the lives of hundreds if not thousands
of American citizens.'' By that reasoning, torture could be justified almost
anywhere on the battlefield of the war on terror. Only the president's
discretion forbade it. These guidelines were formally repudiated by the
administration the week before Gonzales's appearance before the Senate Judiciary
Committee for confirmation as attorney general.

In this context, Rumsfeld's decision to take the gloves off in Guantanamo for
six weeks makes more sense. The use of dogs to intimidate prisoners and the use
of nudity for humiliation were now allowed. Although abuse was specifically
employed in only two cases before Rumsfeld rescinded the order, practical
precedents had been set; and the broader mixed message sent from the White House
clearly reached commanders in the field. Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, in charge
of the Iraq counterinsurgency, also sent out several conflicting memos with
regard to the treatment of prisoners -- memos that only added to the confusion
as to what was permitted and what wasn't. When the general in charge of
Guantanamo was sent to Abu Ghraib to help intelligence gathering, the
''migration'' of techniques (the term used in the Pentagon's Schlesinger Report)
from those reserved for extreme cases in the leadership of Al Qaeda to thousands
of Iraqi civilians, most of whom, according to intelligence sources, were
innocent of any crime at all, was complete. Again, there is no evidence of
anyone at a high level directly mandating torture or abuse, except in two cases
in Gitmo. But there is growing evidence recently uncovered by the A.C.L.U. --
not provided in Danner's compilation -- that authorities in the F.B.I. and
elsewhere were aware of abuses and did little to prevent or stop them. Then
there were the vast loopholes placed in the White House torture memos, the
precedents at Guantanamo, the winks and nods from Washington and the pressure of
an Iraqi insurgency that few knew how to restrain. It was a combustible mix.

What's notable about the incidents of torture and abuse is first, their common
features, and second, their geographical reach. No one has any reason to believe
any longer that these incidents were restricted to one prison near Baghdad. They
were everywhere: from Guantanamo Bay to Afghanistan, Baghdad, Basra, Ramadi and
Tikrit and, for all we know, in any number of hidden jails affecting ''ghost
detainees'' kept from the purview of the Red Cross. They were committed by the
Marines, the Army, the Military Police, Navy Seals, reservists, Special Forces
and on and on. The use of hooding was ubiquitous; the same goes for forced
nudity, sexual humiliation and brutal beatings; there are examples of rape and
electric shocks. Many of the abuses seem specifically tailored to humiliate
Arabs and Muslims, where horror at being exposed in public is a deep cultural
artifact.

Whether random bad apples had picked up these techniques from hearsay or whether
these practices represented methods authorized by commanders grappling with
ambiguous directions from Washington is hard to pin down from the official
reports. But it is surely significant that very few abuses occurred in what the
Red Cross calls ''regular internment facilities.'' Almost all took place within
prisons designed to collect intelligence, including, of course, Saddam Hussein's
previous torture palace at Abu Ghraib and even the former Baathist secret police
office in Basra. (Who authorized the use of these particular places for a war of
liberation is another mystery.) This tells us two things: that the vast majority
of soldiers in Iraq and elsewhere had nothing to do with these incidents; and
that the violence had a purpose. The report of the International Committee of
the Red Cross says: ''Several military intelligence officers confirmed to the
I.C.R.C. that it was part of the military intelligence process to hold a person
deprived of his liberty naked in a completely dark and empty cell for a
prolonged period to use inhumane and degrading treatment, including physical and
psychological coercion.''

An e-mail message recovered by Danner from a captain in military intelligence in
August 2003 reveals the officer's desire to distinguish between genuine
prisoners of war and ''unlawful combatants.'' The president, of course, had
endorsed that distinction in theory, although not in practice -- even in
Guantanamo, let alone Iraq. Somehow Bush's nuances never made it down the chain
to this captain. In the message, he asked for advice from other intelligence
officers on which illegal techniques work best: a ''wish list'' for
interrogators. Then he wrote: ''The gloves are coming off gentlemen regarding
these detainees, Col. Boltz has made it clear that we want these individuals
broken.''

How do you break these people? According to the I.C.R.C., one prisoner ''alleged
that he had been hooded and cuffed with flexicuffs, threatened to be tortured
and killed, urinated on, kicked in the head, lower back and groin, force-fed a
baseball which was tied into the mouth using a scarf and deprived of sleep for
four consecutive days. Interrogators would allegedly take turns ill-treating
him. When he said he would complain to the I.C.R.C. he was allegedly beaten
more. An I.C.R.C. medical examination revealed hematoma in the lower back, blood
in urine, sensory loss in the right hand due to tight handcuffing with
flexicuffs, and a broken rib.''

Even Bybee's very narrow definition of torture would apply in this case. Here's
another -- not from Abu Ghraib:

A detainee ''had been hooded, handcuffed in the back, and made to lie face down,
on a hot surface during transportation. This had caused severe skin burns that
required three months' hospitalization. . . . He had to undergo several skin
grafts, the amputation of his right index finger, and suffered . . . extensive
burns over the abdomen, anterior aspects of the outer extremities, the palm of
his right hand and the sole of his left foot.''

And another, in a detainee's own words: ''They threw pepper on my face and the
beating started. This went on for a half hour. And then he started beating me
with the chair until the chair was broken. After that they started choking me.
At that time I thought I was going to die, but it's a miracle I lived. And then
they started beating me again. They concentrated on beating me in my heart until
they got tired from beating me. They took a little break and then they started
kicking me very hard with their feet until I passed out.''

An incident uncovered by the A.C.L.U. and others was described in The Washington
Post on Dec. 22. A young soldier with no training in interrogation techniques
''acknowledged forcing two men to their knees, placing bullets in their mouths,
ordering them to close their eyes, and telling them they would be shot unless
they answered questions about a grenade incident. He then took the bullets, and
a colleague pretended to load them in the chamber of his M-16 rifle.''

These are not allegations made by antiwar journalists. They are incidents
reported within the confines of the United States government. The Schlesinger
panel has officially conceded, although the president has never publicly
acknowledged, that American soldiers have tortured five inmates to death.
Twenty-three other deaths that occurred during American custody had not been
fully investigated by the time the panel issued its report in August. Some of
the techniques were simply brutal, like persistent vicious beatings to
unconsciousness. Others were more inventive. In April 2004, according to
internal Defense Department documents recently procured by the A.C.L.U., three
marines in Mahmudiya used an electric transformer, forcing a detainee to
''dance'' as the electricity coursed through him. We also now know that in
Guantanamo, burning cigarettes were placed in the ears of detainees.

Here's another case from the Army's investigation into Abu Ghraib, led by Lt.
Gen. Anthony R. Jones and Maj. Gen. George R. Fay:

''On another occasion DETAINEE-07 was forced to lie down while M.P.'s jumped
onto his back and legs. He was beaten with a broom and a chemical light was
broken and poured over his body. . . . During this abuse a police stick was used
to sodomize DETAINEE-07 and two female M.P.'s were hitting him, throwing a ball
at his penis, and taking photographs.''

Last December, documents obtained by the A.C.L.U. also cited an F.B.I. agent at
Guantanamo Bay who observed that ''on a couple of occasions, I entered interview
rooms to find a detainee chained hand and foot in a fetal position to the floor,
with no chair, food or water. Most times they had urinated or defecated on
themselves, and had been left there for 18 to 24 hours or more.'' In one case,
he added, ''the detainee was almost unconscious on the floor, with a pile of
hair next to him. He had apparently been literally pulling his own hair out
throughout the night.''

This kind of scene can also be found at Abu Ghraib: ''An 18 November 2003
photograph depicts a detainee dressed in a shirt or blanket lying on the floor
with a banana inserted into his anus. This as well as several others show the
same detainee covered in feces, with his hands encased in sandbags, or tied in
foam and between two stretchers.'' This, apparently, was a result of
self-inflicted mania, although where the mentally ill man procured a banana is
not elaborated upon.

Also notable in Abu Ghraib was the despicable use of religion to humiliate. One
Muslim inmate was allegedly forced to eat pork, had liquor forced down his
throat and told to thank Jesus that he was alive. He recounted in broken
English:

''They stripped me naked, they asked me, 'Do you pray to Allah?' I said, 'Yes.'
They said 'F / / / you' and 'F / / / him.' '' Later, this inmate recounts:
''Someone else asked me, 'Do you believe in anything?' I said to him, 'I believe
in Allah.' So he said, 'But I believe in torture and I will torture you.' ''

Whether we decide to call this kind of treatment ''abuse'' or some other
euphemism, there is no doubt what it was in the minds of the American soldiers
who perpetrated it. They believed in torture. And many believed it was
sanctioned from above. According to The Washington Post, one sergeant who
witnessed the torture thought Military Intelligence approved of all of it: ''The
M.I. staffs, to my understanding, have been giving Graner'' -- one of the chief
torturers at Abu Ghraib -- ''compliments on the way he has been handling the
M.I. holds [prisoners held by military intelligence]. Example being statements
like 'Good job, they're breaking down real fast'; 'They answer every question';
'They're giving out good information, finally'; and 'Keep up the good work' --
stuff like that.'' At Guantanamo Bay, newly released documents show that some of
the torturers felt they were acting on the basis of memos sent from Washington.

Was the torture effective? The only evidence in the documents Danner has
compiled that it was even the slightest bit helpful comes from the Schlesinger
report. It says ''much of the information in the recently released 9/11
Commission's report, on the planning and execution of the attacks on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon, came from interrogation of detainees at Guantanamo
and elsewhere.'' But the context makes plain that this was intelligence procured
without torture. It also claims that good intelligence was received from the two
sanctioned cases of expanded interrogation techniques at Guantanamo. But
everything else points to the futility of the kind of brutal techniques used in
Iraq and elsewhere.

Worse, there's plenty of evidence that this kind of treatment makes gathering
intelligence harder. In Abu Ghraib, according to the official documents, up to
90 percent of the inmates were victims of random and crude nighttime sweeps. If
these thousands of Iraqis did not sympathize with the insurgency before they
came into American custody, they had good reason to thereafter. Stories of
torture, of sexual humiliation, of religious mockery have become widespread in
Iraq, and have been amplified by the enemy. If the best intelligence comes from
persuading the indigenous population to give up information on insurgents, then
the atrocities perpetrated by a tiny minority of American troops actually help
the insurgency, rather than curtail it.

Who was responsible? There are various levels of accountability. But it seems
unmistakable from these documents that decisions made by the president himself
and the secretary of defense contributed to confusion, vagueness and disarray,
which, in turn, led directly to abuse and torture. The president bears sole
responsibility for ignoring Colin Powell's noble warnings. The esoteric
differences between legal ''abuse'' and illegal ''torture'' and the distinction
between ''prisoners of war'' and ''unlawful combatants'' were and are so vague
as to make the abuse of innocents almost inevitable. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor
wrote for the majority of the Supreme Court in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld that ''the
government has never provided any court with the full criteria that it uses in
classifying individuals'' as enemy combatants. It is one thing to make a
distinction in theory between Geneva-protected combatants and unprotected Qaeda
operatives. But in the chaos of a situation like Iraq, how can you practically
know the difference? When one group is designated as unworthy of humane
treatment, and that group is impossible to distinguish from others, it is
unsurprising that exceptions quickly become rules. The best you can say is that
in an administration with a reputation for clear lines of command and clear
rules of engagement, the vagueness and incompetence are the most striking
features.

Worse, the president has never acknowledged the scope or the real gravity of
what has taken place. His first instinct was to minimize the issue; later, his
main references to it were a couple of sentences claiming that the abuses were
the work of a handful of miscreants, rather than a consequence of his own
decisions. But the impact of these events on domestic morale, on the morale of
the vast majority of honorable soldiers in a very tough place and on the
reputation of the United States in the Middle East is incalculable. The war on
terror is both military and political. The president's great contribution has
been to recognize that a solution is impossible without political reform in the
Middle East. And yet the prevalence of brutality and inhumanity among American
interrogators has robbed the United States of the high ground it desperately
needs to maintain in order to win. What better weapon for Al Qaeda than the news
that an inmate at Guantanamo was wrapped in the Israeli flag or that prisoners
at Abu Ghraib were raped? There is no escaping the fact that, whether he
intended to or not, this president handed Al Qaeda that weapon. Sometimes a
brazen declaration of toughness is actually a form of weakness. In a propaganda
war for the hearts and minds of Muslims everywhere, it's simply self-defeating.

And the damage done was intensified by President Bush's refusal to discipline
those who helped make this happen. A president who truly recognized the moral
and strategic calamity of this failure would have fired everyone responsible.
But the vice president's response to criticism of the defense secretary in the
wake of Abu Ghraib was to say, ''Get off his back.'' In fact, those with real
responsibility for the disaster were rewarded. Rumsfeld was kept on for the
second term, while the man who warned against ignoring the Geneva Conventions,
Colin Powell, was seemingly nudged out. The man who wrote a legal opinion
maximizing the kind of brutal treatment that the United States could legally
defend, Jay S. Bybee, was subsequently rewarded with a nomination to a federal
Court of Appeals. General Sanchez and Gen. John P. Abizaid remain in their
posts. Alberto R. Gonzales, who wrote memos that validated the decision to grant
Geneva status to inmates solely at the president's discretion, is now nominated
to the highest law enforcement job in the country: attorney general. The man who
paved the way for the torture of prisoners is to be entrusted with safeguarding
the civil rights of Americans. It is astonishing he has been nominated, and even
more astonishing that he will almost certainly be confirmed.

But in a democracy, the responsibility is also wider. Did those of us who fought
so passionately for a ruthless war against terrorists give an unwitting green
light to these abuses? Were we naive in believing that characterizing complex
conflicts from Afghanistan to Iraq as a single simple war against ''evil'' might
not filter down and lead to decisions that could dehumanize the enemy and lead
to abuse? Did our conviction of our own rightness in this struggle make it hard
for us to acknowledge when that good cause had become endangered? I fear the
answer to each of these questions is yes.

American political polarization also contributed. Most of those who made the
most fuss about these incidents -- like Mark Danner or Seymour Hersh -- were
dedicated opponents of the war in the first place, and were eager to use this
scandal to promote their agendas. Advocates of the war, especially those allied
with the administration, kept relatively quiet, or attempted to belittle what
had gone on, or made facile arguments that such things always occur in wartime.
But it seems to me that those of us who are most committed to the Iraq
intervention should be the most vociferous in highlighting these excrescences.
Getting rid of this cancer within the system is essential to winning this war.

I'm not saying that those who unwittingly made this torture possible are as
guilty as those who inflicted it. I am saying that when the results are this
horrifying, it's worth a thorough reassessment of rhetoric and war methods.
Perhaps the saddest evidence of our communal denial in this respect was the
election campaign. The fact that American soldiers were guilty of torturing
inmates to death barely came up. It went unmentioned in every one of the three
presidential debates. John F. Kerry, the ''heroic'' protester of Vietnam, ducked
the issue out of what? Fear? Ignorance? Or a belief that the American public
ultimately did not care, that the consequences of seeming to criticize the
conduct of troops would be more of an electoral liability than holding a
president accountable for enabling the torture of innocents? I fear it was the
last of these. Worse, I fear he may have been right.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 23, 2005



CORRECTION: A front-page review in the Book Review today about two books on the
Abu Ghraib torture scandals misstates one title. As shown in the bibliographic
note and the table of contents, Mark Danner's book is ''Torture and Truth,'' not
''Torture and Terror.''


GRAPHIC: Photos: A naked prisoner appears to cower before an unmuzzled dog in a
photograph taken at Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad in late 2003 and leaked to
The Washington Post a few months later. (Photograph by Agence France-Presse, via
Getty Images)
A man detained at Abu Ghraib appears chained to a bed with a woman's underpants
on his head. (Photograph courtesy of The Washington Post)
 A hooded detainee at Abu Ghraib, apparently chained to a door and balancing on
two boxes. (Photograph from Agence France-Presse/The Washington Post)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); TERRORISM (90%); SCANDALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); LITERATURE (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CHRONOLOGIES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); ARMED FORCES
(69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Books and Literature; Reviews; Prisoners of
War; United States Armament and Defense; Books and Literature; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Andrew Sullivan; Steven Strasser; Mark Danner

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             782 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

23 Detainees Attempted Suicide In Protest at Base, Military Says

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 265 words


Twenty-three terror suspects tried to hang or strangle themselves at the
American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in a mass protest in 2003, the
military said yesterday.

Officials had not previously disclosed the incidents, which the military said it
considered ''self-injurious behavior'' intended to get attention rather than
serious suicide attempts.

The coordinated actions were among 350 ''self-harm'' incidents at the prison
that year, including 120 so-called hanging gestures, said Lt. Col. Leon Sumpter,
a spokesman for the detention mission.

In the protest, the 23 prisoners tried to hang or strangle themselves with
pieces of clothing and other items in their cells from Aug. 18 to 26, the United
States Southern Command in Miami said in a statement.

The same year, a rash of suicide attempts occurred after Maj. Gen. Geoffrey
Miller took command of the prison with a mandate to obtain more information from
detainees accused of having ties to Al Qaeda or the former Taliban government in
Afghanistan.

Critics linked the two and denounced the delay in disclosure.

''When you have suicide attempts or so-called self-harm incidents, it shows the
type of impact indefinite detention can have, but it also points to the extreme
measures the Pentagon is taking to cover up things that have happened in
Guantanamo,'' said Alistair Hodgett, a spokesman for Amnesty International's
office in Washington.

Of the 23 men who tried to hang or strangle themselves, 2 required treatment at
a hospital, the military said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUICIDE (91%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%);
NAVIES (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); AL-QAEDA (73%); RIOTS (70%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Suicides
and Suicide Attempts; Demonstrations and Riots; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%); AL-QAEDA (55%); PRISONERS OF WAR
(59%) Amnesty International

PERSON: Geoffrey (Maj Gen) Miller

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             787 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reservist To Offer Guilty Plea In Jail Assault

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ: DETAINEES; Pg.
10

LENGTH: 690 words


An Army reservist at the center of the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal has
agreed to plead guilty in exchange for a promise from prosecutors that he will
spend no more than 18 months in prison.

The commander of the American ground forces in Iraq, Lt. Gen. Thomas F. Metz,
approved a plea agreement yesterday between prosecutors and the reservist, Sgt.
Javal S. Davis, according to a lawyer for Sergeant Davis.

Sergeant Davis was one of seven military police soldiers accused of the abuse
that set off a scandal last year after photographs of detainees in Iraq being
beaten and forced into sexually humiliating poses were made public. He had faced
eight years in prison on charges of aggravated assault, conspiracy,
maltreatment, dereliction of duty and making false statements to investigators.

At a court-martial scheduled to begin Tuesday at Fort Hood, Tex., he will plead
guilty to charges of simple assault and making false statements, said the
lawyer, Paul Bergrin. The trial will then move immediately to the sentencing
phase.

Mr. Bergrin said he hoped his arguments would convince the jury that Sergeant
Davis should not spend any time in jail. He will present evidence, he said,
about deplorable conditions at Abu Ghraib and the stress Sergeant Davis and the
other soldiers suffered from constant mortar attacks and riots. He will also
present depositions from detainees who said Sergeant Davis had treated them
well.

Mr. Bergrin called the agreement ''a deal too good to be true.''

The reservist who the government had said was the ringleader of the abuse,
Charles A. Graner Jr., was convicted, sentenced to 10 years in prison and
discharged from the military two weeks ago.

Three other soldiers from the same company, the 372nd Military Police Company
based in Cresaptown, Md., have agreed to guilty pleas.

The first was Specialist Jeremy C. Sivits, who said he had taken pictures of the
abuse and is serving a year in prison. Specialist Megan Ambuhl, who posed in
photographs, was discharged from the Army but is not serving prison time. Staff
Sgt. Ivan L. Frederick II, also accused of being a ringleader, is now a private
serving an eight-year sentence.

Two other soldiers face courts-martial, Specialist Sabrina Harman and Pfc.
Lynndie England, who was shown in photographs holding a leash around the neck of
a prisoner.

The soldiers all initially defended themselves by saying they had been following
orders. Several investigations that began as a result of the abuse have found
that mistreatment was more widespread than the photographs initially suggested,
and that in some cases, high-ranking officers did know about it. But Mr. Graner,
the first to contest the charges, was unsuccessful in arguing that the soldiers
had been ordered to do the things seen in the photographs, which included naked
and hooded detainees forced to masturbate and stacked in a human pyramid.

A spokesman for the prosecutors, Capt. Chuck Neill, would not confirm the
agreement, although others close to the prosecution did.

Sergeant Davis, 27, was accused of jumping on a pile of about seven hooded
detainees who had been taken to the intelligence wing of Abu Ghraib in November
2003, then stomping on their hands and feet. He left the area after a platoon
sergeant saw him and yelled at him to stop, according to sworn statements from
several soldiers. The photographs were taken after he left the area, so unlike
the other accused soldiers, he does not appear in any and was not accused of
taking any.

When the abuse was reported a year ago, Sergeant Davis first told investigators
he had ''stumbled over'' the detainees and stepped on them unintentionally. The
next day, saying he ''needed to be honest and maintain my integrity,'' he
admitted he had lunged into the pile and stepped on the detainees' hands and
feet ''on purpose.'' He said he was angry because detainees had started a riot
earlier in the day.

''I did what I shouldn't have out of anger,'' he said in his statement.
''However, I did leave the room before going any further. I felt that I needed
to leave before I got myself in trouble. I guess I left too late.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GUILTY PLEAS (92%); ARMED FORCES (91%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (91%); JAIL
SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); PRISONS (90%); ASSAULT & BATTERY
(90%); SEX SCANDALS (90%); ARMIES (90%); SCANDALS (90%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT &
BATTERY (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SENTENCING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY COURTS
(89%); DEPOSITIONS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); MISDEMEANORS (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); RIOTS (71%); MASTURBATION (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences (Criminal);
Courts-Martial; Fort Hood (Tex); Plea Bargaining  ; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Thomas F (Lt Gen) Metz; Javal S (Sgt) Davis

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             791 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Chile: Pinochet Security Chief Taken To Prison

BYLINE: By Larry Rohter (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 133 words


Gen. Manuel Contreras, the feared director of military intelligence during the
dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, was forcibly taken into custody after he
failed to appear before a judge to begin serving a 12-year prison sentence for
his role in the disappearance of a young leftist presumed to have been killed in
1975. General Contreras was said by the police to have brandished a gun at
officers who went to his home to apprehend him and also to have tried to seize
one of the officers' guns, accusations his lawyer denied. Four other former
intelligence operatives also convicted in the case, the first in which officials
have been imprisoned for the disappearance of opponents of the dictatorship,
voluntarily surrendered and were taken to prison to begin their sentences.
Larry Rohter (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ESPIONAGE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); JUDGES (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); LAWYERS (70%); MISSING PERSONS (70%); GENOCIDE (67%); POLITICS (65%)
Sentences (Criminal); Intelligence Services; Missing Persons; Politics and
Government  ; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Larry Rohter; Manuel (Gen) (Ret) Contreras; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

COUNTRY: CHILE (93%)

REGION: Chile

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             792 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Serbian General Agrees to Surrender to War Crimes Tribunal

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, Jan. 28


A retired Serbian general has agreed to surrender to the United Nations war
crimes tribunal in The Hague, where he is wanted for crimes committed by his
troops against ethnic Albanian civilians during the 1999 war in Kosovo.

A government statement released Friday morning said the general, Vladimir
Lazarevic, would fly to the court next week, 15 months after he and three other
senior Serbian generals were indicted.

Analysts said the surrender would be the first indication that the Serbian
government was willing to cooperate with the tribunal after months of inactivity
and, perhaps, was concerned about its increasing international isolation.

The official stance of the government, led by the conservative nationalist
Vojislav Kostunica, is that it will not arrest any war crimes suspects, leaving
it to those who are indicted to turn themselves in.

However, after substantial pressure from the European Union and United States
over the last week, as well as demands for better cooperation within the ruling
coalition government, officials intensified negotiations with two of the four
wanted generals in order to secure their surrender. The government's
announcement followed a meeting between General Lazarevic and Prime Minister
Kostunica on Friday morning.

The government statement said the Serbian government and the prime minister
''personally, all appreciate and respect this patriotic, highly moral and
honorable decision made by General Lazarevic.''

''The Serbian prime minister said he was convinced that by making this decision
General Lazarevic acted in accordance with the long tradition of the Serbian
Army to have its officers always fight for the interest of his people and of his
country,'' the statement read.

Serbia and Montenegro, the name given to the federal state that replaced
Yugoslavia two years ago, has had its applications for membership in the
European Union and NATO's Partnership for Peace program blocked over its refusal
to cooperate with The Hague. The tribunal's focus has been firmly fixed on
Serbia, where it estimates that most of the more than a dozen Serbian war crimes
suspects, including one of the most wanted, Gen. Ratko Mladic, continue to hide.

Serbia's decision not to hand over any suspects at the expense of improved
international relations has left it looking increasingly anachronistic in a
region where most of its former Communist bloc neighbors, including its wartime
enemy Croatia, have a timetable for possible European Union or NATO membership.

A refusal by the European Union's high representative for foreign and security
policies, Javier Solana, to visit Belgrade last week, and a cut of $10 million
in aid by the United States appeared to place additional pressure on the
government to act. A European Union delegation is also in Serbia and Montenegro
making its last visit before publishing the results of a feasibility study on
the country's application for membership.

In addition, the leader of the pro-reformist party G17 Plus, Miroljub Labus, a
crucial partner in Mr. Kostunica's government, stated earlier this week his
intention to withdraw his party from the government unless it began to surrender
war crimes suspects.

Of the remaining three war crimes suspects sought by the court, two, Gen.
Nebojsa Pavkovic, and Gen. Sreten Lukic of the police, live openly in Serbia and
appear frequently in public. The third, Gen. Vlastimir Djordjevic, is believed
to be living in Russia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); INDICTMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
PRIME MINISTERS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%); PUBLIC POLICY
(77%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%) International War
Crimes Tribunal

PERSON: JAVIER SOLANA (52%) Nicholas Wood; Vladimir Lazarevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA
(79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(94%); EUROPE (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); ALBANIA (93%); MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO
(93%); SLOVENIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Albania

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             793 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Lobbies U.N. on Darfur And International Court

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 28


In a fresh strain on relations between the United States and the United Nations,
the Bush administration is vigorously lobbying the Security Council against
assigning the judgment of atrocities in Sudan's conflicted Darfur region to the
International Criminal Court.

The administration has long pushed for action against Sudan's government, saying
its role in the ethnic clashes in Darfur amounted to genocide. But at the same
time, the White House has opposed the International Criminal Court since its
inception, moving to marginalize it on the ground that it could be used to bring
politically motivated prosecutions against American personnel abroad.

The issue has come up now because a United Nations panel -- created in October
at the Bush administration's request and told to determine whether genocide had
occurred in Sudan and to set up methods to determine accountability -- is due to
make its report public next week.

The panel, headed by Antonio Cassese of Italy, a former president of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, is expected to find
that gross violations have occurred that may not be genocide but which the
Security Council should refer to the International Criminal Court for
prosecution.

Almost all of the members of the Council are known to favor that course, and
Secretary General Kofi Annan, who created the commission, has endorsed the
international court as the ''logical place'' for Darfur suspects to be tried.

A British diplomat said Friday that his country and the three other European
nations on the Council, Denmark, France and Greece, were eager to avoid a
confrontation over the issue. But he added, ''If the commission recommends a
referral to the I.C.C., the Europeans would be likely to strongly support it.''

That prospect moved the Bush administration to begin a direct lobbying effort.
On Thursday, Pierre-Richard Prosper, the United States ambassador at large for
war crimes, briefed key countries at the United Nations on the American
position. ''We don't want to be party to legitimizing the I.C.C.,'' he said.

According to diplomats attending the closed session, Mr. Prosper recommended
sending the Darfur charges to a new tribunal to be based at the United
Nations-run war crimes court in Arusha, Tanzania, which is trying suspects in
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. The new court would be administered by the African
Union and the United Nations.

Juan Mendez, Mr. Annan's special adviser on genocide, faulted the American plan
Friday as ill-advised, costly and time-consuming.

''The I.C.C. is in place,'' he said. ''It has very experienced investigators and
prosecutors who can take on the case and don't start from scratch, whereas the
new tribunal would have to start by deciding who would be the president and who
that person would hire as investigators. It seems to me to be a complete waste
of money and time.''

Richard Dicker, a Human Rights Watch director who is an outspoken champion of
the international court, said: ''Let's focus on what's really at stake here. The
delay in the start-up time for a new tribunal will lead to the loss of innocent
lives in Darfur.''

In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. Prosper responded: ''There are lessons
we have learned to date that would allow us to do this in a pretty quick manner,
looking to existing infrastructures. And what is required to save lives is not
debating on accountability mechanisms. What is required is taking action,
fortifying the African Union operations and looking at sanctions as
appropriate.''

Stuart Holliday, a deputy American ambassador to the United Nations, indicated
that there remained room for negotiations. ''We will be engaging with our
Council colleagues and discussing options,'' he said.

The expense of setting up a new tribunal is a serious obstacle for United
Nations member countries that have already pledged more than $500 million to the
tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

Ambassador Cesar Mayoral of Argentina, this month's Security Council president,
said his government backed the international court and would be reluctant to
create a new one in Arusha, where it already has contributed $1 million.

To date, 139 governments have signed the treaty creating the International
Criminal Court, and 97 governments have ratified it. Of the 15 Security Council
members, the four European nations and five others have ratified it, and Russia,
Algeria, the Philippines and Japan have signed the founding treaty. Only China
and the United States have done neither.

The Bush administration's dispute with the United Nations over the court is a
continuing one. The United States succeeded in 2002 and 2003 in gaining immunity
for its troops from prosecution by the international court, but last June it was
forced to withdraw a resolution to extend the exemption another year after it
ran into widespread opposition because of the Abu Ghraib prison scandal in Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LOBBYING
(89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%) United States International Relations; Torture

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL
FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (55%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SUDAN (96%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%); FRANCE (79%); DENMARK (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (79%); GREECE (78%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             801 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Shiite Neighborhood, Residents Brave Explosions to Cast Votes

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE IRAQI ELECTION: THE STREETS; Pg.
9

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 30


Batool Al Musawi hesitated for a single moment.

The explosions had already begun as she rose from her bed early on Sunday. One
after the other, the mortar shells were falling and bursting around the city,
rattling the windows and shaking the walls.

For an instant, Ms. Musawi, a 22-year-old physical therapist, thought it might
be too dangerous to go to the polls.

''And then, hearing those explosions, it occurred to me -- the insurgents are
weak, they are afraid of democracy, they are losing,'' Ms. Musawi said, standing
in the Marjayoon Primary School, her polling place. ''So I got my husband, and I
got my parents and we all came out and voted together.''

Across this corner of Baghdad, in a middle-class, predominantly Shiite
neighborhood called Karada, thousands of Iraqis appeared to make a similar
mental calculation, and thousands, it was clear, had made the same decision.
They poured into the high schools and elementary schools that had been
transformed into polling places, passing through barbed wire, braving threats
and car bombs, all to seize a long-awaited chance to help move their country in
a direction they wanted.

It seemed simple enough, and the ease with which the Iraqis marked their ballots
and dropped them into the box, and the quiet with which they filed out of their
polling places, bespoke a long-suppressed yearning finally set free.

If there were doubts about the ability of ordinary Iraqis to grasp the first
principles of democratic rule, and about their own desire to govern themselves
after decades of tyranny, they seemed to evaporate in the polling places of
Karada.

All through the day, the bombs kept exploding, audible from inside the polling
places. Most of the time, the Iraqis did not even bother to look up, so inured
were they to violence and so immersed in their democratic moment.

''Do you hear that, do you hear the bombs?'' said Hassan Jawad, a 33-year-old
election worker at Lebanon High School, calling over the thud of an exploding
shell. ''We don't care. Do you understand? We don't care.''

''We all have to die,'' Mr. Jawad said. ''To die for this, well, at least I will
be dying for something.''

And then Mr. Jawad got back to work, guiding an Iraqi woman's hand to the ballot
box.

Outside the polling places, the voting itself had a transforming effect, turning
Karada's normally grim and edgy streets into the scene of a party. With
vehicular traffic banned throughout the city, Iraqis walked the streets to their
polling places and then stayed outside, milling about, and laughing and joking
in a way that has rarely been seen in 22 months of occupation and war. Parents
looked on as their children kicked soccer balls. Men and women walked together.

One of the leading candidates for prime minister, Adil Abdul Mahdi, strolled
down Karada's main thoroughfare, unprotected, as he often is, by an armored car
and bulletproof glass.

''Peace be upon you!'' the Iraqis called to him.

The morning opened with a tense and uncertain feel, with American troops and
Iraqi policemen clutching their rifles and staring menacingly.

The first Iraqis on the streets seemed tense as well, not smiling and not waving
back. But as the day unfolded and more and more voters took to the streets, a
momentum seemed to gather. By midmorning Karada's main thoroughfare was jammed
with people who had voted and people on their way to vote.

Some Iraqis, leaving polling places, dialed their cellphones and urged their
friends to come. Some banged on their neighbors' doors and dragged them out of
bed. Old men rolled up in wheelchairs. Women came in groups, lining up in their
long, black, head-to-toe abayas.

The outpouring, which filled Karada's streets with Shiites, Christians and even
some Sunnis, surprised the Iraqis themselves. When Ehab Al Bahir, a captain in
the Iraqi Army, arrived at Marjayoon Primary School, he braced himself for
insurgent attacks. The mortar shells arrived, as he had expected, but so did the
Iraqi voters, which he had not.

''I never expected so many people,'' Captain Bahir said, shaking his head and
looking down a line of Iraqis outside the school. ''I'm in charge of 30 polling
places, and they are all saying the same thing. Hundreds of people are coming
out to vote. One place said that there are already up to a thousand.''

As he spoke, a well-dressed Iraqi man named Rashid Majid, 80, pushed his way
past the guards and stepped through the schoolhouse doors.

''Get out of my way,'' Mr. Majid said, hurrying by. ''I want to vote.''

For all the choices on the ballot -- there were 111 lists of candidates -- the
talk in Karada was less of who might win and who might lose than of the act of
voting itself. And while few Iraqis professed to know exactly how democracy
might end the violence, they seemed certain that they had entered a new and more
decent time.

''We have freedom now, we have human rights, we have democracy,'' Mr. Majid
said. ''We will invite the insurgents to take part in our system. If they do, we
will welcome them. If they don't, we will kill them.''

Not all Iraqis took part in the festivities, or in the voting. Turnout was said
to be lower in the capital's Sunni-dominated neighborhoods like Azimiyah and
Gazalia. Even in Karada, some Iraqis would not take part in elections that they
said had been foisted on them by the Americans.

''It is not fear that prevents me from voting, but the elections themselves,''
said Immad Muneer, 50, sitting on the sidewalk with the friend. ''The candidates
who get elected will not be able to demand that the foreign forces leave our
country. They will be puppets moved by other people.''

Yet for most Iraqis in Karada, the election that came off Sunday seemed the
opposite of the votes that Saddam Hussein had staged before. Indeed, Mr.
Hussein's 34 years of terror seemed to hang over nearly every conversation in
the polling centers on Sunday.

Uday Al Rubaie, a 27-year-old taxi driver once under a death sentence for
spreading Shiite religious leaflets, recalled the voting in 2002, when Iraqis
were asked to vote ''yes'' or ''no'' on retaining Mr. Hussein. Mr. Rubaie said
he showed up late for the voting then, only to find that election workers had
already marked ''yes'' for him. Mr. Hussein claimed to have received 104 percent
of the vote.

When the polls opened Sunday, Mr. Rubaie walked two hours for the chance to cast
his ballot. He walked into Marjayoon Primary School, wiping his brow.

''Look at the sweat on my forehead,'' he said. ''I've come a very long way.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Iraqis en route to the polls in Ramadi yesterday passed
Americans from the First Battalion, 503rd Infantry, who provided security for
the vote. Turnout was low in Ramadi and many other cities in the Sunni triangle.
(Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images)
 Men wait to enter a school to vote in the Karada neighborhood of Baghdad, where
bomb blasts could be heard from polling sites. (Photo by Joao Silva for The New
York Times)Chart/Map: ''Despite Attacks, Iraqis Go to the Polls''An overview of
yesterday's elections.Many cities in the Sunni triangle north and west of
Baghdad, the capital, particularly Falluja, Ramadi and Samarra, had relatively
few voters, although in other areas, like Nineveh Province, more ventured out
than expected.With private cars banned from streets, voters in Anbar Province
walked long distances to polls.Residents crowded polling stations and buses that
delivered people to the polls in Najaf, chanting, ''No to dictatorship, yes to
democracy.''Several Kurdish districts near Mosul never received ballots,
disappointing would-be voters. Kurdish areas in the north had high voter
turnout, as expected.Most insurgent attacks took place in and around Baghdad at
polling sites. As many as 44 people were killed in Iraq yesterday.Map of Iraq
highlighting major cities focuses primarily on the Sunni Triangle.(Source by
News agency reports)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS
(90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); ELECTIONS (77%); CHILDREN (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); HIGH
SCHOOLS (75%); POLITICS (70%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (70%);
SECONDARY SCHOOLS (69%); VEHICLE TRAFFIC (66%); PHYSICAL THERAPY (57%) Bombs and
Explosives; Terrorism; Politics and Government; Elections; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Threats and
Threatening Messages

PERSON: Dexter Filkins

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             803 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: General's Case Over; Another's Begins

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 134 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal sentenced a former Yugoslav general,
Pavle Strugar, to eight years in prison for his role in the 1991 shelling of the
Croatian port of Dubrovnik after Croatia declared independence from
Serbian-dominated Yugoslavia. The court found that while he did not order the
bombing of the city after a three-month siege, he failed to stop it ''when he
could have done so.'' He was also convicted of failing to prevent the
destruction of medieval structures in Dubrovnik's Old Town, a United Nations
World Heritage site since 1979. The court also opened the trial of the former
chief of the Bosnia Army, Sefer Halilovic, on charges of killing Bosnian Croat
civilians in 1993. He is the most senior Bosnian Muslim commander to face a
trial at the tribunal.   Nicholas Wood (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (88%); BOMBINGS (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (71%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Pavle Strugar; Sefer Halilovic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Croatia; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Dubrovnik
(Croatia)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             805 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 887 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Tests Suggest North Korea Sold Uranium to Libya
Scientific tests have led American intelligence agencies and government
scientists to conclude with near certainty that North Korea sold processed
uranium to Libya, bolstering earlier indications that the reclusive state had
exported sensitive fuel for atomic weapons, according to officials with access
to the intelligence.   A1

Causualties of Iraq Election
The victims of election day violence are being hailed by many Iraqis as the
latest martyrs, in a nearly two-year insurgency that has claimed the lives of
thousands.   A1

Nepal's King Assumes Power
Nepal's king dismissed the government and declared a state of emergency, at the
same time effectively cutting the troubled Himalayan nation off from the outside
world by suspending phone, Internet and most air links.   A3

Debate Over Nazi Papers
A Republican senator said he planned to demand a public explanation from the
director of central intelligence about his agency's decision to withhold from a
government working group hundreds of thousands of pages of documents related to
Nazi war criminals.   A9

Sharon's Policy Halted
Israel's attorney general ordered Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's government not
to carry out a policy decision permitting the seizure of East Jerusalem property
owned by Palestinians living in the West Bank.   A8

Sudan Criticizes Report
The leader of the main rebel group fighting the Sudanese government in Darfur
criticized the United Nations over a report that found that while the violence
in the region included atrocities and crimes against humanity, it did not
constitute genocide.   A6

Death Benefits May Increase
The Defense Department proposed nearly doubling death benefit and life insurance
payments to families of soldiers who die in a combat zone, to $500,000, from the
current $262,420.   A11

SPORTSWEDNESDAY   D1-6

Laker Coach May Resign
Rudy Tomjanovich is on the verge of resigning as coach of the Los Angeles
Lakers, less than seven months after he was hired. Two people with insight into
the situation said that Tomjanovich had decided to step down, primarily because
of stress.   D5

DINING OUT   F1-16

Awards Break From Foundation
The James Beard Foundation announced that it had separated its awards program
from the rest of the organization which is struggling to recover from a
financial scandal.   F4

NATIONAL   A12-18

Dean Is Close to Election As Democratic Leader
Howard Dean emerged as the almost assured new leader of the Democratic National
Committee, as one of his main rivals quit the race.   A1

Bush Agenda Rests With Frist
The fate of President Bush's domestic agenda rests, in many ways, with Bill
Frist, the Senate majority leader, who is expected to deliver on an
extraordinarily difficult agenda, including the president's proposal to partly
privatize Social Security.   A14

Medicaid Changes Proposed
The secretary of health and human services called for sweeping changes in
Medicaid that would cut payments for prescription drugs and give states new
power to reduce or reconfigure benefits for millions of low-income people.   A12


Bush administration officials said the new Medicare drug benefit would generally
pay for pills like Viagra when they were medically necessary.   A13

No Filibuster Against Gonzales
Senate Democrats agreed that they would not seek to block the confirmation of
Alberto R. Gonzales as attorney general through a filibuster.   A16

Sonogram's Anti-Abortion Role
In the battle over abortion, opponents say they have discovered a powerful new
tool, sonograms, and over the last 18 months, they have started major
fund-raising campaigns to outfit Christian crisis pregnancy centers with
ultrasound equipment.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

No More Guaranteed Seats On Delta Air Lines Shuttle
Delta Air Lines announced that it would no longer guarantee a seat on the hourly
shuttle connecting New York to Boston and Washington, ending the comfort
generations of East Coast travelers have endured since the 1960's.   A1

Subway Line Restored
Transit officials, announced that service on the A and C subway line is to
resume today after a mysterious fire at the Chambers Street station in Lower
Manhattan crippled service last month.   A1

New York Debt Skyrockets
New York's debt has ballooned from $14 billion in 1990 to $46 billion last year,
or $2,424 for every man, woman and child in the state.   B1

52 Small Schools to Open
Mayor Bloomberg announced a plan to open 52 new small middle and high schools in
September.   B1

EDUCATION   B8

ARTS   E1-12

OBITUARIES   A19

Dr. William H. Crosby Jr.
A hematologist who invented one of the first devices to obtain biopsies of the
bowel, he was 90.   A19

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Bankrupted by Medical Bills
Hundreds of thousands of Americans file for personal bankruptcy each year
because of medical bills -- even though they have health insurance, according to
a study by Harvard University legal and medical researchers.   C1

A Spinoff by Amex
The American Express Company announced that it was spinning off its financial
advisory business in an effort to focus on its card and travel services
operations.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Next steps in Iraq; the costly right to know; class-action lawsuits.


Columns: Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   B10
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SCIENCE NEWS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); GOVERNMENT RESEARCH FUNDING (89%); WAR CRIMES (87%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PRIVATIZATION (78%);
MEDICAID (78%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);
WORLD WAR II (73%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%);
LIFE INSURANCE (69%); SOCIAL SECURITY (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (66%); GENOCIDE
(64%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (58%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (51%); SCANDALS (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS813940 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (51%); SIC8651 POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (51%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (75%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (94%); IRAQ (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (94%);
SUDAN (93%); NEPAL (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             809 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 3, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poland and Auschwitz

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 137 words



To the Editor:

Regarding the 60th anniversary commemoration of the liberation of Auschwitz
(news article, Jan. 27), you write that ''for Poland and other Central European
countries it is both part of a gradual recognition of their complicity in the
killing and an opportunity to draw closer to Europe.''

Reporting from Krakow, your reporter should go to the museum at Auschwitz and
read the documents. He should talk to the thousands of Poles who lived through
Auschwitz who traveled to the ceremony, or talk to the families of the more than
70,000 Poles who died at Auschwitz -- before writing about ''complicity.''

Such a statement can create harmful stereotypes; there should be not a shadow of
a doubt regarding the historical truth about Auschwitz.

Marek Purowski
Press Counselor
Embassy of Poland
Washington, Jan. 27, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ANNIVERSARIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); HOLOCAUST (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); MUSEUMS &
GALLERIES (73%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Concentration Camps;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Marek Purowski

COUNTRY: POLAND (93%); EUROPE (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (72%)

REGION: Poland; Auschwitz (Poland)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             811 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Serbian General Arrives

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 80 words


After intense international pressure, Vladimir Lazarevic, a former Serbian
general charged with war crimes in Kosovo, handed himself over to the United
Nations tribunal and was placed in a prison cell. His decision to turn himself
in after talks with the Serbian prime minister last week is being seen as a sign
that the Belgrade government, albeit reluctantly, is beginning to cooperate in
trying to get indicted war crimes suspects to stand trial at The Hague.
Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); PRIME
MINISTERS (84%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Vladimir (Gen) Lazarevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); KOSOVO (93%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             813 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A New Attorney General

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 116 words



To the Editor:

It was truly a sad day for America when the Senate confirmed Alberto R. Gonzales
as attorney general -- and I say this as a fellow Hispanic who in other
circumstances would have been happy to see another barrier broken (news article,
Feb. 4).

His confirmation sent a message to the world that the United States condones the
use of torture during war. Our nation used to stand for great things, like
freedom and justice and brotherhood. Now, thanks to President Bush and our new
attorney general, it stands for torture.

I hope that as attorney general, Mr. Gonzales will at least try to undo the
damage he has already done to this nation.

David Martinez
San Jose, Calif., Feb. 4, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (95%); LAWYERS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); GENOCIDE (74%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%)
Attorneys General; Prisoners of War; Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) David Martinez; Alberto R
(Atty Gen) Gonzales

CITY: SAN JOSE, CA, USA (50%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             814 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Uganda: War Crimes Cases Advance

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 102 words


Arrest warrants are expected for up to a dozen suspects linked to the civil war
in Uganda, according to a spokesman at the International Criminal Court in The
Hague. The spokesman, Yves Sorokobi, said that war crimes investigations were
well advanced and that charges were expected ''against a small number of top
leaders'' involved in the conflict. The long fight between the government and
rebels in northern Uganda has led to more than 100,000 people dead and more than
1.5 million refugees. The warrants would be the first to be issued by the court,
which became effective on July 1, 2002.   Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); REFUGEES (85%); GENOCIDE (85%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: UGANDA (94%); AFRICA (72%); NETHERLANDS (72%)

REGION: Uganda

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             817 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Police Use Kidnappers' Videos to Fight Crime

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE HAUSER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE CONFLICT IN IRAQ: INSURGENCY;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1301 words

DATELINE: MOSUL, Iraq, Feb. 4


In one scene, the videotape shows three kidnappers with guns and a knife,
preparing to behead a helpless man who is gagged and kneeling at their feet.

In the next, it is one of the kidnappers who is in detention, his eyes wide with
fear, his lips trembling, as he speaks to his interrogators.

''How do I say this?'' says the kidnapper, identified as an Egyptian named
Abdel-Qadir Mahmoud, holding back tears. ''I am sorry for everything I have
done.''

In the first week after the elections, the Iraqi Interior Ministry and the Mosul
police chief are turning the tables on the insurgency here in the north by using
a tactic -- videotaped messages -- that the insurgents have used time and again
as they have terrorized the region with kidnappings and executions.

But this time the videos, which are being broadcast on a local station, carry an
altogether different message, juxtaposing images of the masked killers with the
cowed men they become once captured.

The broadcast of such videos raises questions about whether they violate legal
or treaty obligations about the way opposing fighters are interrogated and how
their confessions are made public.

Since thousands of Iraqi police officers fled their stations here in November
under insurgent attacks, the American military has been working with the Iraqis
to reconstitute the police force in Mosul. But it was not clear if American
advisers had any influence on the decision to use the videos. American military
officials did not have any immediate comment on the practice.

But officials in Mosul, short on manpower, apparently hope the psychological
force of the broadcasts will help undermine the insurgency, making its fighters
appear weak and encouraging citizens to call up with their reactions or
information about those still at large. A program loosely based on ''most
wanted'' crime shows in the United States is also being developed, a Mosul
television official said.

''Because of their confessions and the disgusting things they did, we have
reached our limit,'' said the Mosul police chief, Ahmed al-Jaburi. ''There is no
more patience.''

If nothing more, the confessions, as they are called in the videos, offer a rare
glimpse into how the gangs operate and plot their killings. The videos also try
to divest the terrorists and criminals of their religious platform by
challenging them with questions about Islam.

''These are men who do not fear God,'' an Interior Ministry official said at the
beginning of one of the segments this week. He described the men as Iraqi and
other Arab terrorists. ''Our special forces will crush their filthy heads!''

''We are going to show you some men who have the blood of innocent people on
their hands,'' the official said. ''We are going to show you their confessions,
say their names and those of their leaders, and we expect you to help us find
them.''

Some people said they found the practice of showing the insurgents on television
troubling.

Sarah Leah Whitson of Human Rights Watch said such tactics raised the issue of
whether the people were tortured or otherwise coerced into making the
statements.

Last week the organization issued a report based on interviews in Iraq that
''found the abuse, torture and mistreatment of detainees by Iraqi security
forces to be routine and commonplace,'' said Ms. Whitson, the executive director
of the group's Middle Eastern division. For example, she said, the police often
described detainees as guilty before any trial had occurred and made them
available to journalists to be photographed.

It is not immediately clear what the officials intend to do with the detainees.
Security officials said the men had been detained around Mosul during patrols
based on leads.

Mr. Mahmoud's segment is especially dramatic. At one point it shows three masked
kidnappers dressed in black, standing over their victim. The two on the sides
point weapons at the victim's head as the man in the middle reads a statement.

When he is finished, he hands the paper to someone off camera and, without
hesitation, draws a knife and grasps the victim's chin, pulling it to the side
to expose his neck. The other two lean forward to help.

Then the video pauses. The voice of an Iraqi security official comes on. ''That
is Abdel-Qadir Mahmoud on the left,'' said the official, referring to one of the
masked men. ''And that is Mohammad Hikmat on the right.''

The man identified as Mr. Mahmoud had been shown earlier in the video in a very
different way than when he was displayed masked, armed and acting with bravado
as he helped to kill a man on his knees.

''The coalition forces arrested me last April as one of Saddam's special
forces,'' he said, sporting a scraggly beard, his eyes wide and a crease
furrowing his brow. He was shown from the neck up, a plastic sheet forming a
backdrop behind him.

''I met a man named Sheik Mahdi in jail,'' Mr. Mahmoud said. ''When I was
released, we met again. He was organizing four groups. They hung out at a pool
hall.''

He coughed a few times, then leaned his head on his right hand and put a finger
to his temple as if trying to appear sincere or thoughtful.

''The operations were in the Mahmudiya area,'' he said, referring to a town
south of Baghdad where guerrilla attacks are frequent. ''They killed someone
named Metwalli al-Masri, along with four engineers.''

In another scene, a man who gave his name as Muataz Jawba sat in front of a
tiled wall. The camera was fixed on him from the shoulders up. He was heavyset
and had a thick moustache.

The commentator said he was part of a gang led by the ''prince'' of terrorists,
Khaled Zakia, who was a colleague of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, an associate of Al
Qaeda.

Mr. Jawba's heavy-lidded eyes darted nervously from side to side. Whispering
into a little microphone held to his lips, he said he had pointed out to the
gang a Christian man who worked for the Americans.

''They chose a day to kill him,'' Mr. Jawba said.

The gang went to the man's restaurant and shot him. But they found out he
survived after they sent a scout to the hospital pretending he wanted to donate
blood. They then demanded a $10,000 ransom from the family, which the family
paid, Mr. Jawba said.

''As a group, did you fast and pray?'' the questioner said, referring to two
requirements of practicing Muslims.

''Khaled came and fooled us,'' said Mr. Jawba. ''He said it's jihad, it's
occupation, come help us.''

''Do you call this jihad?'' the interrogator said.

''No,'' Mr. Jawba replied meekly.

''Is Khaled Zakia a religious man?'' the questioner asked.

''He brainwashed us,'' Mr. Jawba said.

Another man was identified as one who pumped bullets into the head of a prone
man with his hands bound behind his back. The commentator said insurgents
thought the victim worked for Americans because a mineral-water bottle was found
in his car.

In another segment, after mentioning that Iraqi security forces had engaged in a
gun battle, an Iraqi official says, as if making a grim public service
announcement: ''This is how we will treat the people beheading you.'' The video
then showed what appeared to be a body covered by a sheet.

Iraqis are invited to call with their reactions and information during the
programs, of which there have been at least three this week. On one broadcast,
emotional citizens called the number imposed over the image of Mr. Jawba on the
screen.

''My nephew was killed a while back,'' said a caller from Dohuk, a Kurdish city
north of Mosul. ''His name was Hassan Ibrahim. Are they the guys who did it?
Please ask them if they killed someone in Sanaa Street in Mosul.''

A woman called up, sobbing. ''Someone murdered my son, Abdel-Salam Hamoodi,''
she said. ''He was murdered near our house. Just ask them if they killed him. I
want you to give me the answer, to ease my heart.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mohammad Hikmat is accused of helping to kill a man on video.
The police are broadcasting his confession to urge Iraqis to report criminals.
(Photo by Warzer Jaff for The New York)(pg. A6)
 The police in Mosul say Abdel-Qadir Mahmoud helped slit a man's throat for a
video promoting the insurgency. Now he is in captivity, and the police hope a
video of him as a cowering prisoner will help catch killers. (Photo by Warzer
Jaff for The New York Times)(pg. A1)Map of Iraq highlighting Mosul: The police
in Mosul have an unusual anti-insurgency tool. (pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (92%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); LOCAL TELEVISION STATIONS (73%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); ARMED FORCES (65%);
RELIGION (64%) Recordings (Video); Prisoners of War; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Confessions; Treaties

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Christine Hauser; Ahmed Al- (Police Chief) Jaburi

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Mosul (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             820 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The C.I.A.'s Files About the Nazis

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

As the principal author who introduced the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act in the
House of Representatives, I am profoundly disappointed that the Central
Intelligence Agency continues to defy this landmark legislation.

Congress has already been obliged to extend the mandate of the Nazi War Crimes
Interagency Working Group once to try to break through the impasse imposed by
the C.I.A.'s reluctance to open files kept secret for more than five decades.

With the C.I.A.'s continuing defiance of the intent of the law verging on the
intractable, Congress should strongly consider extending the mandate of the
Interagency Working Group again in order to ensure compliance. History, and the
memory of the millions who perished in the Holocaust, deserve nothing less than
full disclosure.

CAROLYN B. MALONEY
Member of Congress
14th District, N.Y.
New York, Jan. 31, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HOLOCAUST (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WRITERS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (65%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and
Minorities; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: CAROLYN MALONEY (77%) Carolyn B (Rep) Maloney

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             821 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The C.I.A.'s Files About the Nazis

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 151 words



To the Editor:

Re ''C.I.A. Said to Rebuff Congress on Nazi Files'' (news article, Jan. 30):

The refusal of the Central Intelligence Agency to provide hundreds of thousands
of pages of documents sought by a government working group under a 1998 law that
requires full disclosure of classified records relating to Nazi war criminals
makes it more difficult for those of us who have pleaded with the Vatican to
open its secret archives dealing with the reign of Pope Pius XII during the
Holocaust and post-Holocaust period.

Hidden in the Vatican's archives is the church's role in helping fleeing Nazi
war criminals. Some believe that that the Vatican and the C.I.A., for their own
reasons, collaborated in helping Nazi war criminals obtain refuge in safe
havens.

It is time for both the C.I.A. and the Vatican to open their files dealing with
fleeing Nazi war criminals.

Seymour D. Reich
New York, Jan. 30, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); RELIGION (92%); HOLOCAUST (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); JEWS & JUDAISM (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Classification of Information; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Seymour D Reich

COUNTRY: HOLY SEE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             829 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Following A Paper Trail To the Roots Of Torture

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section E; Column 6; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1826 words



'THE TORTURE PAPERS'
'The Road to Abu Ghraib'
Edited by Karen J. Greenberg and Joshua L. Dratel
Introduction by Anthony Lewis. Illustrated. 1249 pages. Cambridge University
Press. $50.

 As soon as the repugnant photos of torture at Abu Ghraib prison -- the pyramid
of naked prisoners, the groveling man on a dog leash, the hooded man with
outstretched arms -- hit the airwaves and newspaper stands, they became iconic
images: gruesome symbols of what went wrong with the war and postwar occupation
of Iraq, and for many in the Muslim world, the very embodiment of their worst
fears about American hegemony.

They have become a potent propaganda tool for terrorists, and at the same time,
they remain so repellant and perverse that they have served to bolster the ''few
bad apples'' argument -- the suggestion not only that the photographed abuses
were perpetrated by ''a kind of 'Animal House' on the night shift,'' in one
investigator's words, but also that the larger problem was confined, as the Bush
administration has asserted, to a few soldiers acting on their own.

''The Torture Papers,'' the new compendium of government memos and reports
chronicling the road to Abu Ghraib and its aftermath, definitively blows such
arguments to pieces. In fact, the book provides a damning paper trail that
reveals, in uninflected bureaucratic prose, the roots that those terrible images
had in decisions made at the highest levels of the Bush administration --
decisions that started the torture snowball rolling down the slippery slope of
precedent by asserting that the United States need not abide by the Geneva
Conventions in its war on terror.

Many of the documents here have been published before (most notably in Mark
Danner's incisive 2004 volume ''Torture and Truth''), but ''The Torture Papers''
contains some material not collected in earlier books. More important, the
minutely detailed chronological narrative embodied in this volume, which has
appeared piecemeal in other publications, possesses an awful and powerful
cumulative weight. As one of its editors. Karen J. Greenberg, executive director
of the Center on Law and Security at the New York University School of Law,
observes, it leaves the reader with ''a clear sense of the systematic decision
to alter the use of methods of coercion and torture that lay outside of accepted
and legal norms.''

The book is necessary, if grueling, reading for anyone interested in
understanding the back story to those terrible photos from Saddam Hussein's
former prison, and abuses at other American detention facilities.

As this book makes clear, one of the premises that would inform many of the
administration's decisions was an amped-up view of executive power -- the
notion, as Deputy Assistant Attorney General John C. Yoo put it shortly after
9/11 -- that ''the power of the president is at its zenith under the
Constitution when the President is directing military operations of the armed
forces,'' and that he has the authority ''to take whatever actions he deems
appropriate to pre-empt or respond to terrorist threats from new quarters''
whether or not such entities can be ''demonstrably linked to the September 11
incidents.'' Indeed, Justice Department memos suggested that in a war like the
present one, presidential power can override both congressional laws and
''customary international law'': in short, that the president can choose to
suspend America's obligation to comply with the Geneva Conventions if he wishes,
authorize torture or detain prisoners without a hearing.

On Feb. 7, 2002, President Bush signed an order that would have all manner of
unreckoned consequences: ''I accept the legal conclusion of the Department of
Justice and determine that none of the provisions of Geneva apply to our
conflict with al Qaeda in Afghanistan or elsewhere throughout the world.''
Instead, prisoners at Guantanamo Bay were to be designated ''unlawful
combatants,'' who fell under rules that the administration itself would
determine. That included all Qaeda suspects and Taliban detainees, who President
Bush said were not entitled to prisoner of war status, but should instead be
treated ''humanely and, to the extent appropriate and consistent with military
necessity, in a manner consistent with the principles of Geneva.'' In September
2002, a secret C.I.A. study raised questions about the significance of the
Guantanamo detainees, reportedly suggesting that many of them might be low-level
recruits or even innocents swept up in the fog of war.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld would later approve the use of special
interrogation techniques for key terrorist suspects. Eventually techniques
designed to be used on hard-core al Qaeda suspects at Guantanamo migrated to
Iraq, where military intelligence officers told the Red Cross an estimated 70
percent to 90 percent of the detainees had been arrested by mistake.

A second seminal premise embraced by the administration was that the global war
on terrorism represents ''a new paradigm,'' and that this new sort of war
required new sorts of tools. In an interview on Sept. 16, 2001, Vice President
Dick Cheney reworked the means-and-ends equation, asserting that the United
States was going to have to work ''sort of the dark side'' and that ''it's going
to be vital for us to use any means at our disposal, basically, to achieve our
objective.'' Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel at the time, was more
specific; he argued that the ''new paradigm renders obsolete Geneva's strict
limitations on questioning of enemy prisoners.''

There were some dissenting voices. In January 2002, Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell argued that withholding prisoner of war status across the board (instead
of case by case) to al Qaeda and Taliban suspects would ''reverse over a century
of U.S. policy and practice,'' ''undermine the protections of the law of war for
our troops,'' have ''a high cost in terms of negative international reaction''
and ''undermine public support among critical allies.'' His warnings were not
heeded.

Instead, more and more attention was focused on articulating a narrow definition
of torture and proposing strategies to avoid prosecution of American
interrogators. Justice Department and Defense Department memos on this subject
make for chilling reading, and they transport the reader from the sunlit world
of ''democracy'' and ''freedom'' and ''human rights'' frequently invoked by the
president to a dark place located somewhere in the nether latitudes between
Orwell's ''Animal Farm,'' the ''Godfather'' movies and one of Joseph Heller's or
Kurt Vonnegut's black comedies.

Here, lawyerly language is used to draw excruciatingly fine distinctions between
''torture'' and ''cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.'' Bureaucratic charts
are drawn up, detailing 35 types of interrogation techniques, their ''utility''
and their ranking vis-a-vis various torture conventions and American domestic
law. And exacting efforts are made to define torture in the very narrowest of
terms: in an August 2002 memo, Assistant Attorney General Jay S. Bybee wrote
that a victim must experience the sort of pain and suffering ''associated with
serious physical injury so severe that death, organ failure, or permanent damage
resulting in a loss of significant body function will likely result.''

There are discussions about ''the lowest boundary of what constitutes torture,''
a ''risk benefit analysis'' of interrogation techniques and references to
''exceptional techniques'' -- phrases reminiscent of the sort of language used
during the Vietnam War, like ''eliminating assets,'' ''interdictional
nonsuccumbers'' and ''effective delivery of ordnance.''

In addition to such semantic manipulation and parsing of the law, government
lawyers struggled to come up with possible defense strategies. In a 2002 memo,
Mr. Bybee wrote: ''Certain justification defenses might be available that would
potentially eliminate criminal liability. Standard criminal law defenses of
necessity and self-defense could justify interrogation methods needed to elicit
information to prevent a direct and imminent threat to the United States and its
citizens.''

A 2003 Pentagon working group report on detainee interrogations suggested that
''lawfulness will depend in significant part on procedural protections that
demonstrate a legitimate purpose and that there was no intent to inflict
significant mental or physical pain.''

Not surprisingly, the official investigations into the Abu Ghraib scandal
provide a decidedly less panoramic view of the overall situation than this book
does as a whole. As Mr. Danner has pointed out, the investigations tended to
focus on particular aspects of the scandal -- the Taguba Report on the military
police, the Fay-Jones Report on military intelligence, for instance -- and they
also exhibit a reluctance to connect all the dots and explicate the implications
of their findings.

For instance, the Schlesinger Report on Pentagon detention operations concluded
that ''abuses of varying severity'' were ''widespread.'' ''There is both
institutional and personal responsibility at higher levels,'' the report went
on, noting that a lack of resources and failures in postwar planning helped
create serious shortages in ''manning levels'' and a resulting atmosphere of
confusion at Abu Ghraib. Direct responsibility, however, is focused on men and
women on the ground: some incidents of abuse are attributed to ''individual
criminal misconduct;'' others to ''misinterpretations of law or policy or
confusion about what interrogation techniques were permitted.''

Only vague aspersions are cast on the Pentagon's civilian leadership. The report
chirpily concludes that ''while any abuse is too much, we see signs that the
Department of Defense is now on the path to dealing with the personal and
professional failures and remedying the underlying causes of these abuses.''

What happened to higher-up architects and consultants on administration policy?
Mr. Rumsfeld revealed last week that he twice offered to resign over the Abu
Ghraib scandal and was twice turned down by President Bush. Mr. Bybee, who
defined torture as pain equivalent to ''organ failure,'' was nominated by Mr.
Bush to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and took his seat there in 2003.
Michael Chertoff, who in his capacity as head of the Justice Department's
criminal division advised the C.I.A. on the legality of coercive interrogation
methods, was selected by President Bush to be the new secretary of homeland
security. William J. Haynes II, the Department of Defense's chief legal officer,
who helped oversee Pentagon studies on the interrogation of detainees, was twice
nominated by President Bush to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. And Mr.
Gonzales, who used the words ''obsolete'' and ''quaint'' in reference to the
Geneva Conventions, was confirmed last week as attorney general, the nation's
top legal post.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Joshua L. Dratel (Photo by Cambridge University Press)
 Karen J. Greenberg (Photo by Cambridge University Press)(pg. E8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); TORTURE (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (87%); IRAQ
WAR (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); WAR ON TERROR (75%); LAW OF WAR (75%); TERRORISM
(74%); NEWSSTANDS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (70%); LITERATURE (70%); EXECUTIVES (60%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Reviews; Books and Literature; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%) Michiko Kakutani; George W (Pres) Bush; Karen J
Greenberg; Joshua L Dratel

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             834 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Rebuffs U.N. on Trying Darfur War-Crimes Suspects Abroad

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 8


Sudan, rebuking calls for international adjudication of war crimes in its
conflicted Darfur region, said Tuesday that suspects should not be tried out of
the country but judged instead by Sudanese courts.

A report from a United Nations commission last week said the Sudanese judiciary
could not be trusted with the task and recommended that any accused go before
the International Criminal Court in The Hague. The United States has suggested
that the trials should take place in a special tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania,
where cases from the 1994 massacres in Rwanda have been heard.

But Ali Osman Taha, Sudan's first vice president, said: ''We strongly believe
that there are no grounds to warrant taking suspects out of the country. We
strongly feel that such an action would very much help push things down, to
degenerate rather than help people to reconcile.''

Mr. Taha asserted the Sudanese system was ''competent and able and willing to do
justice.''

The names of 51 war crimes suspects are on a sealed list accompanying the United
Nations commission's report on the violence in Sudan and reportedly include
members of the government. It has been accused of financing and equipping Arab
militias held responsible for an ethnic-cleansing campaign that has left up to
two million people homeless and caused the loss of 70,000 lives by United
Nations estimate, and as many as 300,000 according to outside experts.

Mr. Taha made his comments after he and a rebel movement leader, John Garang,
briefed the Security Council on the peace pact they signed last month, ending a
two-decade civil war in southern Sudan.

That accord is being advanced as the basis for constructing peace in Darfur,
which is in Sudan's west. There is also fear that failure to make progress in
Darfur could provoke violence in the south.

In a separate argument against Darfur prosecutions in the near future, Mr.
Garang said that acting to punish killers before achieving peace would be
''putting the cart before the horse, in which case both the cart and the horse
would not move and they would go nowhere.''

Mr. Taha told the Security Council that reconstruction money should start to
flow to Sudan immediately and that all trade sanctions against Khartoum should
be lifted.

His objection further complicated an American effort to speed the judgments of
war crimes in Sudan while avoiding referring them to the international court.
The Bush administration has opposed the court from its inception on the grounds
that it could bring politically motivated actions against Americans abroad.

Following a meeting with Mr. Taha, Stuart Holliday, a deputy United States
ambassador, said, ''I made it clear that we disagree, that we have a belief with
other Council members that we need a strong amount of international involvement
in the accountability process.''

The United States is drawing up a new Sudan resolution but is running into
difficulties over the court dispute as well as possible sanctions against the
Khartoum government, a freeze on the assets of government and rebel leaders, and
a tightened arms embargo.

Reflecting frustration at the continuing delay, Jan Pronk, Secretary General
Kofi Annan's special envoy to Sudan, told the Council that after following
events in Darfur for six months, he could confirm that the government had
neither stopped the violence nor brought offenders to justice despite repeated
demands from the Security Council to do both.

''We must conclude that there is a stalemate,'' he said. ''We urgently need a
breakthrough.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (79%); GENOCIDE
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (72%); PEACE PROCESS (66%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (64%); HOMELESSNESS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%) United
Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); NETHERLANDS (92%); RWANDA (79%);
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             835 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Harrowing Look at a Murderous Institution

BYLINE: By NED MARTEL

SECTION: Section E; Column 4; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 876 words


Free time, by the American definition of the pursuit of happiness, should not be
spent imagining slavery. But PBS's harrowing four hours on this murderous
institution deftly explains who we are and why we can afford so many moments of
rest.

This solemn and exemplary four-part documentary, which is being shown tonight
and next Wednesday on most PBS stations, poses unresolved questions about the
brutality of one man asserting absolute power over another. The economic
benefits that arose from slavery's mass exploitation gave the nation advantages
that it still enjoys. Although regarded as an international beacon for fairness,
the justice system only rarely recognized glaring injustices and barely
challenged codified hatred. And when the Union, led by a president with a slim
mandate, strove to end the system of human property, the bloodiest American war
erupted, with suffering that extends to continuing racial conflicts.

The last time the nation was beckoned to the television for such a consideration
of slavery, there were some happy characterizations to mask the hurt. In 1977's
''Roots,'' the music of Ben Vereen and the beauty of Leslie Uggams occasionally
brightened the grim multigenerational saga. And there was the uplifting
knowledge that the wilted family tree of Kunta Kinte had eventually blossomed,
with the meritocratic success of the author Alex Haley.

In ''Slavery and the Making of America'' there are again dolorous tales of
resilient slaves. They endure the cleaving of families, the indignities of
sexual humiliation, the false hopes of escape. The program re-enacts such
episodes in blurry vignettes, in which the actors' faces are out of focus and
their voices unheard. The calm voices of scholars advance the narration as they
are interviewed on camera and in voice-over. The soothing rasp of the narrator,
Morgan Freeman, patches the pieces together. Thus the story line avoids
crescendo, any spiking of a viewer's emotion that, faced with yet another
downturn, might leave one too depleted to continue.

That would be truer to the hopelessness of these episodes because so many slaves
do not survive. So determined was the slave-owning society to keep its labor
force conscripted and uncompensated that acts of insolence were hideously
punished. After Nat Turner's rebellion, white terrorists -- there's no more apt
description -- rounded up many slaves who were not even disobedient, much less
complicit, and murdered them. Victims' heads were placed on stakes to scare
other slaves into submission.

It is worrisome and easy to have assumed that slavery in this form was a
European import, a bad habit that colonists eventually learned to kick. In fact,
the documentary proves that it was an American innovation, and the trend line
was not toward any improvement in the rights of slaves, even as abolition freed
many in the Northern states. The institution grew more ironclad, the legal
shackles tightened, the cruelty intensified as more American soil was tilled by
slave hands.

The documentary cleverly charts this gradually reduced respect for the slaves as
something that harmed both sides. The program dwells on the biography of Harriet
Jacobs for its epic entanglements with the dark side of slave-owning psyches.
Her master's lust for her inspires hostility from him, when she resists, and
from his wife, who suffers from jealousy and inattention. Another wealthy white
man seems a solution to her crisis, but creates new ones for everyone involved.
Her choices save the lives of her children and result in her own inhumane
self-exile. In many forms, surviving slavery required inventing some reduced
existence between life and death.

Too often popular history has failed to explain the breadth of responses to
enslavement. The slaves were hardly split between supplicant and rebel, the
white man's victim and his enemy. Sometimes there were bargains struck,
betrayals waged, alliances forged. Early on, African slaves and European
indentured servants commiserated in Manhattan taverns, but the laws eventually
invented a distinction: dark skin dictated harsher penalties.

Many slaves developed a keen, nuanced understanding of abuses and grasped the
slim chance of exposing or even ending them. In one inspiring chapter, a
Massachusetts house slave, Mum Bett, learned the language of freedom from those
she served: at her master's table were some drafters of the Declaration of
Independence, and she wondered why the rights they articulated did not extend to
her.

Once she protected a younger slave from being struck with a hot shovel, and she
wore the resulting scar on her forearm as a badge of dishonor for her owner.
When any white person inquired about her injury, she simply said, ''Ask Madam.''
By the end of her story she has sued for and won her liberty, and yet, over the
show's long march, such milestones seem like lessons that have taken far too
long to learn.

'Slavery and the Making of America'
PBS, tonight and next Wednesday night at 9; check local listings.

Dante J. James, Gail Pellett, Chana Gazit and Leslie D. Farrell,
writers/producers/directors; William R. Grant, executive producer; Morgan
Freeman, narrator; score by Michael Whalen and Ellis Hall III. Produced by
Thirteen/WNET New York.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Actors portraying slaves at work on a Southern rice plantation,
from ''Slavery and the Making of America.'' (Photo by Jeremy Lock/WNET)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PUBLIC TELEVISION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); NETWORK TELEVISION (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (78%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (77%);
LABOR FORCE (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); WRITERS (65%); TERRORISM (60%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             836 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Orders Islamic Fund-Raiser Deported

BYLINE: By JOHN M. BRODER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 8


A federal immigration judge on Tuesday ordered a former fund-raiser for a
prominent Islamic charity to be deported, saying his activities posed a threat
to national security.

The judge found that the man, Abdel Jabber Hamdan, who has lived in Orange
County for more than 20 years, knew or should have known that the money he
raised for the Holy Land Foundation was being used to support terrorism. The
government contends that the foundation has funneled more than $12 million to
Hamas and other Palestinian organizations that the United States considers
sponsors of terrorism.

The immigration judge, D.D. Sitgraves, ordered Mr. Hamdan, 44, who has been in
custody since last summer, deported. But Judge Sitgraves said he could not be
sent to Jordan, where he was born in a Palestinian refugee camp, because he
would be at risk of torture by the Jordanian government because he has been
accused by the American authorities of terror-related activities.

Mr. Hamdan's lawyer, Marc Van Der Hout, said he was likely to appeal the
deportation order, saying the government had not proven that Mr. Hamdan had
knowingly aided terrorists.

But Mr. Van Der Hout expressed gratitude that Judge Sitgraves had recognized the
risk of sending Mr. Hamdan back to Jordan.

''We are happy Mr. Hamdan has been granted at least temporary protection from
being returned to Jordan,'' he said, ''as it is clear his life would be in grave
danger there.''

Federal officials shut down the Holy Land Foundation and confiscated its assets
shortly after the September 2001 terrorist attacks. The principal officers of
the foundation, which was based in Dallas and was once the largest Islamic
charity in the United States, were arrested last summer on terrorism-related
charges. The judge in that case ordered the men released on their own
recognizance, saying the government had not proved that they were a national
security risk.

Mr. Hamdan was picked up as part of the same investigation, but was never
charged with a crime. He was instead locked up in a Department of Homeland
Security immigration jail in Los Angeles last August on charges of violating the
terms of his student visa granted 25 years ago. He has lived in the United
States continuously since 1983 and has a wife and six children living here.

He served openly as the Southern California fund-raiser for the Holy Land
Foundation in the 1990's and was active in a mosque. He and others associated
with the charity said it raised money for hospitals, housing and orphanages for
Palestinians living in Israel and did not knowingly funnel money to Hamas or
other terrorist groups.

In its case against him, federal officials produced videotapes of meetings Mr.
Hamdan attended that included members of Hamas and other anti-Israel
Palestinians. Mr. Hamdan said he never condoned violence and had no say in how
the money he raised for the Holy Land Foundation was spent.

Mr. Hamdan's eldest daughter, Yaman, 20, said on Tuesday that she believed that
the government was pursuing the deportation order as a way to pressure her
father.

''They're trying to get him to talk about the H.L.F., even though he doesn't
have that information,'' said Ms. Hamdan, a pre-law student at Chapman
University in Orange, Calif. ''They're holding him on a visa violation that's
more than 20 years old because they want him to provide the evidence against the
others.''

William B. Odencrantz, a senior lawyer at the Department of Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, said he was pleased with Judge Sitgraves's order, although
he said the government might appeal her ruling that Mr. Hamdan not be returned
to Jordan.

''We're pleased the evidence we presented convinced the judge that Hamdan knew
or should have known that the money he was raising as a paid employee of the
Holy Land Foundation was destined for a terrorist organization that engages in
atrocities and human rights violations such as suicide bombings and killing
innocent people,'' Mr. Odencrantz said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rawan Hamdan, 16, and her brother Layth, 13, supporting their
father. (Photo by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); JUDGES (92%); DEPORTATION (92%); RELIGION (91%);
IMMIGRATION (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); FUNDRAISING (90%);
HAMAS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); CHARITIES (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (76%); ARRESTS (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (68%); CHILD RESIDENTIAL HOMES (64%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (54%)
Terrorism; Palestinians; Illegal Aliens; Deportation; Decisions and Verdicts;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%) Holy Land Foundation; Hamas (Militant Group)

PERSON: John M Broder; Abdel Jabber Hamdan; D D (Judge) Sitgraves

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: JORDAN (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); ISRAEL (92%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             840 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Legal Thorn in the Right's Side

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; PUBLIC LIVES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 902 words


THE other day in Brooklyn federal court, the prosecution's witness mentioned the
terrorist killing of an Israeli child. Now, it was time for cross-examination by
the lead lawyer for the Yemeni sheik fighting charges of financing Al Qaeda and
Hamas, the Palestinian militant group.

The lawyer, William H. Goodman, a fringe of gray framing his round face, asked
cordially if there also had been ''Palestinian children who've been shot and
killed.''

Yes, was the answer, there have been tragedies on both sides.

It was not clear whether the maneuver had gotten Mr. Goodman anywhere with the
jury that is to decide the fate of his client, Mohammed Ali Hassan al-Moayad.

But in the courtroom, Mr. Goodman, 64, had once again made the point he has been
making in courtrooms for about 40 years: there just might be another way of
looking at things.

He is a proud relic of the anti-establishment legal tradition. He was virtually
swaddled in the legal wars decades ago over trade unions, the Communist Party
and civil rights. His father, Ernest Goodman, was a prominent left-leaning
lawyer in Detroit.

Sure, Mr. Goodman said in his faded Manhattan office this week on an off day in
the sheik's trial, he had toyed for a while with striking out in some other
direction. But after graduating from the University of Chicago and its law
school, exposure to lawyers he saw as courageous fighters in the causes of the
1960's left him with a fervor for the family business of standing up for the
forgotten and the unpopular.

''If I wanted to be part of the most passionate struggles that were affecting
society and the world,'' he said, ''I could do it as a lawyer.''

Until he moved to New York in 1998, he was a lawyer in Detroit for 33 years and
a thorn in the side of officials there. He handled brutality cases against the
police, challenged prison conditions and won a major damage case by arguing that
the F.B.I. deliberately failed to protect freedom riders who were beaten during
the civil rights movement.

After all those years in Detroit, he said, he was itching for a national legal
canvas. He came to New York as the legal director of the Center for
Constitutional Rights, a group founded by the fiery lawyer William M. Kunstler
and others.

Mr. Goodman's work there, he said, was in familiar territory. Almost instantly
after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, he said, he knew that lawyers with views
like his would be busy for years. The center's lawyers challenged the treatment
of detainees and asserted that the United States government illegally shipped
suspects to countries where they were likely to be tortured to get information
from them.

In an interview at the time, his description of the challenge he said he faced
drew wide attention among lawyers who were critics of the Bush administration.
''My job is to defend the Constitution from its enemies,'' he said in a November
2001 article in The New York Times. ''Its main enemies right now are the Justice
Department and the White House.''

He has been married twice and has six children, ages 11 to 38. Now in the
process of his second divorce, he said he went into private practice in 2003
with a civil rights lawyer, Jonathan C. Moore, because of what he insisted was
the mistaken view that he might make enough money to more easily pay his
children's college tuition.

When a lawyer from Yemen asked him a month before the start of Sheik Moayad's
trial to join a court-appointed defense lawyer, Howard L. Jacobs, Mr. Goodman
said he concluded that taking the sheik's case was just another step along his
familiar road.

''I actually believe in the presumption of innocence,'' he said. Mr. Jacobs had
a mild heart attack just before the trial and Mr. Goodman emerged as the sheik's
lead defense lawyer.

MR. GOODMAN expressed sadness yesterday when he learned that Lynne F. Stewart,
another lawyer who often represents unpopular clients, was convicted of helping
terrorists. ''The motive behind everything Lynne did was to be an effective,
outspoken advocate for her clients,'' he said.

But for all his pedigree as a fighter for the downtrodden, Mr. Goodman's
courtroom style is a little on the temperate side.

In his office, he remembered as ''an artifact of the 70's'' some of the
confrontational oratory he used to use with jurors, such as insisting that the
name officials used for an African-American man charged with being a leader of
the Attica prison uprising was the man's slave name.

In the courtroom these days, where the prosecutors are describing Sheik Moayad
as something akin to Public Enemy No. 1, Mr. Goodman has been more prone to
amiability than table-pounding.

When asked about his legal role models, he did not mention the firebrands of his
profession. Instead, he said he aspired to be like the genial defense lawyer
played by Jimmy Stewart in the 1959 movie ''Anatomy of a Murder.''

In the sheik's case, that could be a tall order. Mr. Goodman acknowledged that
he identified more easily with other clients. Sheik Moayad comes from the
grindingly poor Islamic culture of Yemen, he said, and ''it's harder to put
myself in the shoes of someone from that society.''

But he is trying, he said. And he hopes to convince the jurors that they, too,
might be able to identify with a man the prosecutors say was a partner of
terrorists.

According to Mr. Goodman, anyway, there just might be another way of looking at
things.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: William H. Goodman

GRAPHIC: Photo: WILLIAM H. GOODMAN (Photo by Chester Higgins Jr./The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); LAWYERS (92%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); HAMAS (90%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (87%); CHILDREN (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SHOOTINGS
(73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); LIBERALISM (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (69%); LABOR
UNIONS (67%); POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); TORTURE (66%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL
SCHOOLS (64%); INTERVIEWS (64%) Terrorism; Biographical Information; Finances;
Suits and Litigation; Legal Profession

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); HAMAS (84%); UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (54%) Al Qaeda
(Terrorist Group); Hamas

William Glaberson; William H Goodman; Mohammed Ali Hassan Al- (Sheik) Moayad

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (75%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); ILLINOIS, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); ISRAEL
(92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             841 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2005 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Incendiary in Academia May Now Find Himself Burned

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON; Michelle York contributed reporting from New York for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1109 words

DATELINE: BOULDER, Colo., Feb. 10


Prof. Ward L. Churchill has made a career at the University of Colorado out of
pushing people's buttons, colleagues and students say, clearly relishing his
stance as radical provocateur and in-your-face critic.

Whether it is getting arrested by the Denver police for trying to disrupt
Columbus Day, which Professor Churchill has described as a ''celebration of
genocide'' because of the deaths of Indians that resulted from European
colonization, or ruffling feathers in the faculty lounge, hyperbole and bombast
have always been ready tools in the Churchill kit bag, people here say.

Now many of the offended are pushing back. The storm of controversy that has
blown up around Professor Churchill over his essay about the Sept. 11 attacks,
with its reference to the Nazi Adolf Eichmann -- the ''technocrats'' at the
World Trade Center were ''little Eichmanns,'' Professor Churchill said -- has
turned the professor into a talking point and a political punch line. On
conservative talk radio, on campuses across the country, and especially here in
Boulder, debate about Professor Churchill means debate about freedom of speech,
the solemnity of Sept. 11 and the supposed liberal bias of academia.

Many people here say that the professor -- with his scholarly record under
investigation by the university l and with Gov. Bill Owens, a Republican,
calling for his dismissal -- has become a symbol of academic expression under
fire. Others worry that subjects like Sept. 11 have become ''sacred,'' and
cordoned off from unpopular analysis. Some say that the vitriolic debate itself
is the message and that people have been transformed into mirror images of the
man they love or loathe -- little Churchills, as it were, who are just as
entrenched, over-the-top and, apparently, eager to offend as he himself.

''Two sides are being presented without a lot of people listening,'' said Joe
Flasher, 24, a graduate student in astrophysics. ''You already have your
opinion, right. So it's one person saying what they think and then the other
person saying the complete opposite. It seems very polarized. But I guess it is
the ultimate exercise in free speech.''

Student organizations like College Democrats and College Republicans have
skirmished over Professor Churchill, a member of the ethnic studies department.
The Democratic group began a petition this week saying, ''The attacks on
Professor Ward Churchill are attacks on the academic freedom of the
university.'' The Republicans, in calling for his dismissal, said that alumni
should freeze donations and that parents should send their children elsewhere
until political balance is brought to the professorial ranks.

''It's probably in their best interest to get rid of guys like that, but why
hide what this place really is: a bunch of lunatic leftists,'' said Matthew
Schuldt, senior vice chairman of College Republicans.

The undercurrent of the debate, faculty members and students say, is anxiety
about how the outside world regards the university. A football recruiting
scandal and several alcohol-related deaths among students over the last year
created waves of bad publicity for the institution. Now some people fear that
everyone will think the university is full of people like Professor Churchill,
whose essay, which drew little attention at its publication after the attacks,
gained notoriety when he was scheduled to speak at Hamilton College in upstate
New York last week. It suggests little emotion about the deaths of thousands of
people on Sept. 11 and a cold logic of foreign policy analysis salted with terms
that seemed calculated to enrage rather than enlighten.

''If he had just been a little more thoughtful, nothing would have happened,''
Uriel Nauenberg, a professor of physics and the former chairman of the Boulder
Faculty Assembly, said. ''He did not have to say these things in the manner that
he did.''

Nonetheless, Professor Nauenberg said he did not believe that Professor
Churchill should be forced out because of the essay, though he added that he
personally found the expressions in the essay obnoxious.

Professor Churchill, 57, a Vietnam War veteran who became a lecturer at the
university in 1978 and was granted tenure in 1991, has claimed affiliations over
the years with many vociferous left-wing groups, including the Black Panthers,
Students for a Democratic Society and the American Indian Movement. He said in
an interview that winning peoples' attention often meant not being nice. The
United States' foreign and domestic policies, he said, are brutal, and the words
to describe that can be painful.

''I don't believe in the theory that we get to treat people like dogs, but you
have to talk to us in a polite way,'' he said.

Faculty members say that an objection to his writing style or opinions, however
outrageous or unpopular, is not enough to justify firing him. The 30-day review
of his ''writings, speeches, tape recordings and other works,'' that was
announced last week by the university's governing body, the Board of Regents,
must find evidence of outright academic dishonesty, said RL Widmann, a professor
of English and the chairwoman of the Academic Affairs Committee of the Boulder
Faculty Assembly.

'''I published a falsehood and I knew it to be untrue' -- that's what they'd
have to find,'' Professor Widmann said.

But the passions have led to some dishonesty. University officials said on
Monday, for instance, that they were canceling a speech by Professor Churchill
because of security concerns. The student organizers of the speech had received
death threats because of their support for the professor, university officials
said, and safety could not be guaranteed.

The students, whose names were not released, admitted on Tuesday that the death
threats were embellished.

''They said, 'We were just being political,''' Ron Stump, the vice chancellor
for student affairs, said. ''We expressed our disappointment.''

The speech came off without incident -- and without any apologies from Professor
Churchill.

Many students interviewed on campus in recent days said they feared that the
lines being drawn around Professor Churchill were also creating boundaries about
what could be freely and safely talked about in the United States.

''I think it's no longer about free speech -- it's turned into this kind of
thing that we can't talk about Sept 11, that it's kind of become a sacred
issue,'' said Erin Langer, 22, a senior humanities major from Naperville, Ill.
''People forget we're in a university setting, and the way ideas are challenged
is by looking at an extreme view. The fact that he is so extreme challenges
people to think more.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 15, 2005



CORRECTION: An article on Friday about Prof. Ward L. Churchill of the University
of Colorado at Boulder, whose provocative essay about the terrorist attacks of
September 2001 has resulted in an investigation of his scholarly record,
referred incorrectly to another issue that has drawn unfavorable attention to
the campus. It had one alcohol-related death of a student in the last year, not
several such deaths.



GRAPHIC: Photos: Ward L. Churchill, a University of Colorado professor who
likened World Trade Center victims to Eichmanns, talked with reporters after his
class. (Photo by Mark Leffingwell/Daily Camera, via Associated Press)
 A University of Colorado history professor, Eric Love, left, made a point while
debating Isaiah Lechowit, president of the College Republicans. (Photo by Chris
Schneider/Rocky Mountain News via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); ACADEMIC FREEDOM (89%); STUDENT
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%);
HIJACKING (74%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (73%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
(73%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); LIBERAL MEDIA (72%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (71%); DISMISSALS
(70%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (67%); ASTROPHYSICS (61%); ASTRONOMY & SPACE (61%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (50%)
Terrorism; Hijacking; Airlines and Airplanes; World Trade Center (NYC); Freedom
of Speech and Expression; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO (90%) University of Colorado

PERSON: Kirk Johnson; Ward (Prof) Churchill; Adolf (1906-62) Eichmann

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); DENVER, CO, USA (73%)

STATE: COLORADO, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Washington (DC); New York City

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             844 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Best Court For Justice for Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 171 words



To the Editor:

The refusal of the Bush administration to support and participate in the
International Criminal Court in The Hague serves only to cripple efforts to
secure justice and relief for the millions suffering and dying at the hands of
unrestrained attackers and corrupt brutal regimes.

The unchecked catastrophe occurring now in the Sudanese region of Darfur is only
the latest in a series of genocides to which the world community has shamefully
borne witness without adequate intervention.

Have we learned nothing after Rwanda and Bosnia? At least in Bosnia, military
action by the United States and NATO belatedly brought an end to years of ethnic
cleansing and led to the prosecution of war criminals. Are we to allow the
Sudanese government to continue to condone the massacre of its own people?

After months of diplomatic bickering, the United States finally acknowledged
that genocide was indeed occurring in Darfur, as if labeling war crimes would
make them go away.

Dorothy Reichenberger
Cleveland, Feb. 10, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); CIVIL
WAR (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CORRUPTION (73%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (57%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Dorothy Reichenberger; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             846 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Image Offensive: Rebels Undercut Colombian President

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 11


A new wave of leftist rebel attacks, along with mounting international criticism
of government efforts to disarm right-wing death squads, have dealt sudden and
serious setbacks to President Alvaro Uribe even as he has been touting his
success in bringing order to this conflict-riven country.

The deaths of 45 soldiers in nine days to rebel attacks has raised concerns that
the guerrillas have ended a two-year retreat and embarked on an offensive to
undermine the government's pacification efforts. Rebels of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, killed 24 troops in northern Colombia on
Wednesday. Just days before, in two ambushes in the south, another 31 troops
were killed.

An intensive military campaign to quash the rebellion has been one branch of Mr.
Uribe's widely publicized strategy to improve conditions in Colombia. The other
has focused on negotiations and legislation to disarm the paramilitary death
squads that have worked hand in hand with rogue military units in fighting the
rebels.

Yet a yearlong, 18,000-troop military offensive in southern Colombia has taken
the lives of as many as 1,000 soldiers, according to high-ranking military
officials. The recent attacks by FARC, which has fought the government for 41
years, demonstrates that the group retains much of its military capacity,
military analysts say.

The recent rebel attacks, coupled with the criticism of the paramilitary
legislation, have also revived a debate over whether the government has hyped
its accomplishments to help Mr. Uribe secure a constitutional amendment to
permit his re-election next year.

''The rebels clearly don't want Uribe to win,'' said Sergio Jaramillo, a former
senior Defense Ministry official who runs Ideas for Peace, a policy analysis
group in Bogota. ''So they want to do things to discredit him.''

The attacks have also undermined Mr. Uribe's long-held contention that there is
no war in Colombia, but instead a terrorist assault carried out by criminals
against a legitimate government. The distinction may appear semantic, but it is
central to a strategy that seeks to marshal Colombians and foreign governments
into supporting the government's pacification efforts with few questions asked.

Alfredo Rangel, a leading military analyst, said Mr. Uribe's aim was to
delegitimize the rebels, who are already unpopular.

But the government's position also plays down Colombia's economic crisis. That
underlying factor led the country's leading newsweekly, Semana, to declare in
this week's cover story, ''Yes, Mr. President, there is a war.''

''In Colombia, there is an insurgent war,'' Mr. Rangel said. ''There are
political-military groups that are, in fact, armies with the military capacity
to confront the armed forces, to control some zones of the country, and they
cannot be reduced to simple bands of terrorists.''

The government is also coming under heavy criticism from influential American
lawmakers, the United Nations and some foreign diplomats for its new legislation
governing the disarmament of a 15,000-member paramilitary group, the United
Self-Defense Forces, whose commanders are wanted for widespread rights abuses.

Critics say the bill, presented to Colombia's Congress on Wednesday as an
alternative to tougher legislation offered last year, shows the government is
willing to permit paramilitary commanders to largely avoid punishment in
exchange for demobilizing.

Lawmakers here and Congressional leaders in Washington, who are being asked to
provide financing for the disarmament, say Mr. Uribe's plan does little to
guarantee that paramilitary groups are dismantled or that commanders provide
truthful information about their past activities, including drug trafficking to
the United States.

Commanders are not required to reveal the inner workings of their organization,
nor do commanders have to guarantee the disarmament of all their troops.
Paramilitary leaders, even those wanted for war crimes, could also serve less
than five years for their crimes, possibly on farms instead of in prisons.

In strongly worded letter to Mr. Uribe this month, a bipartisan group of
influential American lawmakers explained that American financing for the
demobilization required that the paramilitaries ''fully disclose their knowledge
of the operative structure'' of the group. They must also forfeit illegally
acquired assets, like land, comply with a cease-fire and be held accountable for
crimes.

The letter's authors include Republicans like Representative Henry J. Hyde and
Senator Richard G. Lugar, as well as Democratic Senators Patrick J. Leahy,
Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph R. Biden Jr.

Rights groups say that Mr. Uribe's bill features a series of loopholes that
would benefit paramilitary commanders. ''The government has been bending over
backwards to satisfy the paramilitary leadership,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco,
the Americas division director for the New York-based group Human Rights Watch.

Mr. Uribe and his closest aides have reacted defiantly to the criticism.

On Thursday, Vice President Francisco Santos referred to opposition legislation
as products of ''political vanities and political hate'' pushed by international
rights group with little grounding in Colombia's violent war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); LEGISLATION (88%); ELECTIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); ARMIES (77%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (75%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(71%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (89%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (91%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             847 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Number of Gays Discharged From Services Drops Again

BYLINE: By JOHN FILES

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


The Defense Department said Friday that it discharged 653 service members last
year for being gay, down 15 percent from 2003. Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks,
the rate of discharges has dropped nearly 50 percent.

The number of men and women discharged from the military because they were
discovered to be gay, or because they revealed their sexuality, has fallen three
years in a row, the Pentagon's statistics show. The Pentagon started keeping
track of the figures in 1997.

The Army discharged more gay personnel in 2004 than any of the other service
branches with 325, according to the figures, followed by the Navy with 177, the
Air Force with 92 and the Marines with 59.

Under a policy introduced by the Clinton administration, known as ''don't ask,
don't tell,'' the military cannot inquire into members' sex live unless there is
evidence of homosexual conduct. But those who volunteer the information are
required to be discharged.

The total of such discharges in 2003 was 770; that compares with 885 in 2002 and
1,227 in 2001.

Critics of the policy, a compromise that resulted from the Joint Chiefs'
resistance to President Bill Clinton's pledge to allow gays to serve openly,
contend it runs counter to any effort to expand a military that has shrunk since
the cold war and remains stressed by overseas deployment.

A Pentagon spokesman pointed out that the policy on homosexual conduct in the
military was approved after hearings and debate on Capitol Hill. ''Individuals
discharged under the provisions of that law represent a very small percent of
military discharges over all,'' he said.

In the decade since Mr. Clinton and Congress adopted the policy to allow gays to
serve in the armed forces as long as they kept their sexual orientation to
themselves, more than 10,000 service members have been discharged on the ground
of failing to do so, according to the Servicemembers Legal Defense Network, a
gay rights group that monitors the armed forces.

Kathi Westcott, senior counsel for law and policy at the network, said the sharp
decline in discharges during a time of war reflected the discretionary nature of
the policy.

''These numbers clearly show that military commanders value good service members
during a time of war, whether the service members are gay or straight,'' she
said.

The group said that since the terrorist attacks of September 2001, the rate of
discharges has dropped more than 45 percent. But it also noted that since 1998
the military had discharged 20 service members who spoke or had studied Arabic
for being gay, according to data from the Pentagon, despite a critical shortage
of translators and interpreters needed for the fight against terrorism.

The military argues that allowing openly gay troops would disrupt unit cohesion
and morale and undermine the services' mission. Defense Secretary Donald H.
Rumsfeld has said the policy will not be revisited by the Bush administration.
But there are numerous lawsuits pending that seek to overturn it.

Representative Martin T. Meehan of Massachusetts, the ranking Democrat on the
House Armed Services subcommittee on terrorism, conventional threats and
capabilities, said the Armed Forces could not ''afford to lose qualified service
members for reasons that have nothing to do with their ability or willingness to
serve our country,'' adding, ''At a time when our military is facing a critical
manpower shortage, it is outrageous that our national security policy remains
driven by discrimination and not military necessity.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); STATISTICS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); ARMIES (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); STATISTICAL METHOD (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SHORTAGES (73%); LGBT RIGHTS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
AIR FORCES (73%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); APPROVALS (64%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (57%); US AIR FORCE (57%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             848 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Open Japan Files, Too

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 98 words



To the Editor:

Re ''C.I.A. Defers to Congress, Agreeing to Disclose Nazi Records'' (news
article, Feb. 7):

Now that the C.I.A. has agreed to release classified information about its
relationships with Nazi war criminals, I hope that it will be equally
forthcoming in opening up similar data about its relationships with Japanese war
criminals.

There is still much that scholars do not know about the occupation of Japan by
the United States, some of which continues to affect present-day Japanese
politics.

Chalmers Johnson
President Japan Policy Research Institute
Cardiff, Calif., Feb. 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WORLD WAR II (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); PUBLIC POLICY (88%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (50%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and
Minorities; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; World War II
(1939-45)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Chalmers Johnson

COUNTRY: JAPAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Japan

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Renews Call to Extend Patriot Act

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 429 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14


President Bush on Monday urged the nation to stay the course in its ''urgent
mission'' to fight terrorism, and he called on Congress to move quickly to
extend sweeping law enforcement powers under the USA Patriot Act.

''We must not allow the passage of time or the illusion of safety to weaken our
resolve in this new war,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech at the Justice Department.
''To protect the American people, Congress must promptly renew all provisions of
the Patriot Act this year.''

The president's remarks came at the formal swearing-in of his friend and
longtime adviser, Alberto R. Gonzales, as the nation's 80th attorney general.
Mr. Gonzales won Senate confirmation 11 days ago by a vote of 60 to 36 after a
sharp debate that focused on the administration's terrorism policies and their
impact on the treatment of prisoners.

Mr. Bush built his re-election campaign last year around the assertion that he
was the candidate best able to defend the country against another terrorist
attack. In taking on the subject of the Patriot Act once again, he showed no
signs of backing away from that approach.

A number of measures in the act that expand the government's ability to conduct
secret surveillance and use other law enforcement powers will expire at the end
of the year unless Congress extends them. Many Democrats and some Republicans
have voiced skepticism or outright opposition to an extension, and some
lawmakers have offered competing proposals that would restrict the ability of
federal agents to demand records from libraries and use other powers granted by
the act.

Mr. Bush's renewed call for an extension met with skepticism from the American
Civil Liberties Union, which called on ''cooler heads'' in Congress to
scrutinize and fine-tune the law to meet civil liberties concerns.

''The president and the attorney general must realize that security and liberty
are not -- and cannot be -- mutually exclusive,'' the group said in a statement.

The White House, however, has signaled that it will veto any effort by Congress
to rein in counterterrorism powers.

Mr. Bush, speaking at the Justice Department's Great Hall before an audience of
visiting officials and Justice Department employees, said that Mr. Gonzales was
joining them in ''an urgent mission -- to protect the United States from another
terrorist attack.''

Mr. Gonzales echoed that theme, pledging that department employees would ''work
together tirelessly to address terrorism and other threats to our nation, and to
confront injustice with integrity and devotion to our highest ideals.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales at his formal swearing-in
yesterday with, from left, President Bush, Mr. Gonzales's mother, Maria, and
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PATRIOT ACT (91%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); VETO (79%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LEGISLATION
(78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(71%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Security and Warning Systems

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%) Justice Department

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (93%); ALBERTO GONZALES (91%) Eric Lichtblau; George W
(Pres) Bush; alberto R (atty gen) gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             857 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbian President Visits Kosovo; Vows to Oppose Independence

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: VELIKA HOCA, Kosovo, Feb. 14


President Boris Tadic of Serbia, in a visit to Kosovo on Sunday and Monday,
publicly asserted his country's claim to the disputed province, vowing never to
agree to its independence.

''Independence for Kosovo is unacceptable for me; I will never endorse it,'' he
repeated in village after village before crowds of ethnic Serbs, who are in the
minority in Kosovo.

The visit was the first by a Serbian leader since 1999, when troops sent by the
central government in Belgrade to quell an insurgency by ethnic Albanian rebels
were forced by NATO-led troops to leave, after being accused of widespread
atrocities against Albanian civilians. The United Nations estimates that up to
10,000 Kosovo Albanians were killed.

Mr. Tadic's visit has prompted anger among the province's Albanian majority,
most of whom want self-rule. While still formally part of Serbia, Kosovo has
been run by a United Nations mission for five years, and United
Nations-sponsored talks about the future status of the province are expected
later this year.

United Nations officials here said that despite his strong statements as he
visited villages, they were encouraged by statements by Mr. Tadic, a pro-Western
advocate of reform, indicating that he firmly supported the status talks.

Since 1999 the local Serbs have borne the brunt of the Albanian community's
anger. In spite of a peacekeeping force that numbered 44,000 at its peak and
remains close to 18,000, fewer than half of the original 230,000 Serbs remain in
Kosovo. Many of them live in remote areas and are unable to travel freely for
fear of attack.

Last March, 19 people were killed during riots in which Albanians attacked Serbs
and other minorities.

Here in the village of Velika Hoca, where 600 Serbs live surrounded by barbed
wire and 24-hour armed protection, Mr. Tadic spoke in a packed movie theater.
''I've never been anywhere and seen people the way they are in Velika Hoca,'' he
said. ''I thank you for staying in this area in such difficult conditions.''

The crowds responded with rapturous applause to this rare visit by a senior
leader, in a region where many Serbs feel forgotten by the Serbian government or
used as a political football.

''Other politicians should come more frequently to see what is going on, and not
just before elections as some of them do,'' said Trifun Stosic, 54, a cook in
Belo Polje, whose village was overrun last March by Albanian mobs, which set 24
houses ablaze.

The chief of the United Nations mission in Kosovo, Soren Jessen-Petersen,
expressed his hope before Mr. Tadic's visit that the president would ''send
positive signals on Belgrade's readiness to build bridges of trust.'' Hua Jiang,
chief of the mission's public affairs division, said afterward that the United
Nations officials felt that Mr. Tadic had done so.

But for Albanians, many of whom lined the roads as the president's convoy drove
by, the sight of the Serbian leader was too much to bear. They shouted abuse and
threw stones and snowballs as lines of policemen held them back. There were no
major incidents, though.

Mr. Tadic did not meet with Albanian leaders on his visit, but his appearances
included some conciliatory language. ''My message to the world is that Serbia
wants a peaceful solution in Kosovo,'' he was quoted by Reuters as telling a
crowd in Gracanica. ''Serbia does not want war. It wants peace for its people
and for other people.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%);
POLITICS (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); GENOCIDE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); RIOTS (69%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%)
United Nations; North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Boris (Pres) Tadic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); ALBANIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); KOSOVO (94%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             858 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fire Department Is Investigated Over Bias in Hiring Practices

BYLINE: By MICHELLE O'DONNELL

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 475 words


The United States Department of Justice is investigating whether the New York
City Fire Department's hiring practices discriminate against black and Hispanic
firefighting candidates, city and federal officials said yesterday.

Lawyers for the city were informed of the inquiry in a letter they received last
week, Kate O'Brien Ahlers, a spokeswoman for the city's Law Department, said
yesterday. Ms. Ahlers said the letter, a notification about the inquiry, was
being reviewed by lawyers for the city.

A spokesman for the Justice Department confirmed that an investigation had been
opened but could not comment on what instigated it. The investigation was first
reported by WNBC-TV.

Capt. Paul Washington, the president of the Vulcan Society, a fraternal
organization of black firefighters with about 300 members, said the inquiry was
begun after black firefighters filed a complaint with the federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission two years ago.

In that complaint, the black firefighters, who are represented by the Center for
Constitutional Rights, a civil rights advocacy group, said the Fire Department's
testing methods violated the civil rights of black applicants. Captain
Washington said the department uses a written test that weeds out black
candidates who score high on the physical exam.

Yesterday, Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta pledged to cooperate with
federal investigators. ''We want a department that reflects the communities we
serve, and we are working vigorously to achieve this goal,'' he said in a
statement.

The department has long been criticized for not aggressively increasing the
numbers of women and minorities in its ranks.

Of the roughly 11,500 firefighters and fire officers, about 92 percent are
white, said Virginia Lam, a department spokeswoman. Blacks account for 3
percent, she said. Less than 1 percent are women.

Those numbers have remained roughly the same since 2001, when an audit by the
city's Equal Employment Practices Commission recommended sweeping changes in
recruiting and hiring minority candidates.

The department enacted some of the recommendations, including more aggressive
recruiting in minority neighborhoods. The commission recommended that the
department offer more frequent tests, as black candidates who pass but score in
lower brackets must wait longer than whites to be hired.

Since 2000, the department has hired almost three times as many minority
candidates than it did from 1990 to 1999, due mainly to an increase in the
number of Hispanic firefighters.

From 2000 to the present, of the 4,994 firefighters hired, 778 were minority
candidates, department statistics show. From 1990 to 1999, of the 4,948
firefighters 271 were minority candidates.

Captain Washington said his group was considering suing the department over the
written exam.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RECRUITMENT & HIRING (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT
(90%); LAWYERS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); HISPANIC
AMERICANS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); FIRE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); WOMEN (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
EMPLOYMENT (74%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (69%); STATISTICS (69%) Fires and
Firefighters; Discrimination; Blacks; Hispanic-Americans; Hiring and Promotion

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION (56%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (56%) Justice Department

PERSON: Michelle O'Donnell

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             859 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 16, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Is Seen as Seeking New Role on Detainees

BYLINE: This article was reported by Douglas Jehl, David Johnston and Neil A.
Lewis and written by Mr. Jehl.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


The Central Intelligence Agency is seeking to scale back its role as
interrogator and custodian of terrorist leaders who are being held without
charges in secret sites around the world, current and former intelligence
officials said.

The internal discussions, they said, reflect the agency's growing discomfort
with what is increasingly seen as an untenable position. The C.I.A.'s current
leadership is concerned, the officials said, that the legal authority for
interrogations and detentions is eroding, and that there is no clear plan for
how the agency can extricate itself from what could be a lengthy task of holding
and caring for a small population of aging terrorists whose intelligence value
is steadily evaporating and who are unlikely ever to be released or brought to
trial.

The C.I.A. assumed the mission of detaining the leaders in the months after the
Sept. 11 attacks. But the officials said the effort required to indefinitely
maintain what amounts to a secret prison system overseas is increasingly
regarded within the agency as conflicting with its core mission of collecting
and analyzing intelligence.

As it rethinks its role, the C.I.A. is facing renewed scrutiny in Congress and
in the courts over practices like detentions without trial, harsh interrogations
and the handing over of captives to third countries where they might be abused.

The C.I.A. never expected to play a long-term role in the detention and
interrogation of terror suspects, the officials said. At the same time, they
added, the Bush administration's repudiation of an August 2002 legal opinion
regarding the use of torture, sought by the C.I.A. to protect its employees from
liability, is seen within the agency as undercutting its authority to use
coercive methods in interrogations.

C.I.A. lawyers, who have said nothing in public about the decision in June 2004
to invalidate the opinion, were furious about the decision, former Justice
Department officials said. From the start, senior C.I.A. officials had agreed to
play a part in detention and interrogation as part of an immediate sense after
the Sept. 11 attacks that all agencies must adopt a new approach to
counterterrorism. But current and former intelligence officials say there was
concern that the C.I.A. might be left to bear sole responsibility and the brunt
of criticism for the use of harsh techniques.

That concern was recently heightened when high-level administration officials
seemed in public testimony to sidestep responsibility for shaping interrogation
policies. The officials included Alberto R. Gonzales, the attorney general, and
Michael Chertoff, the new homeland security secretary. Both suggested in their
confirmation hearings that others might have played a greater role in deciding
how interrogations would be conducted.

Porter J. Goss, the new intelligence chief, is scheduled to make his first
public appearance in that role on Wednesday, in testimony before the Senate
Intelligence Committee. Congressional officials have said that the panel would
conduct a review this year of the C.I.A.'s role in the detention and
interrogation of the terrorist leaders, but the facts surrounding their
detention remain among the government's most closely guarded secrets, and it is
not clear whether senators will question Mr. Goss about the issue in a public
forum.

The estimated three dozen people being held by the C.I.A. include Abu Zubaydah,
the personnel coordinator for Al Qaeda, and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the chief
operational planner of the Sept. 11 plot. Under Bush administration directives,
they are being detained indefinitely as unlawful combatants, without trial, and
without access to lawyers or human rights groups.

Among the options being discussed within the government is the possibility of
enlisting another agency, most likely the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to
assume a role in their interrogation. Bureau officials said they knew of no such
discussions and would oppose any move to involve the F.B.I.

Other possibilities include more active efforts to hand over some of the
detainees to third countries. Neither the C.I.A. nor the F.B.I. would comment
for this article, and the current and former intelligence officials who agreed
to discuss the issue would speak only on condition of anonymity. None would say
where the detainees were being held, or describe the interrogation methods used
on them.

But all of the officials described deep frustration within the C.I.A. about its
role as custodian of the detainees. While some of those in American detention,
particularly Mr. Zubaydah, are said to have provided useful intelligence during
their first months in captivity, no more than a handful of those still in C.I.A.
custody are seen as possessing much intelligence value.

''No one has a plan for what to do with these guys,'' a former senior
intelligence official said, ''and the C.I.A. has been left holding the bag.''

Any change would be a significant one for the C.I.A. The agency's authorization
to use coercive interrogation methods has been spelled out in a series of
documents, most still highly classified, the former officials said, including a
narrow definition of torture in a Justice Department legal opinion issued in
August 2002.

But some former intelligence officials said the C.I.A.'s latitude in conducting
interrogations had been reduced significantly and might have been scaled back by
the agency itself in response to the White House's repudiation last summer of
the 2002 opinion and its decision in December to issue an opinion that broadened
the definition of torture, putting a wider range of interrogation methods off
limits.

Abuses at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq have focused Congressional and public
scrutiny on the possibility that the agency engaged in excessive force in
interrogations.

It has long been known that F.B.I. agents and behavioral science experts took
part in interrogations of detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. F.B.I. agents have
also taken part in interviews of high-level detainees in Iraq and spent months
questioning Saddam Hussein at an undisclosed site near Baghdad.

But until now, the F.B.I. has been unwilling to assign agents to routinely
interview high-value detainees in C.I.A. custody. After the Sept. 11 attacks,
senior F.B.I. officials urged the bureau's director, Robert S. Mueller III, to
keep agents out of those high-level interviews out of concern that it would
damage the bureau's reputation and compromise agents as potential witnesses in
future criminal cases if it became known that they had engaged in interviews in
which highly coercive techniques were used.

Since then, Mr. Mueller has assigned agents to work with the military and the
C.I.A. in places like Afghanistan and Iraq, current and former associates said.

At Guantanamo, where hundreds of captives from the war in Afghanistan are held
by the military, the F.B.I. has complained about excessive force being used
against some detainees. Those complaints have been disclosed in recent weeks in
internal bureau documents obtained by the American Civil Liberties Union, which
obtained them in a Freedom of Information Act request.

The C.I.A.'s agreement to hold and question high-level Qaeda figures rather than
turn them over to other governments or agencies, was a departure from the
agency's past practices. But legal opinions and other documents disclosed
recently show that the agency struggled to protect its employees by repeatedly
asking the Justice Department how far they could go without violating the
federal law prohibiting the use of extreme force on anyone under custody.

Justice Department lawyers addressed the issue in the August 2002 legal
memorandum, which defined torture as ''equivalent in intensity to the pain
accompanying serious physical injury such as organ failure, impairment of bodily
function or even death.''

A companion memorandum, which remains classified, outlined specific methods that
the agency could use.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Porter J. Goss, the C.I.A. director, will face a Senate panel
today. (Photo by Brendan Smialowski/Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); LAWYERS (76%);
PRISONS (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (71%);
TORTURE (70%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); CORRECTIONS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS
(66%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (97%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%) Central Intelligence Agency; Federal Bureau of
Investigation

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (52%) Douglas Jehl; Porter J (Dir) Goss

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             863 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Lawyer's Lawyer, Loss Is Just the Beginning

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; PUBLIC LIVES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 875 words


MICHAEL TIGAR, a master of courtroom argument, says he resolved long ago that
the trial of Lynne F. Stewart, in which he was her chief defense counsel, would
be his last. He reaffirmed this decision with satisfaction, and some relief, in
the Manhattan courtroom on Jan. 18, the day he turned 64.

Three weeks later the jurors came back with one of the most adverse verdicts Mr.
Tigar has ever faced in a high-profile case. On Feb. 10 they convicted Ms.
Stewart, a defense lawyer, and two co-defendants of all charges of aiding
terrorism. They were found guilty of smuggling messages from an imprisoned
terrorist client of Ms. Stewart's, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, to his militant
Islamic followers in Egypt.

In a four-decade career, Mr. Tigar has been the successful champion of diverse
clients. He won an acquittal for Angela Davis, the black revolutionary, on
murder charges in the 1970's, and won again years later for Senator Kay Bailey
Hutchison of Texas, when she was accused of misconduct as the state's treasurer.
He got a life sentence instead of the death penalty for Terry Nichols, the
accomplice in the Oklahoma City bombing. He received a lifetime achievement
award in 1999 from the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.

Mr. Tigar agreed twice to speak about the trial, at length one evening before
the verdict and briefly this week, after a few days pondering the outcome. While
he sounded downcast, his view had not changed. His job, he said, was to ''tell
the story'' of Ms. Stewart in a memorable and legally correct way so the civil
rights issues he raised would resonate with the public and provide the
foundation for any appeal.

Ms. Stewart's trial closed a circle for Mr. Tigar. Its starting point was in
1969, when he first gained fame in the trial of the Chicago Seven, actually
eight defendants accused of plotting to riot at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention. Mr. Tigar, barely out of law school at the University of California
at Berkeley, wrote the pretrial motions. Then, the famously cranky judge, Julius
Hoffman, ordered him to represent Bobby Seale, a defendant, and had Mr. Tigar
arrested for contempt when he refused. Mr. Tigar argued that Mr. Seale had a
right to choose his own lawyer.

The Chicago trial is recalled as a battle for freedom to protest in an era when
many Americans were skeptical of government authority.

Ms. Stewart was another client who proudly called herself a radical. But times
have changed. The federal courthouse stands just blocks from ground zero in a
scarred city with little sympathy for terror suspects. Although the jurors
debated for a total of 12 days, they were ultimately not convinced by Mr.
Tigar's defense that Ms. Stewart was only doing her job as a lawyer as she
thought best.

Mr. Tigar said he was confident that he had created an enduring portrait of his
client in the legal record. ''This is a working-class woman lawyer and community
activist who has maintained intense dedication and credibility in the
African-American, Puerto Rican and other communities of color in New York,'' he
said.

Characteristically, he delivered a closing argument in the folksy manner he
acquired in 15 years of teaching at the University of Texas law school, but he
peppered it with references to Nelson Mandela and the French philosopher Jacques
Derrida.

Mr. Tigar said the verdict was only the beginning of the case's journey through
the courts. Another lawyer, Joshua Dratel, the president of the New York State
Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, will argue Ms. Stewart's appeal. Mr.
Tigar predicted that it would center on violations of the free expression rights
of Ms. Stewart and her client and of her right to practice law.

''The question is, who should be making the decisions about what lawyers may
permissibly do?'' Mr. Tigar said, evoking the memory of Clarence Darrow. ''In
our legal tradition there are no celebrated lawyers for the defense who were
toadies. The lawyers we celebrate are remembered for confrontational statements
and actions with respect to government conduct.''

He recalled his long legal efforts against Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the once
untouchable dictator who is now facing the courts in Chile for human rights
crimes. ''I'm powerfully aware of how the story you tell changes things,'' he
said.

Mr. Tigar grew up in California, where his father was an itinerant ranch hand.
He has three children and is married to a lawyer, Jane B. Tigar, with whom he
shares a law practice.

HE admits he was worn down by the trial, which dragged on more than seven
months. ''A long trial is a physical ordeal, and I certainly was not prepared
for that,'' Mr. Tigar said. ''The stress is enormous. You're carrying a life,
Lynne Stewart's life.''

In late October, on a day when Ms. Stewart was on the stand, Mr. Tigar developed
chest pains. The trial was suspended for several days while Mr. Tigar received
treatment.

As he returns to writing books and teaching law at American University, he has
no doubts about his final trial. ''I'm as convinced as I was the first day in
the justice of Lynne Stewart's cause, and that's enough,'' he said. ''The fact
that 12 people disagreed with our view based on the evidence they heard doesn't
change the issues.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: Michael Tigar

GRAPHIC: Photo: MICHAEL TIGAR (Photo by Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); VERDICTS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); SENTENCING (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); LAW
SCHOOLS (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); ACQUITTAL (73%);
US STATE GOVERNMENT (72%); CELEBRITIES (71%); SMUGGLING (70%); BOMBINGS (70%);
MISCONDUCT (69%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (67%); AWARDS & PRIZES (66%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (65%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (61%); MURDER (58%);
RELIGION (54%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (51%); CIVIL RIGHTS (50%); US
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTIONS (50%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS (55%)

KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON (51%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             864 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

12 Women File Bias Suit Against Large Drug Maker

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE SAUL

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 470 words


For the last six years, Working Mother magazine listed Novartis, the
pharmaceutical manufacturer, as among the best 100 companies for women, citing
its generous maternity leave and a program to encourage telecommuting from home.

But a dozen women sales representatives for Novartis beg to differ. In a lawsuit
filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the women contend that
they were discriminated against in pay and promotions, particularly after
becoming pregnant. The company's products include the Gerber baby brands.

''As soon as a woman indicates that she's planning to become a mother, her male
supervisors start pushing her toward the exit,'' said David W. Sanford, a
Washington lawyer representing the women.

Amy Velez, a former sales representative who lives in Laurel, Md., said, ''They
hate it when you get pregnant.'' She is one of the 12 current and former
employees suing for $100 million, back pay and a ban on gender discrimination.

In a statement, Novartis declined to comment in detail about the suit, but vowed
a vigorous defense.

''Novartis is deeply committed to equal employment opportunity and is proud of
its policies and programs designed to support the advancement of women in the
sales force and throughout the company,'' the statement said, noting that the
company has been recognized for its track record.

The suit names as a defendant the Novartis Corporation in New York, which is the
North American operations of Novartis of Basel, Switzerland. The company has
11,000 United States employees and approximately half of them are women.

Working Mother compiles its 100 Best Companies list each year, with several
hundred companies vying for the designation. The magazine does not conduct an
on-site investigation of each employer, but bases its selections on company
responses to questions about child care, flexible work programs, numbers of
female employees and advancement programs.

''The fact that they've made it on our list says something about what they're
doing over there,'' said Amy DiTullio, special-projects editor for the magazine.

But Ms. Velez, 38, said Novartis employees laughed at the Working Mother
ratings: ''Let me put it this way. That perhaps might mean that the people who
work in the home office have on-site day care, but as far as women in the field
experiencing equality, equal pay or promotions, that doesn't happen.''

Ms. Velez says she was treated badly after she became pregnant with twins.

Another former sales representative in Sacramento told a similar story. Minel
Hider Tobertga, 38, said she was one of the top 50 sales representatives, but
the company's treatment of her changed when she decided to become a parent.
''When I told them my husband and I were going to adopt, that's when I noticed a
big change,'' Ms. Tobertga said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (92%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (91%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); EMPLOYMENT (91%); MATERNITY LEAVE (90%);
PHARMACEUTICAL DRUG & DEVICES LITIGATION (90%); WOMEN (90%); PHARMACEUTICALS
INDUSTRY (90%); SALES FORCE (90%); WORKING MOTHERS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
GENDER EQUALITY (89%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (89%); WOMEN WORKERS (78%); EQUAL PAY
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WORKPLACE PROGRAMS (78%); COMPANY LISTS
& RANKINGS (78%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (78%); TELECOMMUTING (78%); FLEXIBLE WORK ARRANGEMENTS (77%); WAGES &
SALARIES (76%); LAWYERS (73%); TWINS & MULTIPLE BIRTHS (73%); BACK PAY (73%)
Drugs (Pharmaceuticals); Suits and Litigation; Discrimination; Women; Labor;
Hiring and Promotion; Wages and Salaries; Pregnancy and Obstetrics

COMPANY: NOVARTIS AG (95%); NOVARTIS CORP (66%)

ORGANIZATION: Novartis Ag

TICKER: NVS (NYSE) (95%); NOVN (SWX) (95%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325412 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (95%); SIC2834
PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATIONS (95%); NAICS339115 OPHTHALMIC GOODS MANUFACTURING
(95%); SIC3851 OPHTHALMIC GOODS (95%)

PERSON: Stephanie Saul

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); BASEL, SWITZERLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             867 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1169 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-8

Suicide Bombers' Attacks Kill Dozens in Baghdad
Five suicide bombers, some disguised in the black robes of religious pilgrims,
exploded their bombs in crowds of worshipers and at a police checkpoint in the
Baghdad area, killing 35 and maiming dozens of people on the eve of the Shiite
holy day of Ashura.   A1

AIDS Report in South Africa
South Africa's government reported that annual deaths caused by AIDS increased
57 percent from 1997 to 2003, with common AIDS-related diseases like
tuberculosis and pneumonia fueling much of the rise. The increase in mortality
spanned all age groups, but was most pronounced among those between ages 15 and
49, where deaths more than doubled.   A3

Togo Leader Plans New Election
Togo's new military-backed leader agreed to hold new elections in 60 days to
choose a president. The leader, Faure Gnassingbe, said he would remain president
in the interim rather than cede the office to the speaker of the Parliament.
Opposition political parties vowed to march to demand his removal.   A3

Raids Continue in Ireland
Irish police officers continued a second day of raids on houses and businesses
spanning the length of the Irish Republic, aimed at a sprawling money-laundering
ring that is believed to help finance the Irish Republican Army. There was no
confirmation whether money seized in the raids would definitively link the
I.R.A. to the robbery of $50 million from the Northern Bank in Belfast.   A8

Sex Scandal at the U.N.
The refusal of Ruud Lubbers, the United Nations high commissioner for refugees,
to yield to closed-door pleas to step down over sexual harassment findings
ballooned into public exasperation as Mr. Lubbers denied that his resignation
had been discussed and attacked the United Nations for ''slandering'' him.   A8

Japanese View on Taiwan
Senior Japanese officials plan to assure their American counterparts that Japan
shares a common concern about the future security of Taiwan. Japan is
increasingly concerned about the growing political and military might of China.
A6

NATIONAL   A10-13; 16

Panel Advises Against Ban On 3 Leading Painkillers
A panel of experts voted unanimously to advise the Food and Drug Administration
that three leading painkillers -- Celebrex, Bextra and Vioxx -- can cause
worrisome heart problems, but also advised against banning the drugs.   A1

1,092 New Priest Abuse Cases
Roman Catholic bishops reported that they had received 1,092 new allegations of
sexual abuse by priests as they released the second annual survey of the
church's procedures for handling and preventing such abuse by clergy members and
employees.   A12

Newspaper Loses Libel Lawsuit
A jury ordered The Boston Herald to pay $2.09 million to a superior court judge,
ruling that the newspaper libeled him in articles that accused him of making
disparaging comments about crime victims.   A10

Rift Over A.F.L.-C.I.O. Funding
Many of the nation's largest labor unions are pushing a plan to cut in half most
unions' contributions to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and instead devote the money to
organizing workers.   A10

Intelligence Nominee Criticized
Human rights advocates accused John D. Negroponte, President Bush's nominee as
director of national intelligence, of covering up abuses as ambassador to
Honduras in the 1980's.   A13

Judge Faults Navy on Airfield
A federal judge ruled that the Navy distorted an environmental impact study to
justify the construction of an airfield near a large waterfowl refuge in eastern
North Carolina.   A13

A Sort of Blog for the Ears
Thanks to a technology barely six months old, enthusiasts of all sorts are
creating their own broadcasts, or ''podcasts,'' on computers and then posting
them to a Web site, where they can be downloaded to an iPod or any MP3 player.
A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

NASA Sets Date for Next Liftoff
NASA officials set May 15 as the date for launching the first space shuttle
since the loss of the Columbia, calling the plan realistic even though much work
remains to be done.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Higher Spending May Undo Early Pataki Tax Cuts
Gov. George E. Pataki delivered on his campaign promise to cut taxes across the
board in New York state years ago, but with state spending now outpacing
inflation, some fiscal analysts warn that unchecked spending increases over the
last few years could, in the coming years, help undo one of his most significant
achievements.   A1

Support Law Spurs Debt
Low-income men forced to pay child support are accumulating enormous debts
because of a tough law that allowed many states across the country to revoke any
state license and restrict direct access to bank accounts for not meeting their
payments.   B1

Audit Criticizes Road Deal
A former state worker for the Department of Transportation on the project to
rebuild a portion of the West Side Highway in 1998 helped a contractor receive
$516,610 for construction materials that were never used and then began working
for the company that benefited from his actions, according to state auditors.
B1

Religion Journal   B7

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

Hope for a Canceled Season?
A team executive in the National Hockey League expressed optimism that even
though teams had already begun issuing refunds to season-ticket holders, a deal
could still be worked out over the weekend and an abbreviated season could be
played as soon as possible. Some members of the players association's executive
committee were believed to be traveling to New York, as were Mario Lemieux and
Wayne Gretzky, former superstar players who are now team owners, to take part in
the discussions.   D1

ARTS   B11-23

OBITUARIES   B9

Yolanda Garcia
A South Bronx community advocate who forced planners and politicians to rethink
how they would rebuild a sprawling swath of the Melrose section, she was 53.
B9

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Stock Options Dropped
Time Warner will no longer grant stock options to most of its employees, citing
new accounting rules. The decision comes at a time when a number of companies
are reining in the use of options.   C1

Health Care Fix Sought
Dr. David J. Brailer, who is trying to prod the health care system into the
computer age, has warned that unless steps are taken to come up with a single
set of technical standards for electronic records, the government will probably
impose a solution.   C1

Mitsubishi Makes Offer
The Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group has offered $29 billion in stock for UFJ
Holdings.   C3

US Airways Reaches Deal
US Airways, which is operating under bankruptcy protection, said it had reached
agreement on a $125 million deal with Eastshore Aviation, an investment group
owned by Air Wisconsin.   C4

Gurus Heed Calling
In response to China's severe shortage of skilled business managers, western
management experts are flocking to China to capitalize on the country's
capitalist frenzy.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Time for an accounting; the experts' verdict on painkillers; picking
a World Bank president.

Columns: David Brooks.

Bridge   B21
TV Listings   B27
Crossword   B20
Weather   B24


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); AIDS & HIV (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES
(90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (89%); RELIGION (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
LIBEL & SLANDER (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); NONSTEROIDAL
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS (84%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (78%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); MUHARRAM (78%); INFECTIOUS
DISEASE (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); ELECTIONS (76%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
RESPIRATORY DISEASE (76%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (75%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); POLITICS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%); RESIGNATIONS (72%);
POLLS & SURVEYS (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (71%); TUBERCULOSIS (71%); JUDGES
(69%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (69%); VERDICTS (68%); REFUGEES (65%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (65%); MONEY LAUNDERING (65%); SEX SCANDALS (64%); SCANDALS (64%);
LITIGATION (63%); SUITS & CLAIMS (60%); JURY TRIALS (60%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

COMPANY: BOSTON HERALD (50%)

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%); BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (70%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (94%); TOGO (93%); JAPAN (93%); IRELAND (93%);
TAIWAN (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (70%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             873 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Bolivia: Ex-President Charged With Genocide

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 59 words


Prosecutors charged former President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada and his cabinet
with genocide in the deaths of more than 60 people during the antigovernment
protests that toppled him in 2003. After his ouster, Mr. Sanchez de Lozada fled
to the United States, where he still lives. He has repeatedly denied that his
forces used violence against the protesters.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
POLITICAL PROTESTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); POLITICS (86%); RIOTS (82%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Demonstrations and Riots; Politics and
Government

PERSON: Gonzalo Sanchez De Lozada

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Bolivia

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             874 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Social Issues Fuel Race for Oscar

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


As audience members walked into the Avalon Theater here Wednesday night, they
passed a refreshment counter offering popcorn and candy and a folding table
offering brochures and condoms. But this was not unusual for a private screening
of ''Vera Drake,'' the British director Mike Leigh's film about a good-natured
London woman in 1950 who breaks the law by performing abortions.

Groups that promote abortion rights, like Planned Parenthood Federation of
America, which sponsored the showing, have embraced the movie as a cautionary
tale for women, should the Supreme Court overturn Roe v. Wade, the case that
made abortion legal in the United States.

''We have to make sure that on our watch, the clock doesn't get turned back,''
Planned Parenthood's local leader, Jatrice M. Gaiter, warned the audience as she
introduced the film. ''This is a wake-up movie, a wake-up of consciousness to
the stark reality that faces us.''

Marketers for Fine Line Features, which distributes ''Vera Drake'' in the United
States, have been happy to get such attention for their film, which has been
nominated for three Oscars -- though Mr. Leigh is leery of those who would see
his film as a polemic. In a telephone interview, the director said he did not
intend ''Vera Drake'' as ''an abortion movie,'' but rather as one that allows
the audience ''to consider the moral issue of abortion.''

In a hotly contested awards race this season, several Hollywood companies have
found themselves walking a tightrope, as they seek attention for films that are
tightly wound around difficult social issues without alienating parties to the
debate or seeming to exploit human suffering for the sake of a prize. Such
campaigns appeared to pick up intensity in recent weeks, as publicists,
filmmakers and stars connected with Oscar-nominated films scrambled for votes
among the approximately 6,000 members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
Sciences.

Under academy rules, campaigners are barred from directly soliciting Oscar
voters, whose ballots must be returned by today. But ''clever campaigns find
some other clever way of achieving their goals, and it has reached an
astoundingly high level for quite a few years,'' said Ric Robertson, the
academy's executive administrator.

The rich mix of film and politics in a year that saw the release of both Michael
Moore's Bush-bashing documentary ''Fahrenheit 9/11,'' which received no Oscar
nominations, and Mel Gibson's ''The Passion of the Christ,'' which was nominated
for its cinematography, music and makeup, has perhaps inevitably carried some
film promotions into difficult places.

Don Cheadle, for instance, nominated for a best actor Oscar for his work in
''Hotel Rwanda,'' was so disturbed by the 1994 mass killings at the heart of the
film that he traveled to Sudan last month with a Congressional delegation and
the man he portrayed in the movie, Paul Rusesabagina, to see a region where more
than 70,000 people have been killed in civil war. When the ABC News program
''Nightline'' recently broadcast a segment on Sudan, Mr. Cheadle served as
narrator, much to the delight of marketing officials at the film's distributor,
who helped arrange the collaboration. ''We wanted to seize every opportunity we
could to draw attention to the movie,'' said Eric Kops, executive vice president
of publicity for MGM and United Artists.

''The Sea Inside,'' a Spanish film directed by Alejandro Amenabar and an Oscar
nominee for best foreign film, and Clint Eastwood's ''Million Dollar Baby,'' a
best picture nominee, similarly have fueled debate over assisted suicide. While
Mr. Eastwood has dismissed charges that his film, distributed by Warner
Brothers, glorifies such an emotionally charged act, Fine Line, the American
distributor of ''The Sea Inside,'' a true story of a quadriplegic man who sought
help to die, considered staging promotional events for the woman who has now
admitted to helping him. The woman, Ramona Maneiro, told reporters in Spain that
she had delayed her confession until the statute of limitations for prosecution
expired.

''Once she came out, we considered taking advantage,'' said Marian
Koltai-Levine, executive vice president of marketing for Fine Line. But the
company hesitated, she added, because Ms. Maneiro speaks only Spanish and ''we
want to be careful that it's the right opportunity.''

Perhaps no relationship between a film and outside interest groups has derived
more benefits for both than Fine Line's ''Vera Drake,'' which received Oscar
nominations for Mr. Leigh as both director and writer and for leading actress,
Imelda Staunton. The movie was released in the United States last October to
coincide with the final weeks of the presidential campaign, according to Mr.
Leigh. And Fine Line followed up with a marketing campaign that has included
more than 100 private screenings, most of them for women's groups, Ms.
Koltai-Levine said.

Planned Parenthood used a showing last month in Los Angeles, one of several
around the country, to help start a ''stand up for choice action plan'' to
counter what the group described as a possible ''unprecedented attack'' by
President George W. Bush and others ''to implement an anti-choice agenda.''

Karen Pearl, interim national president of Planned Parenthood, said the
screenings have helped recruit members, raise money and ''remind us all of what
lengths a woman will go to deal with an unplanned pregnancy.'' Anti-abortion
groups have noticed the same thing. The Rev. Flip Benham, national director of
Operation Rescue, a group that campaigns against abortion, homosexuality and
assisted suicide, said his organization ''probably will'' speak out against
''Vera Drake.'' ''If something the likes of Planned Parenthood is standing by
it, we'll use it as a tool,'' Mr. Benham said.

Mr. Leigh was not certain that interest stirred by outside groups would help
''Vera Drake'' gain an Oscar. But ''a lot of people have had abortion-related
experiences,'' he said. ''That alone is responsible for a lot of reaction to the
film.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Groups that promote abortion rights have embraced the film
''Vera Drake,'' which stars Imelda Staunton, foreground. (Photo by Fine Line
Features)(pg. E1)
Javier Bardem as Ramon Sampedro, with Belen Rueda in ''The Sea Inside,''
nominated for best foreign film. (Photo by Teresa Isasi/Fine Line Pictures)
 Don Cheadle, the star of ''Hotel Rwanda'' traveled to Sudan last month. (Photo
by Lions Gate Films)(pg. E7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ABORTION (91%); SOCIETAL ISSUES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
FILM (90%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (90%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (89%); WAR CRIMES
(79%); SPONSORSHIP (78%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (78%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (77%);
FILM DIRECTORS (77%); VISUAL ARTISTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); ABORTION LAWS
(76%); WOMEN (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); CINEMATOGRAPHY (72%);
MARKETING & ADVERTISING SERVICES (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); MARKETING &
ADVERTISING (64%); GENOCIDE (56%) Motion Pictures; Awards, Decorations and
Honors; Academy Awards (Oscars); Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Motion
Pictures; Motion Pictures  ; Motion Pictures; Advertising and Marketing;
Abortion; Death and Dying; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION OF AMERICA (83%)

PERSON: Michael Janofsky

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             878 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 23, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: Muslim Ex-Army Chief To Surrender

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 101 words


The wartime commander of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army, Gen. Rasim Delic,
said he would go to The Hague on Monday to surrender to the United Nations war
crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. General Delic, 56, appeared on
Bosnian television and said he made the decision immediately after Bosnian
authorities informed him that the tribunal had indicted him. He is accused of
command responsibility for artrocities committed against Bosnian Serbs in the
1992-1995 war by a unit of foreign Muslim fighters. His predecessor as the top
army commander, Sefer Halilovic, is already on trial at The Hague.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ARMIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INDICTMENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Rasim (Gen) Delic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 23, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Secret Genocide Archive

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 870 words


Photos don't normally appear on this page. But it's time for all of us to look
squarely at the victims of our indifference.

These are just four photos in a secret archive of thousands of photos and
reports that document the genocide under way in Darfur. The materials were
gathered by African Union monitors, who are just about the only people able to
travel widely in that part of Sudan.

This African Union archive is classified, but it was shared with me by someone
who believes that Americans will be stirred if they can see the consequences of
their complacency.

The photo at the upper left was taken in the village of Hamada on Jan. 15, right
after a Sudanese government-backed militia, the janjaweed, attacked it and
killed 107 people. One of them was this little boy. I'm not showing the photo of
his older brother, about 5 years old, who lay beside him because the brother had
been beaten so badly that nothing was left of his face. And alongside the two
boys was the corpse of their mother.

The photo to the right shows the corpse of a man with an injured leg who was
apparently unable to run away when the janjaweed militia attacked.

At the lower left is a man who fled barefoot and almost made it to this bush
before he was shot dead.

Last is the skeleton of a man or woman whose wrists are still bound. The
attackers pulled the person's clothes down to the knees, presumably so the
victim could be sexually abused before being killed. If the victim was a man, he
was probably castrated; if a woman, she was probably raped.

There are thousands more of these photos. Many of them show attacks on children
and are too horrific for a newspaper.

One wrenching photo in the archive shows the manacled hands of a teenager from
the girls' school in Suleia who was burned alive. It's been common for the
Sudanese militias to gang-rape teenage girls and then mutilate or kill them.

Another photo shows the body of a young girl, perhaps 10 years old, staring up
from the ground where she was killed. Still another shows a man who was
castrated and shot in the head.

This archive, including scores of reports by the monitors on the scene,
underscores that this slaughter is waged by and with the support of the Sudanese
government as it tries to clear the area of non-Arabs. Many of the photos show
men in Sudanese Army uniforms pillaging and burning African villages. I hope the
African Union will open its archive to demonstrate publicly just what is going
on in Darfur.

The archive also includes an extraordinary document seized from a janjaweed
official that apparently outlines genocidal policies. Dated last August, the
document calls for the ''execution of all directives from the president of the
republic'' and is directed to regional commanders and security officials.

''Change the demography of Darfur and make it void of African tribes,'' the
document urges. It encourages ''killing, burning villages and farms, terrorizing
people, confiscating property from members of African tribes and forcing them
from Darfur.''

It's worth being skeptical of any document because forgeries are possible. But
the African Union believes this document to be authentic. I also consulted a
variety of experts on Sudan and shared it with some of them, and the consensus
was that it appears to be real.

Certainly there's no doubt about the slaughter, although the numbers are fuzzy.
A figure of 70,000 is sometimes stated as an estimated death toll, but that is
simply a U.N. estimate for the deaths in one seven-month period from nonviolent
causes. It's hard to know the total mortality over two years of genocide, partly
because the Sudanese government is blocking a U.N. team from going to Darfur and
making such an estimate. But independent estimates exceed 220,000 -- and the
number is rising by about 10,000 per month.

So what can stop this genocide? At one level the answer is technical: sanctions
against Sudan, a no-fly zone, a freeze of Sudanese officials' assets,
prosecution of the killers by the International Criminal Court, a team effort by
African and Arab countries to pressure Sudan, and an international force of
African troops with financing and logistical support from the West.

But that's the narrow answer. What will really stop this genocide is
indignation. Senator Paul Simon, who died in 2003, said after the Rwandan
genocide, ''If every member of the House and Senate had received 100 letters
from people back home saying we have to do something about Rwanda, when the
crisis was first developing, then I think the response would have been
different.''

The same is true this time. Web sites like www.darfurgenocide.org and
www.savedarfur.org are trying to galvanize Americans, but the response has been
pathetic.

I'm sorry for inflicting these horrific photos on you. But the real obscenity
isn't in printing pictures of dead babies -- it's in our passivity, which allows
these people to be slaughtered.

During past genocides against Armenians, Jews and Cambodians, it was possible to
claim that we didn't fully know what was going on. This time, President Bush,
Congress and the European Parliament have already declared genocide to be under
way. And we have photos.

This time, we have no excuse.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (88%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); BURN INJURIES
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HEAD INJURIES (66%); POLITICS (60%)
Politics and Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Children and Youth

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (91%) African Union

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             884 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Netherlands: Mladic Aide Imprisoned

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 99 words


A senior aide to the top Bosnian Serb fugitive Gen. Ratko Mladic arrived at The
Hague to face war crimes charges, the second man to surrender in Belgrade this
year. The suspect, Milan Gvero, 67, left, was immediately taken to the prison of
the United Nations war crimes tribunal. Several other Serbs, similarly indicted,
are reportedly still negotiating their surrender. The Serbian government has
been warned that it must hand over war crimes suspects if it is to begin talks
on closer ties with the European Union and NATO. More than a dozen suspects are
still at large.   Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (85%); EUROPEAN
UNION (85%); EUROPEAN UNION LAW (82%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (59%) United Nations; European Union; North Atlantic Treaty
Organization

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Milan Gvero; Ratko (Gen) Mladic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (94%); SERBIA (93%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); NETHERLANDS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%);
MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Europe

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             888 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Opposes Bid To Revive Case Against F.B.I.

BYLINE: By JOHN FILES

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


The government has told a federal appeals court that a suit by an F.B.I.
translator who was fired after accusing the bureau of ineptitude should not be
allowed to proceed because it would cause ''significant damage to the national
security and foreign policy of the United States.''

Lawyers for the government said in a brief filed with the court on Thursday that
the suit could not continue without disclosing privileged and classified
information.

The translator, Sibel Edmonds, was a contract linguist for the bureau for about
six months, translating material in Azerbaijani, Farsi and Turkish. Ms. Edmonds
was dismissed in 2002 after complaining repeatedly that bureau linguists had
produced slipshod and incomplete translations of important terrorism
intelligence before and after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Ms. Edmonds also accused a fellow Turkish linguist in the Washington field
office of blocking the translation of material involving acquaintances who had
come under suspicion and said the bureau had allowed diplomatic sensitivities
with other nations to affect the translation of important intelligence.

''The effect of the government's posture in this case will be to discourage
national security whistle-blowers,'' said Ben Wizner, a lawyer with the American
Civil Liberties Union who is helping Ms. Edmonds. ''She is fighting for the
right to prove that she was wrongfully terminated.''

The case has become a lightning rod for critics who contend that the bureau
retaliated against Ms. Edmonds and other whistle-blowers who have sought to
expose management problems related to the antiterrorism campaign.

The A.C.L.U. joined her cause last month, when it asked the United States Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to reinstate her suit against
the government. The suit was dismissed in July after Attorney General John
Ashcroft invoked a rarely used power and declared the case as falling under
''state secret'' privilege.

The judge who issued that ruling, Reggie B. Walton of Federal District Court,
had said he was satisfied with government statements that the suit could expose
intelligence-gathering methods and disrupt diplomatic relations.

The Justice Department said in its brief that the appeals court should affirm
Judge Walton's decision, adding: ''The district court correctly recognized what
the classified declarations in the record establish: the privileged information
here is fundamentally implicated by Edmonds's allegations, and the case cannot
be litigated without disclosure of that information, which would damage national
security.''

The case touches on potential vulnerabilities for the bureau, including its
ability to translate sensitive counterterrorism material, its treatment of
whistle-blowers and its classification of sensitive material that critics say
could embarrass the bureau.

The Justice Department retroactively classified a 2002 Congressional briefing
about the case and some related letters from lawmakers, but this week it decided
to permit the information to be released. The inspector general of the
department concluded last month that the F.B.I. had failed to aggressively
investigate Ms. Edmonds's accusations of espionage and fired her in large part
for raising them.

In a report that the department sought for months to keep classified, the
inspector general issued a sharp rebuke to the bureau over its handling of Ms.
Edmonds's accusations. It reached no conclusions about whether her co-worker had
actually engaged in espionage, and it did not give details about the espionage
accusations because they remain classified.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%);
WHISTLEBLOWERS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (89%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPEALS COURTS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (88%); LAWYERS (78%); WRONGFUL TERMINATION
(78%); DISMISSALS (78%); JUDGES (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (77%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (55%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AZERBAIJAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             889 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women's Voices Rise as Rwanda Reinvents Itself

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1577 words

DATELINE: KIGALI, Rwanda, Feb. 23


The most remarkable thing about Rwanda's Parliament is not the war-damaged
building that houses it, with its bullet holes and huge artillery gashes still
visible a decade after the end of the fighting.

It is inside the hilltop structure, from the spectator seats of the lower house,
that one sees a most unusual sight for this part of the world: mixed in with all
the dark-suited male legislators are many, many women -- a greater percentage
than in any other parliamentary body in the world.

A decade after a killing frenzy left this tiny Central Africa country in ruins,
Rwanda is reinventing itself in some surprising ways.

Women make up 48.8 percent of seats in the lower house of Parliament, a higher
percentage than in the legislative bodies in countries like Sweden, Denmark, the
Netherlands and Norway, known for their progressive policies.

The rise of women stems in part from government initiatives aimed at propelling
them to the upper ranks of politics. But their numbers do not necessarily add up
to influence.

They are more a reflection of the demographics and disillusionment spawned by
the killing spree that left 800,000 or more people dead, though some lawmakers
are trying to use their new place in government to enhance the lot of women in
what remains a deeply patriarchal land.

''Before the genocide, women always figured their husbands would take care of
them,'' said Aurea Kayiganwa, the coordinator of Avega, a national organization
representing Rwanda's many war widows. ''But the genocide changed all that. It
forced women to get active, to take care of themselves. So many of the men were
gone.''

At the end of the ethnic warfare of the 1990's, women greatly outnumbered men --
some estimate the ratio as 7 to 1 -- a result of the wanton killing of so many
men and the escape of so many others involved in the carnage. During the
rebuilding of the country, then, women's anguished voices were difficult not to
hear, and they became what was seen as a powerful and credible force for
reconciliation.

''I used to see politics as something bad,'' said Athanasie Gahondogo, a member
of Parliament and executive secretary of the Forum for Rwandan Women
Parliamentarians. ''It's what caused our problems and made me a refugee for so
long. But now I want to have a seat at the table.''

Women were a tiny percentage of those jailed for taking part in the strife
between the Tutsi, who make up about 15 percent of the population, and the Hutu,
who represent nearly all of the rest. One study put the portion of women
involved at just 2.3 percent.

A minister of family and women's affairs in the old government, Pauline
Nyiramasuhukon, is on trial on genocide charges at the International Criminal
Tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania, but the heinous charges attributed to her,
including inciting others to rape Tutsi women, are considered by many here to be
an aberration when it comes to women.

''There's a widespread perception in Rwanda that women are better at
reconciliation and forgiveness,'' said Elizabeth Powley, who has studied Rwandan
women's political rise for Women Waging Peace, an organization based in
Cambridge, Mass. ''Giving them such prominence is partly an effort at conflict
prevention.''

During the drafting of the country's new postwar Constitution, 30 percent of the
seats in the two house of Parliament were designated for women. But an
unexpected thing happened in October 2003 when voters went to the polls to elect
a Parliament for the first time since the war. They chose even more women than
many male politicians expected.

''Some men even complained that women were taking some of the 'men' seats,''
said Donnah Kamashazi, a representative in Rwanda for the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

Six of the 20 seats in the Senate are held by women, meeting the 30 percent set
aside. But in the lower house, which has 80 seats, women won 39, 15 more than
the number reserved for them. Taken together, women make up 45 percent of the
two chambers, just below the 45.3 percent in Sweden's single-chamber Parliament.

The political representation of Rwandan women is not limited to the legislative
arena. There is a female chief justice of the Supreme Court, several female
cabinet members, a female head of the influential National Unity and
Reconciliation Commission and a female deputy police chief, to name but a few of
the prominent women in Rwanda's political world.

All that said, women continue to suffer profoundly in today's Rwanda. ''I try to
forget what happened in 1994,'' said one of the suffering ones, Cecille
Mukampabuka, 64, whose leg was shattered and who lost much of her family back
then. ''I would go mad if I didn't try to forget. But I can't ever forget. It's
not over yet for me. I'm still suffering.''

Rwanda remains a male-dominated land, far more than the gendersensitive numbers
would suggest.

Patriarchal traditions remain strong in the home, where experts say women
continue to suffer from spousal abuse and where the notion that the man is the
lord of the manor thrives. A female senator disclosed to colleagues recently
that she still deferred to her husband during official functions in her home so
as not to question his supremacy there.

And the uppermost reaches of government remain the preserves of men. In Rwanda,
President Paul Kagame, the former rebel leader whose forces quelled the mass
killing of Tutsi and moderate Hutu in 1994, holds a firm grip on power, and
loyalty to him remains a prerequisite for political survival, no matter one's
sex.

Criticism of any aspect of governing in Rwanda, including the country's
promotion of women, is done at one's own risk.

Recently, when the head of a women's organization questioned the effectiveness
of the country's female legislators in solving women's problems and likened them
to flowers, which look good but do little else, she was condemned and
threatened. Shortly afterward, she fled the country.

''It was bad research,'' complained Odette Nyiramirimo, an influential senator
and former cabinet minister. ''She was calling the women stupid. She used the
word flower to describe them. I think she was wrong.''

Ms. Nyiramirimo and other women in politics here acknowledge that Parliament
does not play an overly confrontation role with the executive branch, an
outgrowth, they say, of the divisive politics of the country's past. Only a
handful of pieces of legislation have originated in Parliament in recent years,
for instance, and little if anything that Mr. Kagame suggests is rejected, or
even substantially altered, before adoption.

Women also agree that it has taken some time for the female legislators to get
their feet wet in politics. During a recent afternoon of political debate, it
was clear that the proceedings were being dominated by men.

But women are making inroads. Legislation passed in 1999, before the current
influx of women, liberalized the rules restricting inheritance for women, which
were a major force in keeping women poor. Penalties for child rapists have been
toughened, an outgrowth of the brutal treatment that women and girls suffered in
1994.

''Men are watching us,'' Ms. Nyiramirimo said. ''They wonder if we'll rise up to
a higher level. We're learning fast, because we have to. We say to each other
that we can't be as good as the men -- we have to be better.''

Ms. Nyiramirimo said the true test of women's success would be how much they
changed the lives of rural women, those who do not tool around the capital in
chauffeur-driven vehicles and do not spend their time debating the issues of the
day.

''Women in leadership are doing the little they can, but the problems are as big
as the sea,'' said Mrs. Kamashazi of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women. ''Sometimes you just say, 'Oh, my goodness.'''

Rwanda remains a desperately poor country, where social indicators like life
expectancy, child mortality and literacy lag significantly behind most of the
world. Much of the day-to-day toil falls squarely on the shoulders of the
nation's war-weary women.

''I grew up in a rural area, and every morning before school I had to get up
early and fetch water at the river,'' Ms. Nyiramirimo recalled. ''It was so
painful to balance it on your head. Every time I go to my village I see girls
and women still doing it.''

One initiative she hopes to push her colleagues to adopt is a program to import
donkeys, which are common in other parts of Africa but rather rare here. They
would be bred and then distributed to villages to help relieve the loads women
must bear.

Talk of putting 1994 in the past is difficult for many women across Rwanda, who
find themselves poor and alone, or who suffer from AIDS contracted during a
violent rape then, or who are now raising many children who are not their own
but who were orphaned in the killing spree.

One of them is Winfred Mukagirhana, 46, who was raped repeatedly in 1994 and
like so many other Rwandan women is now dying of AIDS. She lost her husband and
four of her five children in 1994. Her lone surviving boy, who was 12 back then,
is now an emotionally disturbed young man who cannot get the brutal attacks that
he witnessed out of his head.

''What can the government do for me?'' she asked, saying she could not feel much
satisfaction from the statistics on women's progress that have put Rwanda so
high compared with other countries in the world. ''My life is over. I'm almost
dead.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Odette Nyiramirimo is head of the Senate social affairs and
human rights committee. ''We're learning fast,'' she said, ''because we have
to.''
Aurea Kayiganwa, the coordinator of Avega, a national organization representing
Rwanda's many war widows, in her office in the capital. (Photographs by
Guillaume Bonn for The New York Times)(pg. A6)Chart: ''Women Leaders''Rwanda has
the highest percentage of women in the lower house of Parliament. But the
percentages of women in government worldwide remain lower than in the adult
populations.RANK: 1. RwandaPCT. OF WOMEN AGES 15-64: 54.4PCT. OF WOMEN IN LOWER
PARLIAMENT: 48.8%RANK: 2. SwedenPCT. OF WOMEN AGES 15-64: 49.1PCT. OF WOMEN IN
LOWER PARLIAMENT: 45.3RANK: 3. DenmarkPCT. OF WOMEN AGES 15-64: 49.4PCT. OF
WOMEN IN LOWER PARLIAMENT: 38.0RANK: 4. FinlandPCT. OF WOMEN AGES 15-64:
49.5PCT. OF WOMEN IN LOWER PARLIAMENT: 37.5RANK: 5. NetherlandsPCT. OF WOMEN
AGES 15-64: 49.4PCT. OF WOMEN IN LOWER PARLIAMENT: 36.7RANK: 57. United
StatesPCT. OF WOMEN AGES 15-64: 50.4PCT. OF WOMEN IN LOWER PARLIAMENT:
14.9(Sources by Inter-Parliamentary Union
 World Bank, 2003 population)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); MEN
(76%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (76%); WOMEN (76%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (75%);
REFUGEES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (59%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (79%); AFRICA (79%);
DENMARK (79%); SWEDEN (78%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             893 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europe Union Upsets Croatia With Demands

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 357 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, Feb. 27


Croatia's new foreign minister says the European Union has made impossible
demands in requiring that a war crimes suspect be turned over to the
international tribunal at The Hague as a condition for starting negotiations on
membership.

The foreign minister, Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic, said late last week that the
requirement that her government arrest Gen. Ante Gotovina before talks start on
March 17 had effectively put Croatia's application in ''deadlock.''

She contends that there is no evidence the general is in Croatia, although the
tribunal says he is.

Requiring the arrest of the general, ''would really be in a deadlock situation
and a very dangerous one, because he is not in Croatia,'' she said. ''What is it
then possible for Croatia to do?''

Western diplomats said her remarks were unlikely to help. ''There is still a
perception that they are not doing everything they can,'' a Western official
said. ''They have to address that first.''

Since coming to power in December 2003, Croatia's conservative-led coalition
government has done more than any of its former Yugoslav neighbors to pursue war
crimes suspects sought by The Hague tribunal. Nine former members of the
security forces have been handed over to the court in the last year.

Until recently the government had stopped short of publicly calling for General
Gotovina's arrest, wary of losing support from nationalists who regard him as a
national hero. Instead it had called for suspects indicted by the tribunal to
surrender.

In the last month, the government has adopted a more deliberate tone. President
Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader made a joint televised address
calling for the general's arrest. The police were ordered to report any
information that could lead to his arrest. The general's assets are to be frozen
this week.

Diplomats and commentators here say there is little doubt the government wants
to deliver the former general to The Hague, but they say it is acting too late.

''When the water comes up to here, they do something,'' said Bruno Lopandic, the
diplomatic correspondent for the daily Vjesnik, raising his hand to his mouth.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ARRESTS (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (79%); INDICTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%) European Union

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Kolinda (Min) Grabar-Kitarovic; Ante (Gen) (Ret) Gotovina

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); ZAGREB, CROATIA (59%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); EUROPE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (93%)

REGION: Croatia; Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             896 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror Suspect Told Saudis Of Attack Plots, F.B.I. Says

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU and JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va., March 1


Ahmed Omar Abu Ali, the American student accused of plotting to assassinate
President Bush, told Saudi interrogators in 2003 that he and associates with Al
Qaeda had also discussed hijacking planes over American airspace, attacking
military bases and killing members of Congress, an agent with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation testified Tuesday.

But the agent said he was not present at the time of Mr. Abu Ali's alleged
admissions to Saudi investigators, and defense lawyers argued that any
confessions that he may have made while in Saudi custody for 20 months came as
result of torture by his Saudi captors. John K. Zwerling, one of the defendant's
lawyers, likened the defendant's alleged admissions to those of a hostage being
forced to read a ''confession'' on videotape before being beheaded.

The court testimony came at a bail hearing for Mr. Abu Ali, 23, a former
valedictorian at an Islamic high school in Northern Virginia who was charged in
an indictment unsealed last week with having provided material support to Al
Qaeda while studying in Saudi Arabia in 2002 and 2003. Mr. Abu Ali was arrested
there 20 months ago and held without charges until last week.

At the close of the hearing here, Magistrate Judge Liam O'Grady of Federal
District Court refused to release Mr. Abu Ali on bail, saying that he found
''clear and convincing evidence'' that the defendant represented a grave threat
to the community and that he was a flight risk.

But at the same time, Judge O'Grady voiced some support for a central defense
claim, saying that he was disturbed by an e-mail message that a senior F.B.I.
official sent last year. In it, the official said that investigators for the
bureau were no longer interested in Mr. Abu Ali.

The defense contends that even though investigators had lost interest in Mr. Abu
Ali's case many months ago, the Justice Department decided to bring criminal
charges against him last month after realizing that it was in danger of losing a
civil lawsuit brought by the defendant's parents.

In the indictment, prosecutors said the suspect's dealings with Al Qaeda in
Saudi Arabia included discussions about shooting Mr. Bush on a street or blowing
up a bomb near him. In seeking to have Mr. Abu Ali kept in custody, prosecutors
introduced the new accusations.

Before the hearing began, a court officer warned Mr. Abu Ali's parents against
trying to communicate with him, even by waving. The defendant, dressed in a
forest green prison suit and with a thick black beard, sat stoically at the
defense table. Though he appeared healthy, his lawyer said his back had been
scarred by whippings by Saudi interrogators.

Barry Cole, a counter-terrorism agent with the F.B.I. who worked on the case,
testified that in oral and written statements to the Saudis in 2003, Mr. Abu Ali
admitted to joining a Qaeda cell. Among the terrorist plots that Mr. Abu Ali
reportedly acknowledged in his statements to the Saudis, Mr. Cole said, was a
plan by Al Qaeda to board a plane from England or Australia to avoid American
security, hijack it over American airspace and crash it into a building in the
manner of the Sept. 11 attacks.

Mr. Cole said the defendant also acknowledged that he and associates with Al
Qaeda discussed plots to bomb American ships and planes at military bases, kill
unidentified members of Congress and rescue prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba. The agent did not detail the methods for such attacks, and like the
reported plot to assassinate the president, there was no indication from
Tuesday's court testimony that plans moved past the discussion stage.

Mr. Cole said that another member of the Saudi cell, identified in Mr. Abu Ali's
indictment only as Co-conspirator No.4, had turned himself in to the Saudis and
had also admitted taking part in discussions about terrorist operations against
the United States. A third person linked to the cell, identified as
Co-conspirator No.2, had talked with Mr. Abu Ali about killing Mr. Bush and
about inflicting ''mass casualties'' against Americans, but he was killed in a
shootout with the Saudis in 2003, the agent testified.

The F.B.I. agent said he was basing his testimony on reports, videos and other
material that the United States received from the Saudis. But the agent said he
interviewed the defendant in Riyadh in September 2003 over a period of four
days. Mr. Abu Ali asked for a lawyer, the agent testified, but after the United
States passed on the request, the Saudis refused to give him one.

Although evidence from such an interrogation is likely to be challenged by
defense lawyers as inadmissible in a criminal proceeding, the agent said he
continued interviewing Mr. Abu Ali in order to gather intelligence that was
considered ''vital to national security.''

The agent said Mr. Abu Ali also asked the F.B.I. to pass along a letter he had
written to his parents in Falls Church, Va. Reading from a copy of the letter,
the agent said that Mr. Abu Ali acknowledged to his family that he would
probably spend years in prison as a result of terrorism charges against him and
told them, ''Everyone makes mistakes.''

Several dozen family members and friends of Mr. Abu Ali's packed the courtroom
to watch the hearing. Some gasped as Judge O'Grady said that he thought comments
the family had made in the news media were ''consistent with jihadist
rhetoric.'' Noting that pro-Qaeda material had been found in the family's home,
the judge said he was concerned about turning the suspect over to their custody.

Mahdi Bray, executive director of the Muslim American Society Freedom Foundation
and a spokesman for the family, said the family was disappointed by the judge's
decision to keep Mr. Abu Ali in custody. But he added: ''Their faith in God is
strong, and they feel ultimately their son will be vindicated.''

                             --------------------


Abuse Lawsuit Names Rumsfeld

 WASHINGTON, March 1 (AP) -- A lawsuit filed Tuesday contended that Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld was responsible for torture and abuse of prisoners
held by the American military in Iraq and Afghanistan and should compensate the
victims. The suit was filed on behalf of four Iraqis and four Afghans who say
they suffered severe and repeated abuse. They were held in Afghanistan and Iraq
in 2003 and 2004, were never charged with crimes and have been released,
according to officials at the American Civil Liberties Union and Human Rights
First, which filed the suit.

The Pentagon said in a statement that military officials ''vigorously dispute
any assertion or implication that the Department of Defense approved of,
sanctioned, or condoned as a matter of policy detainee abuse.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Omar Abu Ali and Faten Abu Ali, the parents of Ahmed Omar Abu
Ali, yesterday at his hearing. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); ASSASSINATION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); HIJACKING (90%); LAWYERS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); ARRESTS (78%); MAGISTRATES (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HOSTAGE TAKING (77%); JUDGES (76%); LITIGATION (76%); BAIL
(74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(73%); AIRLINES (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%); RELIGION (53%) Terrorism;
Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%) Al Qaeda
(Terrorist Group); Congress (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) Eric Lichtblau; James Dao; Ahmed Omar Abu Ali;
George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             899 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 2, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The American Witness

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 753 words


American soldiers are trained to shoot at the enemy. They're prepared to be shot
at. But what young men like Brian Steidle are not equipped for is witnessing a
genocide but being unable to protect the civilians pleading for help.

If President Bush wants to figure out whether the U.S. should stand more firmly
against the genocide in Darfur, I suggest that he invite Mr. Steidle to the
White House to give a briefing. Mr. Steidle, a 28-year-old former Marine
captain, was one of just three American military advisers for the African Union
monitoring team in Darfur -- and he is bursting with frustration.

''Every single day you go out to see another burned village, and more dead
bodies,'' he said. ''And the children -- you see 6-month-old babies that have
been shot, and 3-year-old kids with their faces smashed in with rifle butts. And
you just have to stand there and write your reports.''

While journalists and aid workers are sharply limited in their movements in
Darfur, Mr. Steidle and the monitors traveled around by truck and helicopter to
investigate massacres by the Sudanese government and the janjaweed militia it
sponsors. They have sometimes been shot at, and once his group was held hostage,
but they have persisted and become witnesses to systematic crimes against
humanity.

So is it really genocide?

''I have no doubt about that,'' Mr. Steidle said. ''It's a systematic cleansing
of peoples by the Arab chiefs there. And when you talk to them, that's what they
tell you. They're very blunt about it. One day we met a janjaweed leader and he
said, 'Unless you get back four camels that were stolen in 2003, then we're
going to go to these four villages and burn the villages, rape the women, kill
everyone.' And they did.''

The African Union doesn't have the troops, firepower or mandate to actually stop
the slaughter, just to monitor it. Mr. Steidle said his single most frustrating
moment came in December when the Sudanese government and the janjaweed attacked
the village of Labado, which had 25,000 inhabitants. Mr. Steidle and his unit
flew to the area in helicopters, but a Sudanese general refused to let them
enter the village -- and also refused to stop the attack.

''It was extremely frustrating -- seeing the village burn, hearing gunshots, not
being able to do anything,'' Mr. Steidle said. ''The entire village is now gone.
It's a big black spot on the earth.''

When Sudan's government is preparing to send bombers or helicopter gunships to
attack an African village, it shuts down the cellphone system so no one can send
out warnings. Thus the international monitors know when a massacre is about to
unfold. But there's usually nothing they can do.

The West, led by the Bush administration, is providing food and medical care
that is keeping hundreds of thousands of people alive. But we're managing the
genocide, not halting it.

''The world is failing Darfur,'' said Jan Egeland, the U.N. under secretary
general for humanitarian affairs. ''We're only playing the humanitarian card,
and we're just witnessing the massacres.''

President Bush is pushing for sanctions, but European countries like France are
disgracefully cool to the idea -- and China is downright hostile, playing the
same supportive role for the Darfur genocide that it did for the Khmer Rouge
genocide.

Mr. Steidle has just quit his job with the African Union, but he plans to
continue working in Darfur to do his part to stand up to the killers. Most of us
don't have to go to that extreme of risking our lives in Darfur -- we just need
to get off the fence and push our government off, too.

At one level, I blame President Bush -- and, even more, the leaders of European,
Arab and African nations -- for their passivity. But if our leaders are
acquiescing in genocide, that's because we citizens are passive, too. If
American voters cared about Darfur's genocide as much as about, say, the Michael
Jackson trial, then our political system would respond. One useful step would be
the passage of the Darfur Accountability Act, to be introduced today by Senators
Jon Corzine and Sam Brownback. The legislation calls for such desperately needed
actions as expanding the African Union force and establishing a military no-fly
zone to stop Sudan from bombing civilians.

As Martin Luther King Jr. put it: ''Man's inhumanity to man is not only
perpetrated by the vitriolic actions of those who are bad. It is also
perpetrated by the vitiating inaction of those who are good.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); SHOOTINGS (78%); MAMMALS
(77%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (75%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%); INFANTS &
TODDLERS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); HELICOPTERS (71%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (69%);
WRITERS (67%); HOSTAGE TAKING (65%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (83%) African Union

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Nicholas D Kristof; Brian Steidle; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFRICA (91%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             902 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Standing for Freedom

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 96 words



To the Editor:

The timely ''Lebanon for the Lebanese'' (editorial, March 4), calling on Syria
to comply with the United Nations Security Council resolution and withdraw its
troops from Lebanon, should be followed by ''Palestine for the Palestinians''
and ''Iraq for the Iraqis.''

Foreign occupation must end, and foreign forces must leave. These communities
must be allowed to gain their freedom, their liberty and the right to design
their future free of terror and repression.

Standing for freedom in an era of moral decadence is a virtue.

Abbas Ali
Indiana, Pa., March 4, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); IRAQ (94%); SYRIA (92%); LEBANON
(92%); UNITED STATES (58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             903 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

London Mayor's Latest Statements on Israel Raise New Complaints

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 382 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 4


Ken Livingstone, London's outspoken mayor, drew fresh complaints from Jewish
organizations on Friday over an opinion piece published in the newspaper The
Guardian in which he accused Israel of ''ethnic cleansing'' and described Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon as a ''war criminal.''

The accusations played into a widening debate over anti-Semitism in Europe.

Mr. Livingstone is already embroiled in a dispute over refusing to apologize for
comparing a Jewish reporter to a concentration camp guard. But he went further
on Friday, writing that Israel was ''helping to promote a wholly distorted
picture of racism and religious discrimination in Europe, implying that the most
serious upsurge of hatred and discrimination is against Jews.''

The arguments about the mayor began last month when Oliver Finegold, an Evening
Standard reporter, asked Mr. Livingstone for comment after an official party.

Mr. Livingstone told Mr. Finegold that he was behaving like a German war
criminal, according to the reporter's tape-recording of the incident. When Mr.
Finegold said he was Jewish, the mayor said: ''Well, you might be, but actually
you are just like a concentration camp guard.''

Henry Grunwald, president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, wrote in an
opinion piece two days ago in The Guardian that ''The mayor overstepped the
bounds of acceptable behavior for an elected official. That is the core of our
complaint.''

The mayor wrote that his differences with Mr. Grunwald related to ''the policies
of successive Israeli governments,'' not anti-Semitism.

''Israel's expansion has included ethnic cleansing,'' he wrote. ''Palestinians
who had lived in that land for centuries were driven out by systematic violence
and terror aimed at ethnically cleansing what became a large part of the Israeli
state.''

Referring to the 1982 massacres of Palestinians at two refugee camps in Lebanon
when Mr. Sharon was defense minister, he wrote that Mr. Sharon was ''a war
criminal who should be in prison, not in office.''

Zvi Heifetz, Israel's ambassador to Britain, said the mayor was trying ''to
divert attention from the overwhelming criticism he has faced over the last few
months,'' the Press Association news agency reported.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); RELIGION (73%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (72%); REFUGEES
(72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); RACE & RACISM (69%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); EUROPE (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
GERMANY (79%); LEBANON (78%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             907 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thinking Outside the Icebox

BYLINE: By ZZ Packer.

ZZ Packer is the author of ''Drinking Coffee Elsewhere,'' a collection of
stories.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1017 words



DR. KING'S REFRIGERATOR
And Other Bedtime Stories.
By Charles Johnson.
123 pp. Scribner. $20.

IT seems unconscionable to think of American slavery in any terms besides that
of abject horror and a merciless struggle for survival, much less in set pieces
full of wickedly dark humor and irony. Yet Charles Johnson's National Book
Award-winning novel, ''Middle Passage'' (1990), and its predecessor, ''Oxherding
Tale'' (1982), succeed at just that, and Johnson's use of absurdity and his wit
become dual search beams, casting the familiar atrocities of ''the peculiar
institution'' in a stark new light.

Like ''Middle Passage'' and ''Oxherding Tale,'' nearly all of Johnson's novels
and stories showcase African or African-American characters through the windows
of slavery, manumission and segregation. But instead of filling his characters'
heads with chastening spirituals and dreams of freedom, Johnson explores the
meaning of freedom itself, arming his protagonists with doses of Kant, Hegel and
the Bhagavad-Gita as he watches from the sidelines to see how they make out.

In his new collection, ''Dr. King's Refrigerator: And Other Bedtime Stories,''
Johnson is once again at the ready with his quirky, professorial writing style
and his melange of Buddhism, Western philosophy and African magic realism.

The first story, ''Sweet Dreams,'' is a homage to Kafka. In an interesting
conceit that explores what sounds like some sci-fi version of the Patriot Act, a
man falls behind on the taxes he owes for his dreams. Sensing protest is futile,
he simply acquiesces to the system, but not before the overweening bureaucrat
who is ''auditing'' him offers one inadvertent gem: ''Those who dream more
always pay more.'' In ''Cultural Relativity'' a woman learns that her African
boyfriend, the son of his country's president, is forbidden to kiss. When she
dares to break tradition, she discovers that some cultural barriers are best
left unchallenged.

In the title story, ''Dr. King's Refrigerator,'' Johnson once again mines the
life of Martin Luther King Jr., the semi-subject and honored guest of his novel
''Dreamer'' (1998). In this story King stays up working on an overdue sermon,
and when he looks into the refrigerator for a late-night snack he finds ''bright
yellow slices of pineapple from Hawaii, truffles from England . . . a half-eaten
Mexican tortilla . . . German sauerkraut and schnitzel right beside Tibetan rice
. . . macaroni, spaghetti and ravioli favored by Italians.'' Struck by how
something as basic and elemental as food can represent the interconnectivity of
life, King basks in this revelation only to be brought to earth by his loving
wife.

Each of these tales is told, as the book's subtitle suggests, as one might
relate a story to a child at bedtime, with the light and facile tone of a fairy
tale coupled with the didactic weight of its moral. In adopting this style,
Johnson employs the pre-Chekhovian notion of the short story as merely a tale
for adults -- the short story as a sort of amuse-bouche. But even as the short
story gained greater plot complexity, it still remained devoid of any real
psychological underpinnings.

Arguably, Chekhov's greatest contribution to the form was to use a character's
psyche as a scalpel to cut through all we'd previously thought to be of primacy
in a story; setting, plot, motivation, morality -- each cross section pinned
aside until you saw the live, quivering innards of a story, and finally spied
its beating heart. The best pieces in Johnson's collection operate in this
fashion, and the characters, severed from the dubious life support of their
stories' premises, are free to act like humans.

In ''Kwoon,'' the protagonist is a well-meaning sifu, a martial arts teacher,
who has dedicated his life to the principles of discipline, humility and hard
work while serving as a mentor to the young street toughs in his class in a
South Side Chicago neighborhood. Everything changes when Ed Morgan drops by the
studio, or kwoon. A hulking former merchant seaman who seems to have studied
every type of martial art in its country of origin, Morgan vows to upset the
delicate balance of the kwoon with his outsize ego. It's a deceptively simple
story with deep, complex themes of identity, ego, truth and enlightenment. Not
only do the characters breathe and live, but the language itself swells with the
telling details and surprising beauty never absent from Johnson's longer works.

Other stories, such as ''Executive Decision'' and ''The Queen and the
Philosopher,'' seem like fiction exercises that fall under the weight of the
experimental burden they're expected to bear. ''Executive Decision'' is told
from the point of view of a white male executive who must decide between hiring
a well-off white woman and a laconic black man. It's a story that putatively
examines affirmative action, yet it feels too pat and does nothing to dramatize
the nexus of complexities involving bias, inequality, status, class struggles
and the like. All these issues are presented dossier-style, but regrettably,
aren't brought to life.

AS for ''The Queen and the Philosopher,'' we know all we need to know based on
an excerpt from Bertrand Russell's ''Wisdom of the West'' that prefaces the
story. The excerpt tells us that Queen Christina of Sweden demanded that
Descartes teach her philosophy at the freezing hour of 5 in the morning, causing
him to become ill and die. Johnson's story runs through this at greater length,
and adds but one twist: the queen challenges his conclusion, ''I think,
therefore I am.'' End of story.

Perhaps it isn't appropriate to call these stories ''tales'' or even ''bedtime
stories.'' Taken together, the collection reads like the narrative version of
koans -- Zen riddles used to focus the mind during meditation. They touch upon
previous themes in Johnson's work, namely, picking up the drop stitch of
philosophical thought that American fiction seems to have abandoned after
Transcendentalism, and using a possible return to philosophy in literature not
to impress or confound, but to provoke and delight.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Mary Randlett)Drawing (Drawing by Danijel Zezelj)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SLAVERY (90%);
NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%);
ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (76%); LITERATURE (71%); RELIGION (65%); PHILOSOPHY
(64%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (50%) Books and Literature; Reviews

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (79%) Zz Packer; Charles Johnson

STATE: HAWAII, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); ENGLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             912 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's in It for America?

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN.

Roger Cohen writes the ''Globalist'' column for The International Herald
Tribune.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; The World: Guesswork; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1704 words


IN the Middle East, an old order is weakening -- that of authoritarian,
repressive states walled off from modernity. A new order is rising, with
democracy stirring in countries from Iraq to Egypt, mass demonstrations pushing
out Syrian troops from Lebanon and a Palestinian leader apparently committing
himself to an open political system. But will this emergent democratic current,
if consolidated, make America safer?

President George W. Bush has argued that America's ideals are now synonymous
with its interests; the spread of freedom will drain the frustration and rage on
which terrorism feeds. The argument is beautiful in its simplicity. But it is
precisely in democratic Europe that Mohammed Atta, a mastermind of the 9/11
attacks, lived for about a decade, and it is from Britain, scarcely a stranger
to liberty, that Richard Reid, the would-be shoe bomber of American Airlines
Flight 63 from Paris to Miami, hailed. Democracy can open the way for many
things including illiberal opinion.

Turkey, long a pliant ally under military or military-backed rule, has proved
more restive under the government of a democratically elected moderate Islamic
party, forcing the United States to revise its Iraq invasion plans by denying
access to American troops. A fully democratic and independent Lebanon would
presumably reflect the fact that many Lebanese think Hezbollah, viewed as a
terrorist organization in Washington but not in Paris, is a force for good,
helping the needy and resisting Israel.

For a long time, American policy toward the Middle East was guided precisely by
such fears: democracy could be, and likely would be, dangerous. A blind eye was
turned to authoritarianism because it kept the shop in order, quieted the Arab
street and served American interests. But then the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001,
showed how treacherous the status quo could be.

''The traditional United States approach for the past half-century ignored what
went on inside Middle Eastern societies so long as they cooperated on energy,
security and diplomacy,'' said Richard Haass, president of the Council on
Foreign Relations. ''The president has now rejected that. The question is: can
he deliver an orderly transition?''

That question will likely not be answered for several years. But what is clear
already is that a region long marked by inertia is in flux. Events from Saudi
Arabia to Syria suggest that the invasion of Iraq and the election there have
indeed had a catalytic effect, opening up debate, tearing down walls. Democracy
is getting a toehold.

But terrorism remains a mystery. Nobody knows exactly what leads a young Muslim
to blow himself up in the name of a holy war against the West. As Walter
Laqueur, the historian specializing in political violence, has observed, ''There
can be no final victory in the fight against terrorism, for terrorism (rather
than full-scale war) is the contemporary manifestation of conflict, and conflict
will not disappear from earth.''

In other words, democracy is no panacea, but nor is anything else. Terrorism
will not crumble like Communism or Fascism, defeated by containment or force of
arms or economic measures or the ballot box. Indeed, it is possible the greater
proximity of Western ideas and practices may only redouble the jihadist urge,
which has been driven in part by the desire to re-create an infidel-free
caliphate. But it is also possible that a more open system may cool apocalyptic
urges in the Middle East as it has elsewhere.

''Democratic governments in the Middle East are going to be much more difficult
for the United States to handle because there will be more direct expression of
sentiment, much of it hostile,'' said Rashid Khalidi, a professor of Middle
Eastern studies at Columbia University. ''But in the end it will be healthier
and, yes, democracy could provide an outlet for the frustration that drives
people to jihadism.''

For many years, Islamism seemed the only such outlet. In varying degrees, the
Iranian revolution, jihadist successes in Afghanistan, and the anti-Western
teachings of men like the executed Egyptian writer Sayyid Qutb contributed to
this vogue. So, too, did the hypocrisy of the West in making it clear that
democracy was not for countries like Egypt or Saudi Arabia or Algeria, where a
democratic election that seemed about to usher Islamists to power was quashed in
1991.

But in both the West and the Middle East, the currents that produced this drift
seem to be ebbing. The Algerian experience was scarcely edifying; it ushered in
a period of terrible conflict. Turkey may be harder to handle as a democracy,
but it has scarcely ceased to be an ally. The Bush administration has concluded
that Middle Eastern democracy is preferable, however uncomfortable it may prove.

Among Muslims, too, the forces prodding a rethinking are significant. The Afghan
model for a fundamentalist Islamic society has been demolished. The fervor of
the Iranian revolution has faded. The invasion of Iraq has brought into the Arab
heartland a model -- still fragile and bitterly contested -- of a liberal and
democratic society. Democracy is no longer an abstraction, a risible plaything
selectively dangled by Western powers with interests more compelling than
ideals. It is right there, on the doorstep, or on the screen in the living room.

''The discourse is changing in the Arab world,'' said Patrick Clawson, the
deputy director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ''If you want
to adopt a radical cause, Islamism is no longer the only answer. You can go join
those 500 demonstrators for democracy surrounded by 3,000 police in the streets
of Cairo.''

Of course, if you're angry enough, you can also blow up kids at a Tel Aviv
discotheque, or drive an explosives-laden car into police recruits in Iraq, or
kill a judge preparing to conduct the trials of Saddam Hussein's henchmen. There
are plenty of Arabs still ready to do this in the service of plenty of causes:
fanatical Islamic fundamentalism, anti-imperial nationalism, anti-Zionism or
simply the defense of threatened privilege.

The argument that the American invasion of Iraq has boosted recruitment for Al
Qaeda and other jihadist groups, increased Muslim hatred of the West, injected a
dangerous instability into a turbulent region, and given suicide bombers new
cause for their zeal cannot be ignored. The push for democracy through force or
arms and unbending rhetoric may only have increased the danger, at least in the
short term.

''The barrier of fear is beginning to break,'' said Murhaf Jouejati, the
director of Middle Eastern studies at George Washington University. ''President
Bush has shaken the status quo, shaken the apathy.'' But he added: ''I do not
think the ideology of Al Qaeda is fading or weakening for the moment. On the
contrary, it is reacting to, and in some ways benefiting from, Western
penetration. You have two contradictory forces; Islamic fundamentalism is not
yet on the retreat.''

In Baghdad, the epicenter of the ideological struggle, the theater that now
draws every global current of anti-American fanaticism, the clash of the two
forces -- modernizing and reactionary -- that are trying to benefit from the
collapse of the old Middle Eastern order is intense.

When electricity is cut again, or when your car pivots at high speed because a
hooded gunman has been spotted, or when fires flicker in empty streets inhabited
only by skittering trash, or when not even children will look you in the eye,
this whole American-led effort to transform a country and a region appears
doomed.

But unexpected voices rise from the chaos. ''People are beginning to feel their
own authority, to feel they can create things for themselves, which is the
beginning of democracy,'' said Humam Hamoudi, a prominent Shiite in Iraq and a
leader of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution.

Such sentiment may be significant: the promise of paradise in another life has
surely proved persuasive to the suicide-bomber jihadist in part because closed
societies made any change in this life seem out of reach.

The West has tried cold-war containment in the Middle East, living with conflict
on a regional scale. It has tried the quiet or sometimes flagrant hypocrisy that
characterized the response to the 1991 Algerian election or the decision to let
4,000 Saudi princes do what they like. What has not been tried is the
proposition now being tested: that the Middle East is not some strange
exception, but will, as Europe and the Americas have, find in democracy a cause
for peace.

''I think the United States has shifted the momentum in its favor,'' said Paul
Berman, the author of ''Terror and Liberalism.'' ''The jihadists' utopia in
Afghanistan has been overthrown. We have given democratic ideas a chance in
Iraq, although I think we did it badly. It was never Western liberals who were
going to defeat these ideologues. It was the liberals of the Muslim and Arab
world, and they are stronger today.''

A couple of months ago, I sat in a Gaza office with a beautiful view of the
Mediterranean listening to one such liberal, a Palestinian psychologist, Dr.
Eyad Serraj, explain the culture of martyrdom; explain how shame is transposed
into honor through self-sacrifice and defeat is conquered by assuming ''the
ultimate power, the power to kill''; explain how martyrs were on the level of
prophets and so could not be questioned ''although their acts are devastating to
us politically.''

It was this culture that Yasir Arafat encouraged, a culture of hopelessness, of
the victim, of victory only in death. In so doing, he was representative of his
region. He was a dictator who, like Saddam Hussein, offered only one escape:
another world.

''Arafat was untouchable,'' said Mr. Serraj. ''But Mahmoud Abbas is a human
being like the rest of us. He's bringing us back to reality, beyond rhetoric and
slogans. I hope we will now get realism and pragmatism.''

Democracy, the kind Mr. Abbas is promoting as the Palestinians' new president,
is all about realism and pragmatism. That is what Iraqis are finding now as they
try to form a government. Their experience may just be infectious and make
America safer. At least it looks that way for now.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Iraq, two forces -- modernizing and reactionary -- are
trying to benefit from the collapse of the old order. The same dynamic is at
work throughout the Middle East. (Photo by Chris Hondros/Getty Images)(pg. 1)
(Photo by Burt Herman/Associated Press)
(Photo by Galli Tibbon/Agence France-Presse-Getty Images)
(Photo by Themba Hadebe/Associated Press)
 (Photo by Farjana K. Godhuly/Agence France-Presse Getty Images)(pg.
3)Chart/Maps: ''An Uneven Landscape of Democracy''The recent series of early
steps toward democracy in the Middle East this year -- elections in Iraq, Saudi
Arabia and among the Palestinians, followed now by demonstrations in Lebanon
seeking the withdrawal of Syrian troops -- raises the question of how many of
the world's people live in countries that are considered truly free.An annual
study by Freedom House, a human rights organization, rates the level of
political freedom and civil liberties experienced by each nation's citizens. Its
most recent assessments, released in December, are below.Nations Not Free37
percent of all people live under the harshest 49 regimes.LEAST AT LIBERTYThe
eight countries with the greatest political restrictions and widest violations
of civil liberties are shaded darker and labeled in BOLD TYPE on the map. The
Russian region of Chechnya and the Chinese region of Tibet have equally poor
ratings.KYRGYZSTAN, TAJIKISTANBoth held elections last week that were denounced
as unfair by outside observers.IRAQBefore the January election, which could
bring a better rating at the end of this year, Iraq had an appointed
government.AFGHANISTANA presidential election was held in 2004, but serious
restrictions on civil liberties remain.BELARUSThe most repressive regime in
Europe persisted in 2004. President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, above, ran
virtually unopposed and was re-elected.RUSSIARussia was downgraded from partly
free to not free, says Freedom House, because of an ''increased consolidation of
political authority and stepped-up harassment and restrictionson independent
media.'' The sudden shift downward in those categories left it with a lower
rating even than some African countries which, despite being monarchies or
one-party states, scored higher on Freedom House's broad scales of political
rights and civil liberties, says Michael Goldfarb, senior press
officer.TURKMENISTANPresident Saparmurat A. Niyazov's likeness, below, is
displayed throughout the nation. Niyazov has created a Soviet-style personality
cult.Partly Free54 countries have mixed record on political and civil
rights.LATIN AMERICASeveral nations have slid back from earlier ''free''
ratings: Honduras in 1998, Venezuela in 1999, Ecuador in 2000, Trinidad and
Tobago in 2001 and Bolivia in 2003. Factors range from political instability to
civil strife.UKRAINEViktor A. Yushchenko, below, prevailed in a flawed 2004
election marked by increased civic activism, judicial independence and press
freedom.GEORGIAA 2004 election, seen as free and fair by monitors, improved its
rating.INDONESIADemocratic since 1998, it elected an ex-general as president in
2004. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono promised to maintain civilian rule.Free89
countries have largely fair, competitive elections and freedom of expression,
assembly, association, education and religion.NAMIBIAOnce ruled by South
Africa's apartheid regime, the former German colony held a presidential election
in 2004. Below, a polling station.INDIAManmohan Singh, below, became prime
minister last year after his party won national elections. India is the world's
largest democracy.Freedom, Measured By PopulationSince 1980, the portion of the
world's people living under oppressive regimes has diminished. The share of
those living in free nations is approaching 50 percent.Graphs track the
percentage of the global population considered free, parlty, free, or not free
from 1980 through 2004. Below are the figures for 2004:NATIONS NOT FREE:
37%PARTLY FREE: 19%FREE: 44%''NOT FREE'' AND ''PARTLY FREE'' -- The spike of
people in partially free nations -- and the corresponding dip of those in free
nations -- was primarily due to a period of reduced freedom in India from 1991
to 1997. Sectarian violence was largely to blame.Maps of the world highlight
countries which are considered free, partly free, and not free.(Bill Marsh and
C.B. Williams/The New York Times)(Source by Freedom House)(pg. 3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HEZBOLLAH (77%); WAR ON TERROR
(77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%);
IRAQ WAR (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%); FOREIGN POLICY (69%); HISTORY (67%);
RELIGION (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (63%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (61%); AIRLINES
(53%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: FREEDOM HOUSE (93%); HEZBOLLAH (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (56%)

PERSON: SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO (56%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (91%)

STATE: XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MIDDLE EAST (95%); IRAQ (94%); SYRIA (94%);
LEBANON (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); INDIA (92%); SAUDI ARABIA
(92%); EGYPT (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (91%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
TRINIDAD & TOBAGO (79%); AFRICA (79%); TURKEY (79%); GERMANY (79%); SOUTH AFRICA
(79%); ISRAEL (79%); TIBET (79%); KYRGYZSTAN (79%); CHINA (58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             915 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Presses Syria to Leave Lebanon Soon

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


President Bush stepped up American pressure on Syria on Tuesday to withdraw from
Lebanon and warned authoritarian governments throughout the Middle East that
they stand before a powerful, fast-moving wave of democracy.

''Across the Middle East, a critical mass of events is taking that region in a
hopeful new direction,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech at the National Defense
University in Washington. ''History is moving quickly, and leaders in the Middle
East have important choices to make.''

Seeking to encourage the shift toward democracy that has been on display to
varying degrees in Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan, Egypt and the Palestinian
territories, and implicitly to claim a share of credit for it, Mr. Bush said the
United States would stand by the Lebanese people and all those who work to end
tyranny. ''By now it should be clear that authoritarian rule is not the wave of
the future -- it is the last gasp of a discredited past,'' he said.

Mr. Bush continued his effort to isolate and weaken Syria, and sought to head
off what appears to be an effort by Syria to play for time by specifying what he
meant by his previous demand that Syria withdraw from Lebanon immediately and
completely.

Syria has so far agreed only to move its forces in Lebanon toward Bekaa, near
the Syrian border, by the end of March. The Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad,
said in a joint statement on Monday with his Lebanese counterpart and ally,
Emile Lahoud, that full withdrawal would have to wait for negotiations with a
future Lebanese government. In his speech, Mr. Bush rejected that timetable,
saying he wanted Syria to have its military and intelligence forces out before
Lebanon holds parliamentary elections in May so the vote can proceed free of
foreign influence.

''The Lebanese people have the right to determine their future, free from
domination by a foreign power,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The Lebanese people have the
right to choose their own Parliament this spring, free of intimidation.''

Mr. Bush, who spoke hours after hundreds of thousands of people turned out in
Beirut for a pro-Syria rally organized by Hezbollah, which the United States
considers a terrorist organization, did not address the divisions within Lebanon
or mention Hezbollah by name. But he called on both Syria and Iran ''to stop
using murder as a tool of policy, and to end all support for terrorism.''

After Mr. Bush spoke, the Syrian ambassador to the United States, Imad
Moustapha, told CNN that Syria was already withdrawing its troops and would
complete the job ''as soon as possible, even long time before May,'' and that
the onus was now on the United States to press Israel to pull its forces out of
disputed territories.

The United States has already imposed some sanctions on Syria, but it is not
clear what further action it might take should Syria fail to withdraw from
Lebanon.

Mr. Bush, clearly cognizant that any developments smacking of American influence
would be devalued in most Arab nations, was careful not to claim that the
stirrings of democracy in the Middle East were anything but an expression of a
pent-up demand for freedom among the people of the region.

Still, after enduring years of criticism that his appeal for democracy in the
Middle East was little more than an after-the-fact rationale for the invasion of
Iraq, and a relatively impotent one at that, he included in his speech one
passage that had I-told-you-so overtones.

''Americans, of all people, should not be surprised by freedom's power,'' Mr.
Bush said. ''A nation founded on the universal claim of individual rights should
not be surprised when other people claim those rights.''

But he wove together the theme he first set out in his Inaugural Address in
January -- that the overriding goal of American foreign policy should be to
spread freedom -- with his approach to combating the threat from Al Qaeda and
other violent Islamic extremists. The two, he concluded, reinforce each other.

''Our strategy to keep the peace in the longer term is to help change the
conditions that give rise to extremism and terror, especially in the Middle
East,'' Mr. Bush said.

He said advancing that goal required new thinking from the major democracies,
including the United States, which he suggested had contributed to ''injustice
and instability and tragedy'' in the Middle East through ''decades of excusing
and accommodating tyranny in the pursuit of stability.''

The United States and other democracies, he said, now had to make a
''generational commitment'' to nurturing freedom in a part of the world where
the obstacles to it are many but the signs of progress are clear and the
benefits to American national security concrete.

''Freedom has determined enemies who show no mercy for the innocent and no
respect for the rules of warfare,'' he said. ''Many societies in the region
struggle with poverty and illiteracy. Many rulers in the region have
long-standing habits of control. Many people in the region have deeply ingrained
habits of fear. For all these reasons, the chances of democratic progress in the
broader Middle East have seemed frozen in place for decades. Yet at last,
clearly and suddenly, the thaw has begun.''

Mr. Bush suggested that just as the elections in Iraq in January had shown the
power of democracy, the emergence of a true democracy in Lebanon could encourage
further change throughout the Middle East. Success in Lebanon, he quoted ''one
Lebanese observer'' as saying, would amount to a ring on ''the doors of every
Arab regime.''

Among the nations he singled out as ripe for a move toward democracy was Iran,
which the United States is pressuring to give up its nuclear program. ''We look
forward to the day when the Iranian people are free,'' he said.

His speech, though, also hinted, perhaps unintentionally, at some of the
contradictions within his policies. He approvingly cited the pressure being
brought to bear on Syria by ''Russia and Germany and France and Saudi Arabia and
the United States'' without directly raising American concerns about Russia's
backsliding on democracy or Saudi Arabia's human rights record.

But he praised Saudi Arabia's decision to hold elections -- limited municipal
polls in which only men were allowed to vote -- as ''the beginning of reform
that may allow greater participation in the future.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush during his speech yesterday at the National
Defense University in Washington. He acknowledged that the U.S. and others had
sometimes supported undemocratic governments in the Middle East. (Photo by Doug
Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (84%); POLITICS (79%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (76%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(71%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%);
TERRORISM (65%); ARMED FORCES (63%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (62%) United States
International Relations; Politics and Government; Elections

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY (83%)

PERSON: EMILE LAHOUD (59%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (59%) George W (Pres) Bush; Richard
W Stevenson

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MIDDLE EAST (96%); SYRIA (95%); LEBANON (94%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); IRAQ (79%); ISRAEL
(79%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Lebanon; Syria; Middle East; Lebanon

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             916 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovo's New Chance

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 295 words


The indictment of a prime minister on war crimes charges hardly seems like good
news, but for troubled and bloodied Kosovo, that's what it is, or at least
should be. When Ramush Haradinaj, who had been prime minister of the provincial
government for only about three months, resigned yesterday after being informed
of his indictment by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, it gave Kosovo's ethnic Albanians a new chance to show they deserve
independence.

Choosing Mr. Haradinaj in the first place was one of several distressing signs
that the Kosovo Albanians were not yet ready for running their own country,
which would require them to guarantee the rights and security of the Serb
minority. Less than a year ago, ethnic Albanians went on a rampage that left 19
Serbs dead and 900 wounded.

Mr. Haradinaj has been accused by the Serbs of committing atrocities in the
Decani region of western Kosovo when he was a commander there of the Kosovo
Liberation Army, the guerrilla army that battled Serb forces in the late 1990's.
He has denied any wrongdoing, but K.L.A. fighters were reported to be
responsible for killing Serbs and ethnic Albanians suspected of collaborating
with Serb rule.

An international review this summer is supposed to determine whether Kosovo has
met the standards of governance and interethnic harmony that would justify
granting it independence under a timetable set by the Security Council. It's
been clear lately that Kosovo's leaders have failed the test. But the Kosovo
Albanians could take a big step toward countering that impression by choosing a
new prime minister who is not tainted by his actions during the battles with the
Serbs and who could serve as a moderating, uniting influence in the divided
province.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
PRIME MINISTERS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); POLITICS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (54%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Editorials; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); KOSOVO
LIBERATION ARMY (56%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Ramush Haradinaj

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); SERBIA (96%); ALBANIA (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             917 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovo Chief Surrendering to Hague Tribunal

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 8


Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj of Kosovo unexpectedly resigned Tuesday and
agreed to surrender to the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague,
which said it had indicted him for actions as a guerrilla commander fighting
Serbian forces during the 1998-99 war.

Mr. Haradinaj's decision to step down and answer war crimes charges came as a
shock in Kosovo, a Serbian province of close to two million people where he
became prime minister in December and remains a popular war hero.

In a statement, he said he was ''innocent of any crime'' and felt ''insulted by
this process.''

''I feel they are taking me from my job at a time when I am giving the maximum
for my country,'' he said, adding that he ''never believed'' he would have to
leave office, but was accepting it for the country's sake.

His case is the latest in a series of developments involving senior officials
who have turned themselves in to The Hague tribunal, which deals with crimes
from the 1990's wars that tore Yugoslavia apart.

At the United Nations tribunal, prosecutors released no details about the
charges, but it was widely known in Kosovo that tribunal investigators
questioned him twice in November, just before he became prime minister.
According to reports there, investigators focused on the killings of Kosovo Serb
civilians and Albanian ''collaborators,'' carried out by men under his command.

Mr. Haradinaj, 36, a former Kosovo Liberation Army chief and the most senior
Kosovar to be indicted so far, said the charges against him were based on
''Serbian lies.''

In Kosovo, which is under United Nations administration, NATO increased its
18,000-member peacekeeping contingent overnight by 1,000 more troops, fearing
that the announcement could revive confrontations between the Kosovo Albanians
and the Serbian minority.

The Kosovo Liberation Army was a Western-backed ethnic Albanian force that
fought Serbian troops in the late 1990's in the province, until military
intervention by NATO ended the conflict in 1999. The United Nations estimates
that up to 10,000 Kosovo Albanians were killed.

Despite the end of open hostilities, tensions are high. Last March, for example,
19 people were killed during riots when Albanians attacked Serbs and other
minority members.

For the tribunal in The Hague, the surrender from Kosovo comes at an unusually
busy time. Since October, six high-ranking former Serbian and Bosnian Serb
officers have arrived to face war crimes charges. The latest was no less than
the former chief of the Serbian army, Gen. Momcilo Peresic, who surrendered to
the United Nations prison on Monday. Just days earlier, the court had taken
custody of a former Bosnian army commander, Rasim Delic.

The officers, from opposing sides in wars that took more than 200,000 lives,
have gone to The Hague as a result of economic and political pressure from
Europe and the United States. All entities of the former Yugoslavia -- including
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo -- now want to talk about their future in
Europe, and the European Union has made cooperation with the tribunal a
condition for any talks about closer ties.

At the same time, the war crimes tribunal itself has been under pressure to step
up its pace. The United Nations Security Council, which created the special
court, has demanded that it concentrate on the highest ranking suspects only and
will close down its work by 2008.

For Kosovo, the stakes are particularly high. The Serbian province hopes to
begin talks this year on independence, which has the backing of a huge majority
of its people. One price to be paid, it appears, is the surrender of Mr.
Haradinaj.

The NATO secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, hinted Tuesday at that price.
''Kosovo is entering a crucial period during which it will be judged on its
progress meeting the standards set by the international community,'' he said in
Brussels. ''Cooperation with the tribunal is one of those standards.''

Mr. Haradinaj has had a wide-ranging career which includes a stint as a platoon
commander in the Yugoslav Army, and later as an immigrant, working as a
carpenter, security guard and martial arts teacher in Switzerland. During the
Kosovo separatist rebellion against Serbia, he gained a reputation as a tough
guerrilla fighter and zone commander in the Kosovo Liberation Army. He was also
widely vilified in Belgrade, where the authorities have charged him with several
hundred killings and kidnappings.

His office said he would travel to The Hague on Wednesday. The deputy prime
minister, Adem Salihaj, is to take his place until Parliament approves a new
prime minister.

On Tuesday, Mr. Haradinaj said his indictment was a ''result of the trade-off
that some have made with the Serbian government'' to make sure that Belgrade
would extradite high-ranking Serbian war crimes suspects.

Tribunal officials have declined to comment. The office of the prosecutor
confirmed the indictment, but gave no details.

At the United Nations jail near The Hague, Mr. Haradinaj will join some 50
prisoners -- including his longtime enemy, Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Serbian president -- as well as three of his own former comrades.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ramush Haradinaj, holding his indictment yesterday, resigned as
Kosovo's prime minister. (Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ARMIES (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(75%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (84%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Ramush Haradinaj; Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); NETHERLANDS (94%); ALBANIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); KOSOVO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); FRANCE (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             919 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovar Faces 37 U.N. Counts of War Crimes Against Serbs

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 10


Ramush Haradinaj, the former prime minister of Kosovo, was charged by a United
Nations tribunal on Thursday with 37 war crimes counts that include atrocities
against Serbs like murder and rape. He could face life in prison if convicted on
a single count.

Mr. Haradinaj, a former commander of the ethnic Albanian rebels who fought
Serbian forces in Kosovo's 1998-99 war, surrendered to the court on Wednesday
after resigning as prime minister. Two other Kosovo Albanian rebel commanders
also turned themselves in.

In the indictment unsealed by United Nations judges, Mr. Haradinaj faces 17
counts of crimes against humanity for murder, rape, persecution, inhumane acts,
unlawful detention and deportation or forcible transfer of civilians. He also
faces 20 counts of violations of the laws or customs of war for cruel treatment,
murder and rape.

As the commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Mr. Haradinaj ''personally
ordered, controlled and participated in beatings'' of civilians, according to
the indictment.

Mr. Haradinaj, 36, is expected to appear in court in the coming days, when he
will be asked to plea to the charges.

Lahi Brahimaj, another suspect named in the indictment, traveled to the court
with Mr. Haradinaj. Mr. Brahimaj was a rebel and a member of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, a civilian emergency group made up of ethnic Albanian former
rebels. A third former rebel, Idriz Balaj, was also indicted by the court and
surrendered Wednesday.

International officials praised Mr. Haradinaj -- a seasoned battlefield
commander with a fiery temper and a loyal following -- for his decision to
cooperate with the court, and called on other countries in the region to follow
his example.

The indictment said Mr. Haradinaj's forces drove Serbian and Gypsy civilians
from villages ''and killed those civilians that remained behind.''

Mr. Balaj, serving under Mr. Haradinaj, ran a special unit known as the Black
Eagles, which ''repeatedly abducted, beat, mutilated, tortured and murdered
civilians and detained persons taking no active part in hostilities,'' the
indictment said.

It charged that Mr. Balaj raped a Gypsy woman and tortured a prisoner at a
detention center, and tried to cover up civilian murders by having victims'
bodies thrown into a lake.

In the second half of May 1998, ''a makeshift detention center was established
at the K.L.A. (Kosovo Liberation Army) headquarters in Jablanica where at least
16 noncombatants were detained, beaten and tortured,'' the indictment said.
''One is known to have died while the others are still missing.''

                             --------------------


Bosnian Serb Surrenders to U.N.

 BELGRADE, Serbia, March 10 (Reuters) -- Mica Stanisic , a former Bosnian Serb
minister, will surrender to the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague
on Friday, according to a Serbian government statement on Thursday.

A tribunal statement said Mr. Stanisic, who was the interior minister in the
breakaway Bosnian Serb republic during the 1992-95 Bosnian war, faced 10 counts
of crimes against humanity and three of violations of the laws or customs of
war.

The charges include murder, torture and deportation committed by Bosnian Serb
security services under his command as part of a campaign of ''ethnic
cleansing'' to force out Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); SEX OFFENSES (90%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
DEPORTATION (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%);
MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (84%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (56%) International Court of Justice (Un)
(World Court)

PERSON: Ramush Haradinaj; Idriz Balaj; Lahi Brahimaj

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); ALBANIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             920 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2005 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON SEEKS TO SHIFT INMATES FROM CUBA BASE

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL; Neil A. Lewis and Tim Golden contributed reporting for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: GUANTANAMO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1493 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


The Pentagon is seeking to enlist help from the State Department and other
agencies in a plan to cut by more than half the population at its detention
facility in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in part by transferring hundreds of suspected
terrorists to prisons in Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan and Yemen, according to
senior administration officials.

The transfers would be similar to the renditions, or transfers of captives to
other countries, carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency, but are subject
to stricter approval within the government, and face potential opposition from
the C.I.A. as well as the State and Justice Departments, the officials said.

Administration officials say those agencies have resisted some previous
handovers, out of concern that transferring the prisoners to foreign governments
could harm American security or subject the prisoners to mistreatment.

A Feb. 5 memorandum from Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld calls for broader
interagency support for the plan, starting with efforts to work out a
significant transfer of prisoners to Afghanistan, the officials said. The
proposal is part of a Pentagon effort to cut a Guantanamo population that stands
at about 540 detainees by releasing some outright and by transferring others for
continued detention elsewhere.

The proposal comes as the Bush administration reviews the future of the naval
base at Guantanamo as a detention center, after court decisions and shifts in
public opinion have raised legal and political questions about the use of the
facility.

The White House first embraced using Guantanamo as a holding place for terrorism
suspects taken in Afghanistan, in part because the base was seen as beyond the
jurisdiction of United States law. But recent court rulings have held that
prisoners there may challenge their detentions in federal court.

Indeed, the Pentagon has halted, for the last six months, the flow of new
terrorism suspects into the prison, Defense Department officials said. In
January, a senior American official said in an interview that most prisoners at
Guantanamo no longer had any intelligence value and were not being regularly
interrogated.

The proposed transfers would represent a major acceleration of Pentagon efforts
that have transferred 65 prisoners from Guantanamo to foreign countries. The
population at Guantanamo includes more than 100 prisoners each from Afghanistan,
Saudi Arabia and Yemen, a senior administration official said, and the United
States might need to provide money or other logistical support to make possible
a large-scale transfer to any of those nations.

Defense Department officials said that the adverse court rulings had contributed
to their determination to reduce the population at Guantanamo, in part by
persuading other countries to bear some of the burden of detaining terrorism
suspects.

Under the administration's approach, the State Department is responsible for
negotiating agreements in which receiving countries agree ''to detain,
investigate, and/or prosecute'' the prisoners and to treat them humanely.

''Our top choice would be to win the war on terrorism and declare an end to it
and repatriate everybody,'' a senior Defense Department official said in an
interview. ''The next best solution would be to work with the home governments
of the detainees in order to get them to take the necessary steps to mitigate
the threat these individuals pose.''

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that future transfers
into Guantanamo remained a ''possibility,'' but made clear that the court
decisions and the burdens of detaining prisoners at the American facility had
made it seem less attractive to administration policymakers than before.

''It's fair to say that the calculus now is different than it was before,
because the legal landscape has changed and those are factors that might be
considered,'' a senior Defense Department official said.

In addition to working to transfer prisoners to their home countries, either to
face charges there or simply to be kept in detention, officials also hope to
shed dozens of prisoners whose cases are being studied by special review boards.

Those three-member military boards began working in earnest in January to
determine which prisoners are no longer a threat, have no information of value
and may be released outright.

At its peak, the population at Guantanamo exceeded 750 prisoners. But the last
time prisoners were transferred there was on Sept. 22, 2004, when a group of 10
was transferred from Afghanistan. The United States has already dispatched 211
Guantanamo prisoners, releasing the majority of them. Sixty-five have been
transferred to the custody of other counties, including 29 to Pakistan, 5 to
Morocco, 7 to France, 7 to Russia, and 4 to Saudi Arabia.

The administration's policy of detaining suspected terrorists at Guantanamo has
relied on declarations that the detainees are unlawful ''enemy combatants,''
based on assertions that they did not serve in a conventional army, and thus did
not qualify for the protections listed in the Geneva Conventions.

Administration lawyers argued successfully in lower federal courts that United
States laws, including access to the courts, did not apply because Guantanamo is
part of Cuba.

But last June, the Supreme Court ruled that United States law applied to
Guantanamo and that prisoners there could challenge their detentions in federal
courts.

In August, a federal district judge ruled that the Geneva Conventions apply to
Guantanamo prisoners and that the special military commissions to try war crimes
were unconstitutional. The government's appeal of that ruling is scheduled to be
heard next month.

Even as it moves to reduce the population at Guantanamo, the Pentagon has asked
Congress for another $41 million in supplemental financing for construction
there, including $36 million for a new, more modern prison and $5 million for a
new perimeter fence.

The purpose, Defense Department officials said, was to provide a secure, humane
detention facility for a remnant of the current population who are expected to
remain there for the foreseeable future.

As many as 200 of those now at Guantanamo will most likely remain there
indefinitely, the officials said, on grounds that they are too dangerous to be
turned over to other nations or would probably face mistreatment if returned to
those nations.

Each of the roughly 540 prisoners at Guantanamo have gone before a three-member
military board, to have their status as enemy combatants reviewed. A final
review has been completed in 487 cases; of those, all but 22 were found to have
been properly classified, a status leaving them subject to possible war crimes
charges.

Unlike the Pentagon, the C.I.A. was authorized by President Bush after the Sept.
11 attacks to transfer prisoners from one foreign country to another without
case-by-case approval from other government departments. Former intelligence
officials said that the C.I.A. has carried out 100 to 150 such transfers, known
as renditions, since Sept. 11.

By contrast, the transfers carried out by the Pentagon are subject to strict
rules requiring interagency approval. Officials said that the transfers do not
constitute renditions under the Pentagon's definition, because the governments
that accept the prisoners are not expected to carry out the will of the United
States.

Indeed, officials have been concerned that transfer of some detainees could
threaten American security because they might escape from foreign prisons or the
foreign governments might free them.

The White House has said its policy prohibits the transfer of prisoners to other
nations if it is likely they will be tortured, and administration officials said
the interagency review is intended in part to enforce that standard. Transfers
have been approved by the State Department to countries including Saudi Arabia
and Pakistan, identified in the department's own human rights reports as nations
where the use of torture in prisons is common.

Administration officials said that American diplomats in those countries were
responsible for monitoring agreements to make sure prisoners were not
mistreated. The senior Defense Department official said that the difficulty of
''gaining effective and credible assurances'' that prisoners would not be
mistreated had been ''a cause of some delay in releasing or transferring some
detainees we have at Guantanamo.''

It is possible that Guantanamo inmates could petition a federal court to stop a
transfer to a country where they did not want to be sent. But there is little if
any precedent to suggest how the courts would rule.

In November, a lawyer for Mamdouh Habib, a prisoner who claimed he had been
tortured in Egypt before being transferred to Guantanamo, asked a federal
district court to stop the Bush administration from returning him to Egypt.
Before the court ruled, he was sent to Australia in January and freed.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 15, 2005



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Friday about the Pentagon's efforts to send
prisoners to other countries from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, referred incompletely to
legal proceedings in a recent case involving Mamdouh Habib, who had asked the
Federal District Court in Washington to prohibit the government from sending him
to Egypt. In November, a judge denied Mr. Habib's request but gave him
permission to renew it if the government ordered his transfer there, and
required the government to give advance notice of any such transfer. Mr. Habib
was later sent instead to Australia, where he was released.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld is said to have sought
broader support from other governmental agencies for transfers of detainees.
(Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A10)Chart: ''Transferred From
Guantnamo''While roughly 540 detainees are still being held by the American
military at Guantnamo Bay, Cuba, 211 detainees have left. Of those 211, 146 have
been released, and 65 have been transferred to other countries for further
detention or for prosecution.Detainees transferred from Guantnamo to other
countriesTo Pakistan: 29Britain: 9France: 7Russia: 7Morocco:5Saudi Arabia:
4Australia, Kuwait, Spain and Sweden: 1 each(Source by Department of
Defense)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); NAVIES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); INTERVIEWS (73%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (67%) Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism;
Intelligence Services; Security and Warning Systems

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) State
Department; Justice Department; Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; Douglas Jehl

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%);
SPAIN (79%); MOROCCO (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); KUWAIT (79%); FRANCE (59%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Yemen; Saudi Arabia; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             933 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: 6 Years For Genocide Role

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 93 words


A United Nations tribunal sentenced a 60-year-old former local government
official to six years in prison, its lightest sentence so far, after he pleaded
guilty to committing crimes against humanity and apologized for his role in the
1994 genocide. He was just the fourth person to plead guilty and was accused of
directing Hutus to kill thousands of Tutsis who had sought refuge in a church in
western Kibuye Province. The court has convicted 21 people and acquitted 3 since
it was set up in November. Currently, 25 people are on trial with 18 others
waiting.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); ACQUITTAL (83%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (92%); AFRICA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             935 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Serb Official Surrenders to Hague; Links to Moscow Cited

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD; Ivana Sekularac contributed reporting from Belgrade,
Serbia, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 582 words


After more than five years on the run, Gojko Jankovic, a former Bosnian Serb
police commander wanted for war crimes committed during the 1992-95 conflict in
Bosnia, surrendered yesterday to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague.

Mr. Jankovic, 50, who is accused of torturing and raping Muslim women, followed
an example set by four other Bosnian Serbs this year in turning himself in,
which he did over the weekend to the authorities in the Bosnian Serb town of
Banja Luka.

However, Mr. Jankovic appeared to have arrived at the court via a more
circuitous route than his fellow suspects. Until late last year, according to
his wife, Milica, he was hiding in Russia under a false identity and was under
24-hour protection.

Her account of his situation was made in a statement to the Bosnian Serb police
after she traveled to Moscow last December. According to the statement, which a
visitor was permitted to read, Mrs. Jankovic said she had been sent to see her
husband by the Bosnian Serb authorities in an attempt to persuade him to
surrender, and thereby help improve Bosnia's relations with the tribunal.

As with its former Yugoslav neighbors, Bosnia must cooperate with the United
Nations court before its integration with the European Union and NATO can
proceed.

Officials in the Bosnian Serb government said they were unable to comment on how
Mr. Jankovic eventually came to hand himself in.

However, a Western diplomat in Sarajevo as well as officials at the war crimes
tribunal in The Hague said Mr. Jankovic was one of at least three war crimes
suspects hiding in Moscow.

The diplomat and the tribunal officials, who asked not to be identified, said
that in addition to Mr. Jankovic, they believed that Vlastimir Djordjevic, a
former commander in the Yugoslav Army during the 1999 war in Kosovo, and Vujedin
Popovic, a Bosnian Serb army officer, were also in Moscow.

Since the removal of Slobodan Milosevic from the Yugoslav presidency in October
2000, Moscow has become a well-known refuge for members of his family and
immediate circle. His wife, Mira Markovic, lives in Moscow. His son, Marko, also
spends time there.

In her testimony, Mrs. Jankovic indicated her husband was being protected by a
member of the Russian security services, but she offered no proof to support
that contention.

She said a man carrying a card marked with the abbreviation F.S.B. -- for the
successor organization to the K.G.B. -- accompanied her and her husband
throughout her stay in Moscow from Dec. 7 to Dec. 12.

She said that since a previous visit to Moscow in 2003, Mr. Jankovic had married
another woman even though he had not obtained a divorce, and that he had been
able to acquire Russian citizenship and other official documents under the name
Sergey Plutsadiev, or Plutmadiev.

Serbia has sought confirmation from Russia about the location of Mr. Djordjevic,
who is wanted for war crimes committed in Kosovo. Serbian newspapers have
reported that he as being in Moscow. The Russian government has denied any
knowledge of his whereabouts, said Milan Vujin, an adviser to the Serbian
president, Boris Tadic. ''It's too small a question for them to find out where
Vlastimir Djordjevic is or anyone else,'' Mr. Vujin said.

For his surrender, Mr. Jankovic will be entitled to a reward plan set up by the
Bosnian Serb authorities to encourage war crimes suspects to surrender. It
includes about $540 and scholarships for his children.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%);
ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); TORTURE (78%); TESTIMONY (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (65%); CITIZENSHIP (63%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (55%) United Nations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Gojko Jankovic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); SARAJEVO,
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); NETHERLANDS
(93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); SERBIA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (74%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             940 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New York: Manhattan: Firefighters Object To Beret Ban

BYLINE: By Nicholas Confessore (NYT); Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 154 words


A group of Bronx firefighters, banned by the Fire Department from wearing their
signature green berets in today's St. Patrick's Day Parade, filed a formal
complaint yesterday with the New York State Division of Human Rights.

A lawyer for the firefighters charged that the department's policy amounted to
''ethnic and religious discrimination'' against the firefighters, many of whom
are of Irish descent. Meanwhile, many firefighters from the Bronx will not march
in the parade today. Instead, wearing green berets but not their uniforms, they
plan to muster at Fifth Avenue and 82nd Street, where they will be joined by the
executive board of the Uniformed Firefighters Association, which has also
objected to the decision. In a statement yesterday, Fire Commissioner Nicholas
Scoppetta said, ''When a member publicly represents this department in uniform,
a proper dress code must be adhered to.''   Nicholas Confessore (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARADES & MARCHES (90%); FIREFIGHTERS & FIREFIGHTING (88%); FIRE
DEPARTMENTS (88%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); RELIGION
(55%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             941 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A.C.L.U. Requests Documents on Visas

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 16


The American Civil Liberties Union asked the Bush administration on Wednesday to
turn over documents detailing the use of immigration laws to bar foreign
scholars from the United States based on their reported support of terrorism or
on other ideological grounds.

Citing three prominent cases in the past year, the A.C.L.U. said the
administration appeared to be denying visas to Muslim and Hispanic academics
because it disagreed with their political views.

The civil liberties group filed a Freedom of Information Act request with
several federal agencies seeking records about the decisions to keep the
scholars out of the country.

The most recent case cited by the A.C.L.U. is the denial of a visa to a former
Nicaraguan Sandinista leader, Dora Maria Tellez, who was to have taught a course
this spring at the Harvard Divinity School.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (88%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (88%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (88%); TERRORISM (87%); REFUGEES (85%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
(73%) Terrorism; Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%) American Civil Liberties
Union

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); NICARAGUA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             942 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia Denies Aiding Serb

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 16


The Russian Embassy in Sarajevo said Wednesday in a statement that a former
Bosnian Serb police commander who is suspected of war crimes may have hidden in
Russia, but it denied that he had been under Moscow's protection.

The suspect, Gojko Jankovic, turned himself in to the United Nations tribunal in
The Hague over the weekend.

Until late last year, according to his wife, he was hiding in Russia where he
was under 24-hour protection.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (83%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Foreign Service

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: Gojko Jankovic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);
MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (88%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (93%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Sarajevo (Bosnia); Russia

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             946 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Country Was Ready

SECTION: Section 2; Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk; DIRTY JOKES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 179 words



To the Editor:

''The Greatest Dirty Joke Ever Told'' by Frank Rich [March 13] mentions the
Friars Club's roast of Hugh Hefner happening two weeks after 9/11 -- an
important footnote in comedy history. The days following 9/11 were not a time
for comedy, specifically Friars comedy: ribald, unorthodox, edgy. Lest
proponents of censorship accept it as the norm for a group of liberal bad boys
whose agenda is to shock with dirty words, allow us to note the intense
discussions about going through with the roast.

The Friars Club, Comedy Central and Mr. Hefner contemplated canceling. Was the
country ready to laugh -- especially at dirty jokes? The answer was a resounding
yes: heal through laughter; fight the fear with humor. We decided to let freedom
of speech reign over the repression of laughs that had been handed down by
terrorists.

Along with bringing back the laughter, the event yielded benevolent results: the
Friars Club, Comedy Central and Hugh Hefner contributed $650,000 to help the
victims of 9/11.

FREDDIE ROMAN
Manhattan

The writer is dean of the Friars Club.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); LIBERALISM (75%);
WRITERS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); CENSORSHIP (70%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: FRANK RICH (73%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             955 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

More of F.B.I. Memo Criticizing Guantanamo Methods Is Released

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


The Justice Department on Monday released an F.B.I. memorandum dated May 10,
2004, in which departmental lawyers dismissed intelligence obtained by coercive
methods used by the military at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as ''suspect at best.''

The existence of the memorandum has been known for months. But when it was first
made public by the government, the memorandum was released in heavily edited
form, in response to a Freedom of Information Act request by the American Civil
Liberties Union.

In February, Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, asked the Justice
Department to restore the deleted parts of the document after confirmation
hearings on Michael Chertoff's nomination to be secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security.

''The facts related to interrogation practices used against some detainees are
slowly being forced to the surface, and we will keep pushing for more,'' Mr.
Levin said in a statement in which he referred to the Department of Defense as
D.O.D. ''Today we were able to obtain some information that had previously been
blacked out in an F.B.I. document critical of D.O.D. interrogation practices. As
I suspected, the previously withheld information had nothing to do with
protecting intelligence sources or methods, and everything to do with protecting
D.O.D. from embarrassment.''

Mr. Chertoff said at his confirmation hearing that he did not engage in detailed
discussions of interrogation policies and never offered specific advice when he
headed the criminal division at the Justice Department from 2001 to 2003, when
he left the department to take an appointment to a federal appeals court.

But the newly released version of the memorandum identified for the first time
four of Mr. Chertoff's top deputies who, according to the document, attended
weekly meetings with F.B.I. officials in which the military's interrogation
methods were frequently discussed and criticized as ineffective and
unproductive.

The four Chertoff aides, whose names were edited from the previous version of
the memorandum, were identified in the newly released version as Alice Fisher,
David Nahmias, Laura Parsky and Bruce Swartz.

Ms. Fisher was Mr. Chertoff's chief of staff. Mr. Nahmias was his senior
counterterrorism adviser and is now the United States attorney in Atlanta.

The author of the memorandum, an F.B.I. employee whose identity is still
unknown, wrote that the group often discussed how the military's tactics were
not working and might be a problem in its efforts to try Guantanamo prisoners in
special tribunals.

''We all agreed D.O.D. tactics were going to be an issue in the military
commission cases,'' the memorandum said.

The author said it was Mr. Swartz who took the group's complaints to the
Pentagon's general counsel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(78%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (77%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); POWS & MIAS (72%); NAVIES (72%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (71%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (70%); WRITERS (64%); APPEALS COURTS
(50%) Terrorism; Torture  ; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%) Federal Bureau of
Investigation; American Civil Liberties Union; Homeland Security Department

PERSON: CARL LEVIN (79%) David Johnston; Carl (Sen) Levin; Michael (Sec)
Chertoff

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             958 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 24, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

France Asking U.N. to Refer Darfur to International Court

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 23


France, in a direct challenge to the United States, proposed a resolution on
Wednesday referring war-crime cases from Sudan to the International Criminal
Court. This presented Washington with the choice of validating a tribunal it
strongly opposes or casting a politically awkward veto.

The United States has been in the forefront of calling for international action
in the Darfur region of western Sudan, where an ethnic-cleansing campaign has
left up to 300,000 people dead and two million villagers displaced, but
disagreements over where to try accused war criminals and whether to press for
sanctions have caused weeks of delay in Security Council action.

A United Nations commission on Darfur recommended in January that war crimes be
referred to the international court in the Hague, but the United States, citing
its objections to the court, offered an alternative proposal to set up a new
tribunal in Tanzania. It drew scant support from other members of the 15-nation
Security Council.

The Bush administration, which revoked the Clinton-era signature on the treaty
establishing the court, opposes it on the basis that it might bring frivolous or
mischievous legal actions against Americans abroad.

With criticism over Security Council inaction mounting, the United States this
week circulated three separate resolutions in the hope of breaking out measures
that enjoy full Council support from those that do not.

The first, a resolution calling for a 10,000-member peacekeeping force to
monitor a cease-fire in the south of Sudan and to lend assistance to African
Union troops in Darfur, in western Sudan, was scheduled for a vote Thursday and
enjoys broad, perhaps unanimous backing.

The second, calling for sanctions including a travel ban and asset freeze on
people suspected of war crimes, is opposed by at least three Council members,
Algeria, China and Russia, and was not put up for a vote.

The third, which is also being held back, says a ''climate of impunity in
Sudan'' should be ended without delay and says the Council should take into
account three proposals -- the Tanzania court, a vaguely defined court suggested
last week by Nigeria and the International Criminal Court.

The French put forward their counterproposal calling for a referral to the
International Criminal Court, and said they would call for a vote on Thursday.
The French mission said it had assurances of at least 11 votes in favor. Only
nine votes are needed to pass a Security Council resolution.

Asked if the resolution was in competition with the American one, Jean-Marc de
la Sabliere, the French ambassador to the United Nations, said, ''No, it's a
draft resolution which is complementary.'' He said it was the broad conviction
of the Council that action had been put off for too long. ''We had to act now,''
he said, ''and France has shouldered its responsibilities today.''

He also noted that a paragraph of the resolution specifically exempts from
investigation or prosecution citizens of countries like the United States that
are not ratifiers of the court treaty.

''We think that this paragraph meets American concerns,'' he said. ''So we hope
they'll vote for the resolution.''

The United States has argued in recent weeks that any referral to the
International Criminal Court -- even one with language protecting Americans --
would be opposed by Washington because it would confer legitimacy on the
tribunal.

French and British diplomats said they still held out hope that the United
States might consider abstaining instead of casting a veto, but American
diplomats discouraged that possibility.

Richard A. Grenell, the spokesman for the American mission, said, ''Certainly
the United States is very committed to punishing those who committed these awful
crimes in Darfur and throughout Sudan, but with respect to using the
International Criminal Court, our views are well known and still unchanged.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); LITIGATION (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%) United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) United Nations; Security Council (Un);
International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (98%); FRANCE (95%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); AFRICA (79%); NIGERIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Sudan; France

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             961 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

10,000 Peacekeepers to Be Sent To Sudan, U.N. Council Decides

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 499 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 24


The Security Council passed a resolution on Thursday establishing a
10,000-member peacekeeping force for Sudan to reinforce a peace agreement in the
south of the country and to lend assistance in the conflicted Darfur region in
the west.

The measure, introduced by the United States, drew the support of all 15 Council
members.

Passage occurred after France postponed consideration of a resolution that would
refer war crime cases from Sudan to the International Criminal Court, a move
seen as a challenge to the United States and likely to provoke an American veto.
That vote was rescheduled for March 30.

The vote on Thursday followed two months of delay in which the Council and
member countries were subject to rising complaints that world powers had failed
to respond to what the United Nations has called the world's worst human crisis.

Council members disagree over placing sanctions on Sudan, an idea opposed by
Algeria, China and Russia, and over which court should try perpetrators of
atrocities in light of the American objections to the international court.

Secretary General Kofi Annan sent a message to the Council after the vote
pointing out that there was a ''clear recommendation'' by a United Nations
special commission to Darfur in January to send the war crime cases to the court
and saying that ''sanctions should also be kept on the table.''

''While I welcome today's resolution,'' he said, ''I also look forward to the
Council's decisions on those issues.''

Stuart Holliday, a deputy American ambassador, made a brief statement saying,
''We remain very concerned and disturbed by the situation in Darfur and will
continue working with Council colleagues.''

The Bush administration, which revoked the Clinton administration's signature on
the treaty creating the Hague court, opposes it out of concern that it could
bring politically motivated legal actions against Americans abroad.

Nine of the 15 Council members have signed and ratified that treaty, and the
French believe that they have at least 11 votes to pass their resolution.

Thursday's resolution calls for a peacekeeping force of 10,000 military
personnel and 715 civilian police officers to monitor progress in the south of
Sudan and help the African Union, which has 2,000 troops in Darfur.

The peace agreement that the force is pledged to reinforce was signed on Jan. 9
by the Islamic government in Khartoum and rebels from the Christian and animist
south, ending a 21-year war that the United Nations estimates cost 1.5 million
lives and forced four million people to flee their homes.

While there is no direct connection between the conflicts in the south and the
west, the United States, a principal promoter of the accord, and the United
Nations have expressed the hope that the January signing will serve to speed
peacemaking in Darfur, where ''ethnic cleansing'' by government-supported Arab
militias has made refugees of two million villagers and cost the lives of an
estimated 300,000 people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); PEACEKEEPING
(91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%);
LITIGATION (76%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%); RELIGION (60%); ARMED FORCES (60%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%); AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); France; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             962 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Calls For Punishing Peacekeepers in Sex Abuse

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 24


A report on sexual abuse by peacekeepers recommended Thursday that offending
soldiers and their commanders be punished by their home countries, that payments
made to them be recovered and put into a fund for victims and that the United
Nations make compliance with these measures a condition for taking part in its
missions.

Secretary General Kofi Annan commissioned the report from Prince Zeid Raad al
Hussein, Jordan's ambassador to the United Nations, after evidence emerged that
blue helmeted peacekeepers and civilian staff members had had sex with women and
girls in Congo in exchange for food and money, and, in some cases, had committed
rape. The report also recommended that the United Nations make counseling and
medical care available to victims and provide assistance for ''peacekeeper
babies'' left behind when the troops rotate back to their own countries.

Prince Zeid, a former military officer and civilian peacekeeper in Bosnia, said
that current efforts to curb abuses were ''ad hoc and inadequate'' and that
exploitative behavior was widespread.

In a cover letter, Mr. Annan said that while peacekeeping had brought stability
to many countries over decades, the record had been damaged by acts he termed
''unconscionable'' and that present measures were ''manifestly inadequate.''

''Such abhorrent acts are a violation of the fundamental duty of care that all
United Nations peacekeeping personnel owe to the local populations they serve,''
Mr. Annan said, adding that a ''fundamental change in approach was needed.''

Sarah E. Mendelson, a senior fellow in the Center for Strategic and
International Studies in Washington and a vocal critic of the United Nations's
past response to the sexual abuse scandal, hailed the report as ''extremely
important, I would even say revolutionary.''

''The idea that peacekeepers will be held responsible for paternity, that there
is assistance for victims, that there is a system to incentivize and reward
those who invest properly in the program, there are a lot of things here that a
lot of us have been talking about for a long time,'' she said in an interview.

Some of the measures recommended in the report can be carried out by Mr. Annan,
but others are subject to the approval of the 191-member General Assembly.

The report noted that the United Nations had no authority to punish violators
and said that countries contributing troops should agree to hold courts-martial
of their accused soldiers in the countries where the alleged abuse occurred.
Those countries with national laws preventing that should consider legislation
to permit it, the report said.

In addition, Prince Zeid said, the United Nations should establish independent
investigative teams with experts in sex crimes, particularly those against
children, and modern forensic methods of identification.

He called for expanding the policy of setting curfews, declaring areas off
limits and making patrols mobile, and said that missions needed to have better
recreational services for off-duty troops and subsidized telephone and Internet
connections to help them stay in touch with relatives and friends.

It recommended that peacekeeping missions set up clear lines of communication to
allow local people to lodge complaints and obtain emergency medical and
psychological attention. It also recommended data tracking mechanisms to record
complaints systematically to avoid duplication and hearsay.

In a step to make commanders responsible for the actions of their troops, Prince
Zeid said in his report that those who obstruct investigations into sexual abuse
should be removed and repatriated, and the secretary general should advise the
head of state of the home country why the action was taken. In addition, the
United Nations should recover any payments made to the commander and give the
money to a fund for the victims.

Prince Zeid added that it was important to champion commanders who cooperated,
and recommended that the secretary general reward such behavior with written
commendations to their heads of state.

Where an investigation shows that allegations are well founded, the charges
ought to be sent to the home country of the offending soldier with a
recommendation that he be prosecuted. Prince Zeid said that while a decision to
prosecute was a sovereign decision, the United Nations ought to insist on prior
cooperation in the memorandums of understanding governing each mission.

Many of Prince Zeid's recommendations stemmed from the fact that the United
Nations has little authority of its own to punish offenders other than to send
them home where they seldom face prosecution. Other offenders have often been
innocently rotated out to their home countries by the time they are identified.

The United Nations has also been concerned not to discourage countries from
contributing troops. According to the department of peacekeeping operations, the
10 leading nations furnishing soldiers are, in order, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
India, Ethiopia, Nepal, Ghana, Nigeria, Jordan, Uruguay and South Africa.

The United Nations is experiencing a surge in peacekeeping, with 17 missions
involving 80,000 people. The report said that the United Nations in 2004 had
received 25 allegations of sexual exploitation against civilians and civilian
police officers and 80 against uniformed personnel. The majority of them
involved sex with people under 18.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (92%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
LEGISLATION (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); SEX SCANDALS (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (73%); SCANDALS (73%);
MILITARY COURTS (73%); FORENSICS (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); APPROVALS (72%); CURFEW
(60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sex Crimes; Civil War
and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; Zeid Bin (Prince) Raad

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire); Jordan; Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             966 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Opposes U.N. on War Crimes

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan, March 27


Sudan would reject any United Nations resolution calling for the prosecution of
Sudanese suspected of war crimes in a court abroad, the foreign minister said
Sunday.

The United Nations Security Council is expected to vote Wednesday on a French
draft resolution that would send people suspected of war crimes in the Darfur
region to the International Criminal Court.

The United States has proposed instead the formation of a United Nations-African
Union tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania. But many European nations, including
Britain, want the suspects to be sent to the International Criminal Court in The
Hague.

The Bush administration opposes the International Criminal Court out of a
concern that it could bring politically motivated legal actions against
Americans abroad.

Foreign Minister Mustafa Osman Ismail said Sudan, which is not a signer of the
international court accord, would reject each resolution.

''Both of them are not suitable to Sudan,'' he said. ''Any resolution that is
going to include the taking of a Sudanese -- whether he is a rebel or government
official -- outside the Sudan: we are totally against it.''

But one of the Darfur rebel groups said the Security Council should adopt the
French resolution.

''We think this resolution will contribute to peace,'' said Tajeddin Nyam, a
senior member of the rebel group, the Justice and Equality Movement. ''It will
enhance the confidence of the displaced people and honor those who have been
killed. It will help us reach a political solution.''

Tens of thousands of people have been killed in fighting during the two-year-old
rebellion in Darfur. Thousands more die every month in camps for the almost two
million people who have fled the violence.

A commission appointed by the United Nations stopped short of calling the
violence genocide but said that heinous war crimes had been committed in the
region. It gave the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, a sealed list
of 51 names of government and military officials, militia leaders and rebels who
it said should be referred to the international court.

The Security Council has been deadlocked over the issue, but passed a resolution
last week allowing as many as 10,000 United Nations peacekeepers to be sent to
southern Sudan, where a peace deal in January ended more than two decades of a
separate civil war.

The commander of the United Nations force, Fazle Elahi Akbar, said it would be
deployed within six months. Its main tasks will be to monitor troop movements
and support a cease-fire, he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (77%); PEACE PROCESS (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); POLITICS (69%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (69%); ARMED FORCES (66%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); AFRICAN UNION (83%) United Nations; African
Union; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Mustafa Osman (Min) Ismail

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (93%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
EUROPE (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             969 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

When Americans Torture and Kill

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 144 words



To the Editor:

In ''Is No One Accountable?'' (column, March 28), Bob Herbert asks how far we've
come since the Middle Ages, given the evidence of torture and abuse by United
States military and intelligence personnel.

As a species, we have not advanced at all; we are the same dangerous, sometimes
violent animals that we were at the time of the Inquisition. But as a society,
or a loosely bound collection of societies, we have advanced. One major area of
advancement has been in our respect for individual human rights, and the extent
to which that respect is reflected in our laws.

But there will occasionally be times and places when the protections of the law
are ignored or overridden, and in those times, the darker tendencies of our
nature will be given expression. This would seem to be one of those times.

Michael H. Holmes
Gaithersburg, Md., March 28, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             970 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee's Suit Gains Support From Jet's Log

BYLINE: This article was reported by Scott Shane, Stephen Grey and Ford
Fessenden and written by Mr. Shane.; Shane Scott reported from Washington for
this article, Stephen Grey from London and Ford Fessenden from New York. David
Johnston contributed reporting from Washington and Margot Williams from New
York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1197 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Maher Arar, a 35-year-old Canadian engineer, is suing the United States, saying
American officials grabbed him in 2002 as he changed planes in New York and
transported him to Syria where, he says, he was held for 10 months in a dank,
tiny cell and brutally beaten with a metal cable.

Now federal aviation records examined by The New York Times appear to
corroborate Mr. Arar's account of his flight, during which, he says, he sat
chained on the leather seats of a luxury executive jet as his American guards
watched movies and ignored his protests.

The tale of Mr. Arar, the subject of a yearlong inquiry by the Canadian
government, is perhaps the best documented of a number of cases since the Sept.
11, 2001, terrorist attacks in which suspects have accused the United States of
secretly delivering them to other countries for interrogation under torture.
Deportation for interrogation abroad is known as rendition.

In papers filed in a New York court replying to Mr. Arar's lawsuit, Justice
Department lawyers say the case was not one of rendition but of deportation.
They say Mr. Arar was deported to Syria based on secret information that he was
a member of Al Qaeda, an accusation he denies.

The discovery of the aircraft, in a database compiled from Federal Aviation
Agency records, appears to corroborate part of the story Mr. Arar has told many
times since his release in 2003. The records show that a Gulfstream III jet,
tail number N829MG, followed a flight path matching the route he described. The
flight, hopscotching from New Jersey to an airport near Washington to Maine to
Rome and beyond, took place on Oct. 8, 2002, the day after Mr. Arar's
deportation order was signed.

After seeing a photograph of the plane and hearing its path, Mr. Arar, 35, of
Ottawa, said in a telephone interview: ''I think that's it. I think you've found
the plane that took me.''

He added: ''Finding this plane is going really to help me. It does remind me of
this trip, which is painful, but it should make people understand that this is
for real and everything happened the way I said. I hope people will now stop for
a moment and think about the morality of this.''

Records of the jet's travels also show a trip in December 2003 to Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, where the United States holds hundreds of detainees, suggesting that
it was used by the government on at least one other occasion.

If the plane was used to move Mr. Arar, it is the fourth known to have been used
to transport suspected terrorists secretly from one country to detention in
another.

Among the three identified in previous news reports is one owned by a company
apparently set up by the Central Intelligence Agency, according to The
Washington Post. Another, first described by The Chicago Tribune, is an ordinary
charter jet that was also used by the Boston Red Sox manager between missions
ferrying detainees and their guards to Guantanamo, with the Red Sox logo
attached to the fuselage or removed, depending on who was aboard.

Maria LaHood, a lawyer for Mr. Arar, said the new information on the Gulfstream
jet lent support to his lawsuit.

''The facts we got from Maher right after he was released are now corroborated
by public records,'' said Ms. LaHood, who works for the Center for
Constitutional Rights, a group in New York that advocates investigation of human
rights abuses. ''The more information that comes out, the better for showing
that this is an important public issue that can't be kept secret.''

She said Mr. Arar and his attorneys believe that American officials wanted him
to undergo a more brutal interrogation than would be permitted in the United
States in the hope of getting information about Al Qaeda.

After 10 months in a cell he compared to a grave, and 2 more months in a less
confined space, Syrian officials freed Mr. Arar in October 2003, saying they had
been unable to find any connection to Al Qaeda. The Syrian ambassador to the
United States called the release ''a gesture of good will toward Canada.''

Charles Miller, a Justice Department spokesman, said the government had no
comment on the case. The administration has refused to cooperate with the
Canadian inquiry into Mr. Arar's case and has asked a judge to dismiss most of
his lawsuit, saying that allowing it to proceed would reveal classified
information.

President Bush has said it is United States policy neither to engage in torture
nor to deliver prisoners to countries where they are likely to be tortured.
Former intelligence officials say rendition is useful for cases in which secret
information has identified a suspected terrorist but cannot be used for a public
prosecution in an American court.

Mr. Arar has told a consistent story since his release: He was detained at
Kennedy International Airport in New York on Sept. 26, 2002, while changing
planes on the way back to Canada from a vacation in Tunisia. He was then held
for nearly two weeks, awakened at 3 a.m. and taken to an airport in New Jersey,
where he was put aboard a small jet.

Shackled in place, Mr. Arar says, he followed the plane's movements on a map
displayed on a video screen, watching as it traveled to Dulles Airport, outside
Washington, to a Maine airport he believed was in Portland, to Rome, and finally
to Amman, Jordan, where he was blindfolded and driven to Syria.

According to F.A.A. flight logs for Oct. 8, 2002, only one aircraft flew from
New Jersey to the Washington area to Maine to Rome: the 14-passenger Gulfstream
III jet, operated by Presidential Aviation, a charter company in Fort
Lauderdale, Fla. The jet left Teterboro, N.J., for Dulles at 5:40 a.m.;
proceeded at 7:46 a.m. to Bangor, Me.; and left Bangor for Rome at 9:36 a.m.

The only conflict with Mr. Arar's story is that the Maine airport was Bangor,
not Portland. And the logs cover only flights departing from the United States,
so they document the trip only as far as Rome. Court records show, however, that
immigration officials ordered him deported to Syria.

Nigel England, director of operations for Presidential, said he would not
divulge who rented the Gulfstream that day or discuss any clients.

''It's a very select group of people that we fly, from entertainers to foreign
heads of state, a whole gamut of customers that we fly and wouldn't discuss one
over the other,'' he said.

The plane flew about 50 flights a month to various destinations in 2002 and
2003, according to federal records. Presidential's Web site says a similar jet
would now rent for about $120,000 for an itinerary like the one on which Mr.
Arar apparently was flown.

Records show that the plane was owned in 2002 by MJG Aviation, a Florida company
that lists its manager as Mark J. Gordon, an entrepreneur who also owned
Presidential at the time. Mr. Gordon could not be reached. The plane has since
been sold and the tail number has been changed to N259SK, records show.

As for Mr. Arar, he said he felt the identification of the plane helped
establish his credibility. ''I don't know for sure but probably people had some
doubts about what I said,'' he said. ''This goes to prove and corroborate at
least part of my story. I hope even more information will come forward.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 15, 2005



CORRECTION: A note about the writers yesterday with a front-page article on a
lawsuit against the United States by a Canadian engineer who was deported to
Syria reversed the names of one reporter. He is Scott Shane.



A front-page article on March 30 about the discovery of flight records that
appeared to confirm that a charter jet took a suspected terrorist against his
will to Jordan from New Jersey in 2002 misstated the name of the government
agency whose data was used to establish the jet's path. It is the Federal
Aviation Administration (not Agency).


GRAPHIC: Photos: Gulfstream N259SK, flying under an earlier registration,
N829MG, traveled to three American airports and on to Rome on Oct. 8, 2002, the
day after a Canadian engineer was ordered deported to Syria. (Photo by Cindy
Skop for The New York Times)
 Maher Arar, of Canada, says American agents kidnapped him. (Photo by Bill
Grimshaw/Getty Images)(pg. A9)Map highlights the route from the U.S. to Rome,
and on towards Amman. (pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(79%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); AIRPORTS (78%); AIRLINES (78%); TORTURE (77%);
LAWYERS (75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%); AL-QAEDA (74%); NAVIES (74%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); CIVIL AVIATION (72%); INTERVIEWS (71%); AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%) Terrorism; Deportation; Suits and
Litigation; Airlines and Airplanes; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism;
Prisoners of War; Security and Warning Systems; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (50%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Justice Department; Al
Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (50%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (50%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (50%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (50%)

PERSON: Maher Arar; Scott Shane

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); ONTARIO, CANADA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (95%); SYRIA (92%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

REGION: Canada; Syria; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             971 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Limits the Transfer Of 13 From Guantanamo

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


In a defeat for the Bush administration, a federal judge ruled on Tuesday that
the government could not transfer 13 Yemenis from the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, unless it notified the judge and gave their lawyers a
month to challenge the removal.

The opinion, by Judge Henry H. Kennedy Jr. of Federal District Court for the
District of Columbia, was issued on a procedural skirmish that involved a small
number of detainees, but it represented another rebuff to the administration's
core legal contention that it has unbridled power to detain and transfer
prisoners in the campaign against terror without court reviews.

The Pentagon also announced that it had completed determining whether those held
at the Guantanamo naval base were properly detained as unlawful enemy
combatants. Navy Secretary Gordon R. England said that of the 558 cases
reviewed, 38 detainees were no longer considered enemy combatants and could be
eligible for release.

It could not be learned whether any of the Yemenis who were plaintiffs in the
court case would be affected, because military officials did not identify those
eligible for release.

In his ruling, Judge Kennedy suggested that the 30-day notice was justified
because the Yemenis had grounds for fears voiced by their lawyers that the
government might send them to other countries where they might be subjected to
extreme interrogation methods and indefinitely detained.

David H. Remes, a lawyer here for the 13, said the ruling placed new limits on
the government.

''On a practical level, this decision places a restraint on the government's
rendition policy,'' he said, referring to the practice of transferring terror
suspects from country to country without formal legal proceedings. ''On a more
political level, it's another rejection of the government's position that it is
accountable to no one but itself and that the courts have no meaningful role to
play here.''

A spokesman for the Justice Department said government lawyers in the case would
not discuss the opinion. A Pentagon spokesman said the Defense Department
''disagrees with the ruling by Judge Kennedy establishing the need to notify the
detainees' counsel before anyone is transferred to his home country.'' The
spokesman said the Pentagon had previously told the court that ''we understand
and follow our obligations regarding the transfer of individuals to other
countries.''

In its legal papers, the government argued that granting the detainees' petition
for advance notice of any transfer would ''illegitimately encroach on foreign
relations and national security prerogatives of the executive branch'' and
damage the government's ability to coordinate counterterrorism efforts with
other countries. It also argued that a 30-day notice would ''undermine'' the
government's effort to reduce the number of detainees in American custody.

Justice Department lawyers waged an unusually aggressive fight for the right to
make decisions about the detainees' movements without having to notify their
lawyers or the judge of their intentions. They had argued that there were no
immediate plans to move any of the detainees, and they repeated administration
statements that the United States did not send detainees to countries where it
was more likely that they would be tortured.

Human rights lawyers expressed hope that the opinion on Tuesday, which applies
just to the Yemenis at Guantanamo, would influence more than 40 other cases in
which judges are considering similar petitions filed by lawyers for about 130
additional detainees. Lawyers are also trying to file similar actions for the
remainder of the 540 detainees at the base.

The Pentagon has said about 214 detainees have left the base. Of those, 149 were
transferred to their home countries. Most have been freed, but others have been
detained by those governments.

In practice, Judge Kennedy's opinion stops the Pentagon from removing the 13
without notice at a time officials have said the government is moving to reduce
the number of detainees by transferring many to other countries.

The detainees' lawyers said transferring the Yemenis would in effect end a
broader challenge to the legality of their detention. In his opinion, Judge
Kennedy agreed that transfer of the Yemenis would deprive the court of
jurisdiction over the wider dispute.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); LAWYERS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); NAVIES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); VERDICTS (78%); JUDICIAL
REVIEW (78%); TESTIMONY (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); PETITIONS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (65%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (60%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Decisions and Verdicts

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: David Johnston; George W (Pres) Bush; Henry H Jr (Judge) Kennedy

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Yemen

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             977 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Votes to Send Any Sudan War Crime Suspects to World Court

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 31


The Security Council voted Thursday night to send any war crimes suspects from
the Darfur region of Sudan to the International Criminal Court in the Hague,
after the United States obtained amendments to exempt Americans from the
tribunal's jurisdiction.

The vote of the 15-member Council was 11 in favor, with four abstentions--
Algeria, Brazil, China and the United States.

The withdrawal of American opposition to sending the cases to the court
represented a significant diplomatic change of course for the Bush
administration, which vehemently opposes the court and has been insisting for
two months that it would block any Security Council move legitimizing it.

''We didn't cave,'' said Richard A. Grenell, the spokesman for the United States
mission. ''We got the full protection for Americans that we sought.''

Anne W. Patterson, the deputy United States ambassador to the United Nations,
said, ''We decided not to oppose the resolution because of the need of the
international community to work together in order to end the climate of impunity
in Sudan.''

She added, however, referring to the court, ''We have not dropped and indeed
continue to maintain our longstanding and firm objections and concerns regarding
the I.C.C.''

The vote followed days of trans-Atlantic negotiation involving Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice, the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, and France's
foreign minister, Michel Barnier, and produced an 11th- hour maneuver that
secured agreement when Britain replaced France as the sponsor of the measure.

The outcome spared the United States the onus of casting a veto and seeming to
block the arrest and prosecution of war crimes suspects, steps it has been
insisting are essential to begin reining in the violence in Darfur.

It was the third Sudan resolution in the Council in a week after two months of
delay that had raised a clamor of criticism against the panel over its inaction.

On March 24, the Council unanimously passed a measure establishing a 10,
715-member force to shore up a peace agreement in the south of the country and
lend assistance to the 2,000 African Union troops in Darfur. On Tuesday, the
panel voted 12 to 0 with three abstentions to impose a travel ban and asset
freeze on individuals who commit atrocities or break cease-fire agreements.

The conflict in Darfur is estimated to have displaced 2.4 million people and
cost the lives of up to 300,000 black African villagers. Pro-government Arab
militias, including those known as janjaweed, have been blamed for most of the
violence, including rape, murder and arson.

Though the United States has been in the forefront of calling for action in
Darfur, it balked over the judicial issue when a United Nations commission
returned from Sudan in January with a recommendation that suspects be sent to
the international court.

The United States first recommended an alternative court to be set up in Arusha,
Tanzania, but the idea drew little support.

American objections to the court are based on the view that it is unaccountable
and could become a forum for politically motivated prosecutions against
Americans abroad. The Clinton administration signed the 1998 Rome treaty setting
up the court in December 2000 but the Bush administration revoked the signature
in May 2002.

John R. Bolton, President Bush's nominee to be ambassador to the United Nations,
was the official who signed the letter abrogating the American signature and he
said afterward that the experience had afforded him ''the happiest moment in my
government service.''

In Security Council resolutions in 2002 and 2003, the United States succeeded in
gaining immunity for American soldiers participating in United Nations-approved
peacekeeping forces from prosecution by the court, but last June it failed to
obtain a renewal in the wake of the prisoner abuse scandal in Iraq and a strong
statement of opposition from Secretary General Kofi Annan.

With the United States's objections in mind, the original French draft exempted
persons from countries that have not signed the treaty establishing the court
from investigation or prosecution by the court. But the United States pressed
for stronger guarantees.

The key concession to the Americans was a clause giving exclusive jurisdiction
to troop-contributing states over any of their citizens arrested abroad. This
posed a problem for the French sponsors because France had opposed the same
language in a previous resolution sending peacekeepers to Liberia. The solution
Thursday was to have the British insert that language and take over the
sponsorship of the resolution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); ARSON (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); VETO (78%); GENOCIDE (73%);
JURISDICTION (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); PEACE PROCESS (72%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (64%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (77%); JACK STRAW (69%) Warren Hoge; George W (Pres)
Bush; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Jack (Sec) Straw; Michel (Min) Barnier

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
FRANCE (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); AFRICA (79%); BRAZIL (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Algeria; Brazil; China; Sudan; France; Great
Britain

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             979 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebels in Congo Say They'll End Cross-Border Raids in Rwanda

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya, March 31


A group of Rwandan rebels, accused of massacring Tutsi and moderate Hutu in
Rwanda in 1994, acknowledged Thursday for the first time that genocide had
occurred and agreed to halt military attacks against Rwanda from their hideaways
in eastern Congo.

The statement, by the leadership of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda, was in Rome. In Rwanda, reaction to the declaration was reserved. ''If
they said it, it is a good thing,'' Richard Sezibera, a senior adviser to
President Paul Kagame, told Agence France-Presse. He said the fighters must hand
in their weapons to demonstrate they mean what they say.

Rwanda sent troops into Congo in 1996 and 1998 to root out the predominantly
Hutu rebels. The incursions prompted a vicious war that eventually drew in six
countries. In recent months, citing border attacks by the rebels, Mr. Kagame has
threatened another foray.

The Hutu rebel group, which Mr. Kagame says is the instigating force and which
is known by its French initials, F.D.L.R., has long refused to label the
killings in Rwanda genocide. Members have contended that many Hutu were killed
by Tutsi soldiers during the fighting in 1994, making the events there more
confused than they are portrayed.

But in a statement after talks organized by the Community of Sant'Egidio, a
religious group promoting peace, the rebels said they ''condemned the genocide
committed in Rwanda and its authors.''

The statement said the rebels had decided ''to transform their armed struggle
into a political one'' by disarming and ending attacks. ''From this moment on,
the F.D.L.R. announces that it will refrain from any offensive operation against
Rwanda,'' said Ignace Murwanashyaka, the group's leader.

Congolese officials who took part in the talks trumpeted the accord as a sign
that the government of President Joseph Kabila was committed to bringing peace
to Congo as well as calming tensions with Rwanda.

''This is a big step toward peace in the region,'' said Antoine Ghonda
Mangalibi, a former Congolese foreign minister who is now a roving ambassador
for Mr. Kabila. ''It's an unbelievable development.''

Western diplomats said they considered the accord a possible breakthrough in the
difficult process of stabilizing Congo. A peace accord in 1999 ended the war on
paper but fighting continues, especially among militias in the northeast. In
recent months the United Nations peacekeeping force in Congo has taken a more
aggressive military stance in rooting out the various armed groups, pressing
them to hand in their guns.

The exact details of the disarmament must still be worked out and it remains
unclear whether all the fighters will abide by the wishes of their leaders. In
2003 a rebel military commander, Paul Rwarakabije, surrendered to Rwanda with
hundreds of fighters but most rebels remained behind in the dense forests of
eastern Congo. The size of the group has been estimated at 13,000 to 20,000
fighters.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (77%); PEACEKEEPING (74%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (74%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (65%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (62%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (60%); RELIGION (50%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

COMPANY: ACCORD AS (65%); AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2311 MEN'S & BOYS' SUITS, COATS, & OVERCOATS (65%); SIC7375
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%)

PERSON: Marc Lacey; Paul (Pres) Kagame; Joseph (Pres) Kabila

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (67%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); KENYA (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

REGION: Rwanda; Congo (Formerly Zaire); Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             986 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

John Paul II: Mourning and Remembrance

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 164 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Pope John Paul II, Keeper of the Flock for a Quarter of a Century''
(editorial, April 3):

While John Paul deserves praise for his work to advance peace and to advocate
for the poor, his greatness was limited by a rigid dogmatism in matters of
morality and sexuality.

In his final book, ''Memory and Identity,'' the pope suggested that homosexual
marriage was ''perhaps part of a new ideology of evil, perhaps more insidious
and hidden, which attempts to pit human rights against the family and against
man.''

The pope did many things right, but guiding his flock into the 21st century was
not one of them. He refused to acknowledge the need for change in the church to
keep pace with modern notions of morality. Instead, he published words that gave
license to discrimination.

It was that intractability and intolerance that led many former Roman Catholics
like me to leave the church for more enlightened pastors.

Robert J. Inlow
Charlottesville, Va., April 3, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); RELIGION (88%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GAYS & LESBIANS (71%); MARRIAGE (70%); SAME
SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (55%) Terms not available from NYTimes

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (50%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             992 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Defends Patriot Act Before Senate Hearings

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


On the eve of Senate hearings on the government's power to fight terrorism, the
Justice Department on Monday defended the law passed after the Sept. 11 attacks
as ''an invaluable tool'' and released new data showing increased use of a
particularly controversial type of search warrant.

But critics of the law, the USA Patriot Act, strongly urged Congress to give it
careful scrutiny before extending the government's powers to track terrorism
suspects. Several critical provisions in the law are set to expire at the end of
the year, and on Tuesday the Senate Judiciary Committee will hold the first in a
series of Congressional hearings on the question of whether to extend the law.

In advance of the hearing, Justice Department officials sought to strengthen
support for the law in the face of criticism from some conservatives and many
liberals who say it gives the government too much power to track suspects and
use wiretaps.

The data released by the Justice Department late Monday centered on its use of
Section 213 of the law, which allows federal agents, with a court order, to
enter a suspect's home or residence secretly and search for evidence without
immediately telling the person they have been there. The provision is among
those set to expire at the end of 2005.

The new data showed that the Justice Department used the secret warrants 108
times from April 2003 to January 2005, for an average of almost five warrants
per month. That represented a sharp increase from the last reported tally from
October 2001 to April 2003, when 47 warrants were issued, for an average of
fewer than three per month.

Justice Department officials said they resorted to using the secret warrants in
less than 0.2 percent of all search warrants granted to law enforcement
officials. The secret warrants were used in a wide spectrum of cases beyond
terrorism, including child pornography, drug trafficking and organized crime,
the officials said.

In explaining the increased frequency, a Justice Department official who spoke
on the condition of anonymity because of political considerations said, ''It's
the criminals who set the pace for how often these warrants are used, not us.''

The law allows the Justice Department to delay notifying a suspect that a
property has been searched if a judge agrees that there is reasonable cause to
believe that disclosure would endanger someone's safety, prompt a suspect to
flee, lead to the destruction of evidence or jeopardize an investigation.

But the American Civil Liberties Union and other critics of the provision --
which they refer to as the ''sneak and peek'' law -- say it risks an abuse of
power and should be curtailed. They point to the Justice Department's use of the
warrant last year in secretly searching the home of Brandon Mayfield, a Muslim
lawyer in Oregon who was mistakenly arrested in connection with the Madrid train
bombings because of a faulty fingerprint match.

Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the A.C.L.U., told reporters on Monday
that his organization plans to press for reconsideration and refinement of the
search warrant power and five other provisions in the antiterrorism law,
including the government's use of ''roving'' wiretaps and its demands for
library records and other materials in intelligence investigations.

Pointing to significant support for recent Congressional efforts to scale back
parts of the law, Mr. Romero predicted that moderate Republicans as well as many
Democrats would have reservations about extending the current law. Congress will
be considering the issue, he said, in ''a very different political climate''
than existed in 2001, when it approved the antiterrorism measure some six weeks
after the Sept. 11 attacks.

More than 375 governmental bodies, including five states, have expressed formal
concerns and objections to the government's expanded authority under the law.

Last month, groups of liberal civil rights activists, conservative libertarians,
advocates of medical privacy, supporters of gun rights and others formed an
unusual coalition to urge close scrutiny of several provisions in the law that
they said need to be scaled back.

And on Monday, a separate coalition of more than three dozen groups, including
immigration rights advocates and Muslim groups, sent a letter to Congress
arguing that the government's expanded powers to fight terrorism ''reflect a
steady assault on fundamental liberties that has served only to make us less
free, and not more secure.''

Justice Department officials, however, are preparing a vigorous defense in
pursuing one of the White House's top legislative priorities this year. The
department is expected to send its two most prominent figures -- Attorney
General Alberto R. Gonzales and Robert S. Mueller III, director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation -- to the Judiciary Committee hearing on Tuesday to
solidify support.

''For more than three years,'' the Justice Department said in a statement on
Monday that amounted to a preview of its testimony, ''the USA Patriot Act has
served as an invaluable tool for law enforcement and intelligence communities in
the war on terror.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (93%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PATRIOT ACT
(90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); SEARCH WARRANTS (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); JUDGES (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%);
INVESTIGATIONS (71%); WIRETAPPING (67%); PORNOGRAPHY (50%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(50%); CHILD PORNOGRAPHY (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             993 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 6, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Pope and Hypocrisy

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 724 words


President Bush and other world leaders are honoring John Paul II in a way that
completely misunderstands his message. We pay him no tribute if we lower our
flags to half-staff and send a grand presidential delegation to his funeral,
when at the same time we avert our eyes as villagers are slaughtered and
mutilated in the genocide unfolding in Darfur.

The message of the pope's ministry was about standing up to evil, not about
holding grand funerals.

''Throughout the West, John Paul's witness reminded us of our obligation to
build a culture of life in which the strong protect the weak,'' Mr. Bush said.
Well, what about that reminder? What kind of a ''culture of life'' is it that
allows us to shrug as Sudanese soldiers heave children onto bonfires?

The latest estimates, from the British government and others, are that 300,000
or more have perished so far in Darfur. Mr. Bush has forthrightly called this
slaughter ''genocide,'' but he has used that label not to spur action, but to
substitute for it.

These days the Sudanese authorities are adding a new twist to their crimes
against humanity: they are arresting girls and women who have become pregnant
because of the mass rapes by Sudanese soldiers and militia members. If the
victims are not yet married, or if their husbands have been killed, then they
are imprisoned for adultery.

Doctors Without Borders issued a report last month about Darfur that quoted one
16-year-old girl as saying:

''I was collecting firewood for my family when three armed men on camels came
and surrounded me. They held me down, tied my hands and raped me, one after the
other. When I arrived home, I told my family what had happened.

''They threw me out of home, and I had to build my own hut away from them. I was
engaged to a man, and I was so much looking forward to getting married. After I
got raped, he did not want to marry me and broke off the engagement because he
said I was now disgraced and spoilt.

''When I was eight months pregnant from the rape, the police came to my hut and
forced me with their guns to go to the police station. They asked me questions,
so I told them that I had been raped. They told me that as I was not married, I
will deliver this baby illegally.

''They beat me with a whip on the chest and back and put me in jail.''

The report quoted another girl, 17, who was gang-raped and then locked inside
her hut, which was set on fire. She escaped through the wall of the hut but
suffered extensive burns.

John Paul wanted world leaders to show compassion for suffering people like
these girls, not for dead popes. Mr. Bush and other world leaders flocking to
Rome could truly honor the pope by meeting there to establish a protection force
in Darfur.

In the meantime, these attacks are continuing daily. And what are we doing about
it? When girls are mutilated after their rapes, we provide free Band-Aids.

Mr. Bush has supported a humanitarian relief effort. But even the aid agencies
emphasize that what is needed most is a security force to stop the slaughter.

''We're proud of what we do,'' said Kenny Gluck, the operations director based
in the Netherlands for Doctors Without Borders. ''But people's villages have
been burned, their crops have been destroyed, their wells spiked, their family
members raped, tortured and killed -- and they come to us, and we give them
2,100 kilocalories a day.'' In effect, Mr. Gluck said, the aid effort is
sustaining victims so they can be killed with a full belly.

I'm not proposing that we send American ground troops. But an expanded United
Nations and African force, with logistical support from the U.S., is urgently
needed. And Condoleezza Rice should immediately visit Darfur to show that it is
a U.S. priority.

Mr. Bush should promptly back the Darfur Accountability Act, a bipartisan bill
that would pressure Sudan to stop the killing (so far, the White House hasn't
even taken a position on the act). Ordinary citizens can also urge their members
of Congress to pass the act.

If there is a lesson from the papacy of John Paul II, it is the power of moral
force. The pope didn't command troops, but he deployed principles. And it's
hypocritical of us to pretend to honor him by lowering our flags while
simultaneously displaying an amoral indifference to genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (88%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (87%); POLICE FORCES (78%); ARRESTS (75%); CHILDREN (74%);
MAMMALS (74%); MARRIAGE (73%); FIRES (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%); SEX OFFENSES
(71%); ARSON (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CORRECTIONS (71%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (70%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (70%); BURN INJURIES (65%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (51%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (54%) Roman Catholic Church

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Nicholas D Kristof; John Paul II (Pope); George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1006 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Religion in the Pharmacy

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 213 words



To the Editor:

''Moralists at the Pharmacy'' (editorial, April 3) addressed ''scattered
reports'' of pharmacists refusing to dispense certain medications that conflict
with their personal moral or religious beliefs and women seeking to have these
prescriptions filled. We believe that there is a solution that accommodates the
needs of both parties.

Recently, we introduced the Workplace Religious Freedom Act, which clarifies
current law to say a person's religious beliefs should be recognized and
accommodated in the workplace as long as this does not adversely affect the
employer's business or customers.

The bill is supported by a diverse coalition of more than 45 religious and civil
rights groups as well as a bipartisan group of senators and representatives.

If the bill becomes law, a pharmacist who does not wish to dispense certain
medications would not have to do so long as another pharmacist is on duty and
would dispense the medications.

The Workplace Religious Freedom Act provides a sensible solution to the
potential conflict between an employee's religious conviction and the needs of
pharmacy customers.

(Senator) Rick Santorum
(Senator) John Kerry
Washington, April 7, 2005

The writers are, respectively, Republican of Pennsylvania and Democrat of
Massachusetts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); PHARMACISTS (91%); RETAIL PHARMACEUTICALS (90%);
RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); FREEDOM OF
RELIGION (90%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%);
WRITERS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (73%); RICK SANTORUM (53%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1010 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Book of Days From Single Voice Caught Amid Mideast Crossfire

BYLINE: By PHOEBE HOBAN

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 459 words


Political rhetoric masquerading as theater is not a pretty sight. ''When the
Bulbul Stopped Singing'' is a one-man, one-note chronicle of the events
beginning on March 29, 2002, when Israeli troops invaded Ramallah and surrounded
Yasir Arafat's headquarters. What the play never mentions, although it is duly
listed in a chronology with the program, is that two days before, a suicide
bomber had attacked a Netanya hotel jammed with Israelis celebrating Passover,
killing 21 people.

That startling omission is typical of this personalized account, adapted for the
stage by the Scottish playwright David Greig from the diaries of Raja Shehadeh,
a Palestinian lawyer and human-rights advocate. Although the Palestinian
suffering is described as ''a soap opera to keep the Arab world entertained,''
the play unapologetically offers one perspective, stripped of meaningful
historical context, that paints the Israelis as savage barbarians bent on
destruction for its own sake. (Indeed, on the day of the Israeli invasion, an
18-year-old Palestinian blew herself up in a supermarket, killing herself and
two others; this isn't listed in the chronology.)

The monologue, first presented last year by the Traverse Theater in Edinburgh,
details the monthlong siege of Ramallah, during which a strict curfew kept most
of the population captives in their own homes. When the invasion starts, Mr.
Shehadeh, played with assurance by Christopher Simon, is completing a novel; his
American wife is attending a conference in Cairo. Meanwhile, his brother's home
is taken over by Israeli soldiers, who threaten his family at gunpoint.

For the next 80 minutes, Mr. Shehadeh walks us through his days: pacing,
fielding phone calls, sending his novel to his agent, working in his garden.
(The minimalist set, with its sand floor mosaic that doubles as a map, serves
his narrative well.) He is unable to get fresh food, see his elderly mother or
help his brother. He hears shooting and shelling, his electricity is turned off,
he sees tanks. Interestingly, he witnesses little bloodshed except on
television: an Israeli sniper hitting the driver of a camera team, a man in a
bullet-riddled house in Bethlehem sitting next to a corpse, and, on April 10, a
Palestinian ''strapped her body with explosives and turned the switch. Boom. So
now it was they who were subject to our threat, our bombing.''

While Mr. Shehadeh is clearly trying to document the terrible price paid by the
innocent civilians caught in the middle of the Mideast crisis, his simplistic
account of this enormously complex situation does a disservice to both sides.

''When the Bulbul Stopped Singing'' is at 59E59 Theaters, 59 East 59th Street,
between Madison and Park Avenues, through April 23. (212)279-4200.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christopher Simon in ''When the Bulbul Stopped Singing.'' (Photo
by Richard Campbell)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: THEATER & DRAMA (90%); CHRONOLOGIES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%);
THEATER (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(76%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (76%); WRITERS (75%); DRAMA LITERATURE (73%);
ARMED FORCES (72%); HISTORY (68%); SHOOTINGS (56%); PASSOVER (56%); CURFEW (51%)
Theater; Reviews

PERSON: Phoebe Hoban; David Greig; Christopher Simon

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (78%); EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND (57%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MIDDLE EAST (90%);
UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (78%); SCOTLAND (57%)

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1017 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqis Find Graves Thought to Hold Hussein's Victims

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 14


Investigators have discovered several mass graves in southern Iraq that are
believed to contain the bodies of people killed by Saddam Hussein's government,
including one estimated to hold 5,000 bodies, Iraqi officials say.

The graves, discovered over the past three months, have not yet been dug up
because of the risks posed by the continuing insurgency and the lack of
qualified forensic workers, said Bakhtiar Amin, Iraq's interim human rights
minister. But initial excavations have substantiated the accounts of witnesses
to a number of massacres. If the estimated body counts prove correct, the new
graves would be among the largest in the grim tally of mass killings that have
gradually come to light since the fall of Mr. Hussein's government two years
ago. At least 290 grave sites containing the remains of some 300,000 people have
been found since the American invasion two years ago, Iraqi officials say.

Forensic evidence from some graves will feature prominently in the trials of Mr.
Hussein and the leaders of his government. The trials are to start this spring.

One of the graves, near Basra, in the south, appears to contain about 5,000
bodies of Iraqi soldiers who joined a failed uprising against Mr. Hussein's
government after the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Another, near Samawa, is believed to
contain the bodies of 2,000 members of the Kurdish clad led by Massoud Barzani.

As many as 8,000 men and boys from the clan disappeared in 1983 after being
rounded up in northern Iraq by security forces at the command of Ali Hassan
al-Majid, widely known as Chemical Ali. It remains unclear, however, how the
victims ended up in the south.

Investigators have also discovered the remains of 58 Kuwaitis spread across
several sites, including what appears to be a family of two adults and five
children who were crushed by a tank, Mr. Amin said. At least 605 Kuwaitis
disappeared at the time of the first gulf war, and before the latest graves were
discovered, fewer than 200 had been accounted for, he added.

A smaller site was discovered near Nasiriya earlier this week. Arabic satellite
television showed images of residents digging up remains there.

Mr. Amin declined to give the exact locations of the graves, saying it could
endanger witnesses to the massacres and anyone working at the sites.

One obstacle to exhuming bodies has been an absence of DNA labs and forensic
anthropologists in Iraq, Mr. Amin said.

In the aftermath of Mr. Hussein's fall, thousands of Iraqis overran mass grave
sites, digging for their relatives' remains with backhoes, shovels, even their
bare hands. A number of sites were looted, making identification of victims
difficult, said Hanny Megally, Middle East director for the International Center
for Transitional Justice.

The American occupation authority, after some initial hesitation, began
classifying grave sites, and international teams began traveling to the sites in
2003 to conduct assessments or exhumations. But toward the end of 2004, rising
violence led nearly all the teams to abandon their work.

Only one site has been fully examined, a grave of Kurdish victims in northern
Iraq, Mr. Megally said. That work was overseen by the Regime Crimes Liaison
Office, which is gathering evidence for the trials of Mr. Hussein and his
deputies.

The interim Iraqi government, working with the United Nations, has drawn up
plans for a National Center for Missing and Disappeared Persons that would have
authority over all aspects of the process, from exhumations to providing
assistance to victims' families.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Iraq highlighting Samawa, Nasiriya, and Basra: Mass graves have
been found in Samawa and Nasiriya, and one in Basra may hold 5,000 bodies. Many
of the victims were Kurds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CEMETERIES (89%); DESERT STORM
(89%); FORENSICS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (79%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); EVIDENCE (76%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (76%); MEDICAL &
DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (71%); MEN (69%); DNA (68%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (50%);
TEST LABORATORIES (50%) Kurds

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Robert F Worth; Saddam Hussein; Massoud Barzani

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); KUWAIT (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); GULF
STATES (78%)

REGION: Iraq; Basra (Iraq); Samawa (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1021 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Soldier in the Army of the Lord

BYLINE: By Barbara Ehrenreich.

Barbara Ehrenreich's most recent book is ''Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By
in America.''

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1155 words



JOHN BROWN, ABOLITIONIST
The Man Who Killed Slavery, Sparked
the Civil War, and Seeded Civil Rights.
By David S. Reynolds.
Illustrated. 578 pp.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.

THIS may not be the most auspicious time for a sympathetic biography of a
religious fanatic who repeatedly sought to advance his cause through violence.
Even before the war on terrorism, John Brown had been largely relegated to a
loony sidebar of American history. The high school history textbooks that the
sociologist James Loewen surveyed in 1995 either brushed Brown off or labeled
him insane, while, at a loftier level of intellectual discourse, Michael
Ignatieff accused him of ''sadistic self-righteousness.'' So it takes courage,
if not a touch of Brownian madness, to argue, as David S. Reynolds does in his
absorbing new biography, ''John Brown, Abolitionist,'' that Brown was not the
Unabomber of his time, but a reasonable man, well connected to his era's
intellectual currents and a salutary force for change.

Reynolds, a professor of English and American studies at the City University of
New York, best known for his book ''Walt Whitman's America,'' buries the
insanity charge under a mountain of contrary evidence. Even Brown's seemingly
suicidal raid on Harpers Ferry represented a strategy no crazier than the Civil
War practice of throwing infantry into massed rifle fire and hoping a few men
would survive to break through the enemy lines: Brown's long study of slave
revolts suggested that an act of exemplary violence would set off huge slave
uprisings and self-emancipation. And what could be saner than his 1858 attack on
three Kansas slave owners, in which Brown freed 11 blacks with only a single
death?

As for Brown's monomaniacal hostility to slavery, which seems so inexplicable to
many critics, he was not the only white man so afflicted. The antislavery
publisher Elijah Lovejoy, for example, had his printing presses destroyed three
times by pro-slavery mobs in Illinois. Each time, he coolly acquired a new press
and went on crusading, until the mob got him.

Nor did Brown's rigidly Calvinist version of Christianity isolate him
intellectually, binLaden-style, from the intellectual ferment of his time.
Reynolds reports that he traveled long distances to hear feminist lecturers, and
took their cause to heart. At various times, his little band of armed recruits
included Jews and agnostics, and engaged in heated discussions of ''religious
themes, mesmerism, ventriloquism, necromancy, spiritualism, psychology,'' not to
mention earthquakes and astronomy. More important for Brown's legitimacy, he was
embraced by the leading intellectuals of his time, Henry Thoreau and Ralph Waldo
Emerson, who found in him an exemplar of the ''higher law'' their
Transcendentalism aspired to.

To those who argue that Brown's commendable goals were sullied by his bloody
methods, Reynolds retorts that violence was in fact central to his message and
his legacy. In the 1850's, it was the pro-slavery forces that held a monopoly on
armed force -- terrorizing antislavery citizens in the Midwest as well as the
South, or proudly proclaiming, as did one Kansas newspaper editor, that he lived
to kill an abolitionist: ''If I can't kill a man, I'll kill a woman; and if I
can't kill a woman, I'll kill a child!'' Antislavery activists, on the other
hand, were often pacifists and usually the victims of their political opponents
-- a relationship symbolized by a South Carolina congressman's crippling beating
of the abolitionist Charles Sumner on the floor of the United States Senate.
With his guns and pikes, Brown reversed the equation -stiffening the backbones
of Northern abolitionists, terrifying the white South -- and hastening, through
both effects, the Civil War and emancipation.

There are times when Reynolds goes almost as far as the Transcendentalists in
beatifying Brown. Maybe the Brown family members were, as Reynolds claims, the
only nonracist whites in America. Certainly Reynolds cites some appallingly
racist statements by antislavery leaders, including Abraham Lincoln. Brown, in
contrast, fought not only to end slavery but to achieve full equality of the
races, a goal he prefigured by recruiting blacks into leadership roles in his
armed band and by settling in the largely black community of North Elba, N.Y.
But the reader might wonder why Brown attracted so few black men to his Harpers
Ferry raid and, devastatingly enough, failed to give the local slaves a heads-up
in the weeks before.

Reynolds also portrays Brown as a sort of all-around progressive saint,
sympathetic to the various liberation movements of his time. But his credentials
as a feminist are undermined by the fact that he inflicted 20 births on two
sequential wives, the first of whom was mentally unstable. There is
disappointingly little here about Mary Brown, the stolid second wife who ran the
farm and raised the children while her husband raided Kansas and swanned around
New England's abolitionist circles. Did she get to travel to the suffrage
lectures with him? I tend to doubt it.

On the other hand, there are points where Reynolds might have been stronger in
Brown's defense. After the Fugitive Slave Act (1850) and the Dred Scott decision
(1857), white people of conscience could no longer content themselves with
supporting the Underground Railroad. A slave was a slave anywhere, the law
declared, and for all time. Violence was beginning to look like the answer, not
just to Brown, but eventually to Lincoln too.

It was Brown's killing of five Pottawatomie, Kan., pro-slavery men -- dragged
from their beds and hacked to death -- that has made commentators queasy ever
since, Reynolds included to some extent. He offers the rather feeble judgment
that it would be ''misleading'' to compare the Pottawatomie attack to modern
terrorism. Yet if terrorism is defined as the random killing of civilians to
make a political point, then it is not just misleading to call Brown a
terrorist, it is flat-out wrong. Brown selected his victims carefully; all had
reportedly threatened abolitionists and the Brown family in particular. At any
rate, the Pottawatomie violence exacted a high price: Brown's son John Jr.
suffered a long episode of insanity, and three other sons remained deeply
disturbed by the killings.

How do we judge a man of such different times -- and temperament -- from our
own? If the rule is that there must be some proportion between a violent act and
its provocation, surely there could be no more monstrous provocation than
slavery. In our own time, some may discern equivalent evils in continuing racial
oppression, economic exploitation, environmental predation or widespread
torture. To them, ''John Brown, Abolitionist,'' for all its wealth of detail and
scrupulous attempts at balance, has a shockingly simple message: Far better to
have future generations complain about your methods than condemn you for doing
nothing.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Gregory Nemec)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); HISTORY (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); RELIGION (89%); SLAVERY
(89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); TERRORISM (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%);
BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (77%); LITERATURE (77%); BIOGRAPHY PUBLISHING (77%);
SOCIOLOGY (77%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (77%); TEXTBOOKS (76%); ETHNIC &
CULTURAL STUDIES (76%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%);
ARMED FORCES (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (67%); ASTROLOGISTS &
PSYCHICS (60%) Books and Literature; Reviews

PERSON: Barbara Ehrenreich; David S Reynolds; John (1800-59) Brown

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1023 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Victims of Uganda Atrocities Choose a Path of Forgiveness

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1697 words

DATELINE: GULU, Uganda


The International Criminal Court at The Hague represents one way of holding
those who commit atrocities responsible for their crimes. The raw eggs, twigs
and livestock that the Acholi people of northern Uganda use in their traditional
reconciliation ceremonies represent another.

The two very different systems -- one based on Western notions of justice, the
other on a deep African tradition of forgiveness -- are clashing in their
response to one of this continent's most bizarre and brutal guerrilla wars, a
conflict that has raged for 18 years in the rugged terrain along Uganda's border
with Sudan.

The fighting features rebels who call themselves the Lord's Resistance Army and
who speak earnestly of the import of the Ten Commandments, but who routinely
hack up civilians who get in their way. To add to their numbers, the rebels
abduct children in the night, brainwash them in the bush, indoctrinate them by
forcing them to kill, and then turn them -- 20,000 over the last two decades --
into the next wave of ferocious fighters seeking to topple the government. Girls
as young as 12 are assigned as rebel commanders' wives. Anyone who does not toe
the line is brutally killed.

The international court, invited to investigate the war by President Yoweri
Museveni, has announced it is close to issuing arrest warrants for rebel leaders
including, no doubt, Joseph Kony, the self-styled spiritualist calling the
shots. But some war victims are urging the international court to back off. They
say the local people will suffer if the rebel command feels cornered. They
recommend giving forgiveness more of a chance, using an age-old ceremony
involving raw eggs.

''When we talk of arrest warrants it sounds so simple,'' said David Onen Acana
II, the chief of the Acholi, the dominant tribe in the war-riven north, who
traveled to The Hague recently to make his objections known. ''But an arrest
warrant doesn't mean the war will end.''

Lars Erik Skaansar, the top United Nations official in Gulu, has sought peace in
as varied places as the former Yugoslavia, Sierra Leone and the Middle East over
the last 12 years. ''I have never seen such a capacity to forgive,'' he said.

Mr. Kony tells his followers that he is in direct contact with God, and that God
says it is right to kill in the cause of toppling Mr. Museveni's evil
government, which is accused of hostility toward the country's north. (The
government's sins, however, remain unstated.)

In 1988, when the government tried to train villagers in self-defense, Mr. Kony
was quoted as saying: ''If you pick up an arrow against us and we ended up
cutting off the hand you used, who is to blame? You report us with your mouth,
and we cut off your lips. Who is to blame? It is you! The Bible says that if
your hand, eye or mouth is at fault, it should be cut off.'' The rebels began
cutting off the lips, hands, noses and breasts of civilians, intending that
their victims survive as constant warnings to others.

The other day, an assembly of Acholi chiefs put the notion of forgiveness into
action. As they looked on, 28 young men and women who had recently defected from
the rebels lined up according to rank on a hilltop overlooking this war-scared
regional capital, with a one-legged lieutenant colonel in the lead and some
adolescent privates bringing up the rear. They had killed and maimed together.
They had raped and pillaged. One after the other, they stuck their bare right
feet in a freshly cracked egg, with the lieutenant colonel, who lost his right
leg to a bomb, inserting his right crutch in the egg instead. The egg symbolizes
innocent life, according to local custom, and by dabbing themselves in it the
killers are restoring themselves to the way they used to be.

Next, the former fighters brushed against the branch of a pobo tree, which
symbolically cleansed them. By stepping over a pole, they were welcomed back
into the community by Mr. Acana and the other chiefs.

''I ask for your forgiveness,'' said Charles Otim, 34, the rebel lieutenant
colonel, who had been abducted by the rebels himself, at the age of 16, early in
the war. ''We have wronged you.''

The age-old rite is what local residents have used when members of one tribe
kill members of another. After being welcomed back into the fold, the offender
must sit down together with tribal leaders and make amends. After confessing to
his misdeeds, the wayward tribesman is required to pay the victim's kin
compensation in the form of cows, goats and sheep.

It is a system not unlike those in use in other parts of Africa. Somalis still
pay compensation to quell the inter-clan battles in that country, although the
traditional rite cannot possibly keep up with all the killings. In northern
Kenya, where a recent bout of clan violence resulted in several dozen deaths,
tribal mediation became bogged down over complains that the loss of a man's life
was compensated for with more cows than for a woman's life.

South Africa managed to put apartheid in its past by insisting on truthful
admissions from those who brutalized the country's blacks but then by promoting
reconciliation among the races.

A traumatized Rwanda has used both international and local justice to respond to
the mass killings of 1994, which left an estimated 800,000 ethnic Tutsi and
moderate Hutu dead. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, based in
Arusha, Tanzania, was set up by the United Nations to prosecute the
orchestrators of the violence. The many foot soldiers in the slaughter are
facing traditional ''gacaca'' trials, where the community hears their cases and
often forgives those who confess.

The Darfur region of Sudan is the subject of a separate investigation by the
international court although there it is the government, which has been
implicated in the violence, that is pushing for reconciliation methods to be
used.

Uganda's government, which backs the international court, has already adopted
the traditional notion of forgiveness as one of its peace strategies. An amnesty
program in place since 2000 has prompted thousands of rebels from the Lord's
Resistance Army and other groups to lay down their arms and re-enter society. A
popular radio program broadcast in the north sends the message out that
returning rebels will not be executed, to counter what Mr. Kony tells his
followers.

''Whoever comes out of the bush is forgiven,'' explained Lt. Tabard Kiconco, an
army spokesman based in Gulu.

Amnesty is one strategy being used to quell the violence. Also, more
conventional peace talks are taking place. In December 2004, they resulted in a
rare meeting of the rebel and government leadership. If the war does end soon,
these negotiations led by Betty Bigombe, a World Bank consultant and former
government minister whom Mr. Kony apparently trusts, will play a critical role.

In addition, Uganda's military has been using force to try to end the rebel
insurgency, and most agree that successes in the heavily forested battlefield
have made the rebels more willing to strike a deal. At the same time, Mr.
Museveni, a former guerrilla fighter who frequently dons a camouflage army
uniform when inspecting his troops in the north, has said repeatedly that his
administration has already finished off the Lord's Resistance Army. The rebels
show the president's pronouncements to be false by hacking off some more lips or
snatching some more children from their beds, as they have done repeatedly in
recent weeks.

''Reports of the insurgency's death are greatly exaggerated,'' the International
Crisis Group, a Brussels-based research group, said in a report last week that
called for renewed diplomatic pressure by the United States and others for a
negotiated solution. It said issuing arrest warrants against the rebel command
''could drive the rebels definitively out of the peace process.''

To be sure, certainly, many Ugandans want Mr. Kony and his cohorts behind bars.

[After meeting with critics of the court last month, the international court's
chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, met with a broader group of leaders last
week, including those supporting the prosecution of top rebels. On April 16, Mr.
Moreno-Ocampo issued a statement saying the court and the community leaders had
agreed to integrate peace talks, the international court investigation and
traditional justice and reconciliation processes. ''We urge the Lord's
Resistance Army members to respond positively to the appeal to end violence,''
the statement said.]

Still, remarkably, a number of those who have been hacked by the rebels, who
have seen their children carried off by them or who have endured years suffering
in their midst say traditional justice must be the linchpin in ending the war.
Their main rationale: the line between victim and killer is too blurred.

Many African conflicts pit one tribe or community against another. But in
northern Uganda, the Acholi are cursed with being on both sides of the fight.
Young Acholi are kidnapped; the people they are forced to kill are just as
likely to be other Acholi as of other northern tribes.

The nephew of Mr. Acana, the paramount chief, was abducted by the rebels and
turned into a killer some years back. The boy is now back home, washed in the
egg and on his way to being forgiven.

Understandably, forgiveness and rage are mixed in many people's heads. Former
rebels who have surrendered have been largely welcomed back to the communities
they had preyed upon, with each new arrival celebrated as a sign that the war is
fizzling out. But former fighters complain that they are sometimes shunned and
subjected to taunts, as well.

Conacy Laker, 25, finds it hard to look anyone in the eye after losing her nose,
ears and upper lip to rebels more than a decade ago. Her physical wounds have
healed, but her suffering goes on.

''I have nothing to say to the person who cut me,'' she said sternly, staring at
the dirt. ''But the person needs to be punished like I was punished.''

A moment later, though, forgiveness seemed at the fore. ''What I'm after is
peace,'' she said. ''If the people who did this to me and so many others are
sorry for what they did, then we can take them back.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Conacy Laker, 25, who lives in Gulu, finds it hard to look
anyone in the eye after members of the Lord's Resistance Army cut off her nose,
ears and top lip more than a decade ago. ''What I'm after is peace,'' she says.
Aceng Nighty, 25, was abducted in 1994 when she was 15. While in the bush, she
was forced to become the sixth wife of a rebel commander, and she gave birth to
her son, Komakech Dominique, 8. They live in Gulu. (Photographs by Vanessa Vick
for The New York Times)(pg. A8)
 A Ugandan ex-rebel walked toward an egg in a forgiveness rite. (Photo by
Vanessa Vick for The New York Times)(pg. A1)Chart/Map: ''Major Milestones In a
Violent Conflict''1986 -- Yoweri Museveni, who led the rebel National Resistance
Army, takes control of Uganda as president, toppling Maj. Gen. Tito Okello, an
ethnic Acholi.1987 -- Joseph Kony leads a selfdescribed spiritualist movement
that calls for rights for the Acholi people of northern Uganda. He tells his
followers it is sometimes necessary to attack Acholi people to persuade them to
follow his movement, which eventually becomes known as the Lords Resistance
Army, or L.R.A.1988 -- Mr. Museveni names Betty Bigombe as minister of state for
pacification of northern Uganda. Her efforts to set up community self-defense
units backfire as the rebels begin chopping off the hands and lips of
civilians.1993-94 -- Mrs. Bigombe convenes peace talks that come close to a deal
but eventually fall apart.2000 -- Uganda approves an amnesty law in an attempt
to lure rebels from the bush. Thousands surrender in subsequent years.2002 --
The Uganda People's Defense Force stages Operation Iron Fist against L.R.A.
rebels in northern Uganda and crosses over into hideouts in southern Sudan with
the permission of the Sudanese government. Sudanese authorities had previously
supported the group.2004 -- Mr. Museveni asks the International Criminal Court
to investigate the atrocities committed by the L.R.A.DECEMBER 2004 -- Sam Kolo,
a rebel leader, meets government officials in northern Uganda in peace
negotiations orchestrated by Mrs. Bigombe. Mr. Kolo, the chief spokesman for the
rebels, would later surrender to the army in February 2005.MARCH 2005 -- A
delegation of Acholi leaders travels to The Hague to urge Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to hold off on issuing
arrest warrants against Mr. Kony and other rebel leaders. The leaders prefer
traditional reconciliation methods.Map of Uganda highlighting Gulu. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (75%); COUPS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%) Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (94%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marc Lacey; Yoweri (Pres) Museveni; Joseph Kony

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: UGANDA (95%); SUDAN (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SIERRA LEONE (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Uganda; Uganda; Uganda

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1024 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Armenian-Turkish Dispute

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: IZMIR, Turkey, April 17


The Turkish State Archive on Sunday issued a list of more than 523,000 Turks it
said were killed by Armenians in Turkey from 1910 to 1922.

The move seemed intended to counter the historical record of the genocide
committed by Ottoman Turks against Armenians in and around 1915.

Armenians plan to mark April 24 as the 90th anniversary of the start of the
violence. Turkey is concerned that the issue could interfere with its plans to
start talks with the European Union in October for possible membership. There
have been growing calls from other countries for Turkey to acknowledge its role
with regard to the Armenians.

Last week, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and the Turkish Parliament called
for an international study of the events of that period.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (88%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); ANNIVERSARIES (69%); EUROPEAN UNION (68%); PRIME MINISTERS
(65%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (65%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%) European Union

PERSON: RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (58%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); ARMENIA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); EUROPE
(90%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1028 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 20, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Spain: Argentine Officer Convicted

BYLINE: By Renwick McLean (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 80 words


The National Court convicted Adolfo Scilingo, a former Argentine naval officer,
of crimes against humanity during Argentina's 1976-1983 military dictatorship.
It was the first conviction under a law that allows courts here to prosecute
crimes in other countries if they constitute violations of international law.
Mr. Scilingo is expected to serve 30 years in prison. He admitted throwing
dissidents from planes into the sea but later retracted the confession.
Renwick McLean (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); NAVIES (90%); CORRECTIONS (88%); ADMISSIONS
& CONFESSIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%); MILITARY RULE (85%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (92%); SPAIN (91%); EUROPE (91%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1030 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 20, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

House Panel Studies Sharing Of Intelligence

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 19


Senior Justice Department officials resisted calls on Tuesday for stronger
judicial checks on the government's use of foreign intelligence information, as
Congress continued its debate over federal antiterror powers.

At the fourth in a lengthy series of Congressional hearings on the future of the
sweeping law known as the USA Patriot Act, civil right advocates and some House
Democrats called for stricter safeguards on the sharing of intelligence
information to prevent abuses and government ''fishing expeditions.''

In particular, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union urged Congress
to require that prosecutors notify a judge whenever they share information from
a criminal investigation with intelligence agencies and explain their reasons
for doing so.

The lawyer, Timothy H. Edgar, said that although greater sharing of government
intelligence since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, had helped deter terrorism, it
had also created the danger of abuses that could ''chill legitimate political,
religious and academic activities.''

The Patriot Act authorized much wider sharing of sensitive information from
terrorism and espionage cases between criminal prosecutors and intelligence
agencies, effectively eliminating a ''wall'' that officials said had hindered
antiterrorism efforts before the Sept. 11 attacks.

At the hearing before a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, Justice
Department officials pointed on Tuesday to the improved flow of information as
one of the government's critical advances since the attacks and urged Congress
to make permanent the part of the law that expanded such information-sharing.
That provision and more than a dozen others are set to expire at the end of the
year unless Congress renews them.

''Prior to 9/11, we tied ourselves in knots with misunderstood legal and
bureaucratic guidelines that had the effect of constricting the flow of
essential information within the United States government,'' said Barry Sabin,
head of the terrorism section at the Justice Department. ''We dare not and must
not let this happen again.''

Mr. Sabin and Maureen A. Baginski, who oversees intelligence operations at the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, told the panel that it would be a mistake for
Congress to require the notification of a judge or impose other restrictions
that could slow or hinder the flow of information.

Several Democrats on the panel said they were bothered by the idea that
government agents could gather and disseminate intelligence information from
wiretaps, surveillance and other means as part of a foreign intelligence
investigation without having to show probable cause that a crime had been
committed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); US PATRIOT ACT (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PROBABLE CAUSE (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); WIRETAPPING (69%) Terrorism; Intelligence Services; Law and
Legislation

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

PERSON: Eric Lichtblau

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1031 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 20, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

5 Muslims to Sue Homeland Security in Border Detentions

BYLINE: By ANDREA ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 909 words


Five American Muslims will file a federal lawsuit today after they and dozens of
others were detained last December by United States border agents as they
returned home from a religious conference in Toronto, their lawyers said.

The Muslim men and women, all American citizens who live in New York, said they
and others were held up to six and a half hours at border crossings,
interrogated, photographed and fingerprinted simply because they told customs
agents they had attended ''Reviving the Islamic Spirit,'' a large annual
conference organized by Muslim organizations in Canada. None of those detained
had engaged in unlawful activities, their lawyers said.

Border agents near Buffalo searched the cars of those detained and confiscated
some of their cellphones after they tried to call lawyers, according to the
complaint their lawyers plan to file in United States District Court in
Brooklyn.

The three men and two women include an orthodontist, a teacher, a hotel manager
and a graduate student, and are represented by lawyers for the New York Civil
Liberties Union, the American Civil Liberties Union and the Council on
American-Islamic Relations. The complaint charges that the detention,
interrogation and other treatment of those held by customs officials violated
their constitutional rights.

Homeland Security officials have acknowledged that at least 34 people were
stopped by border agents after attending the conference.

In response to questions about the suit, Valerie Smith, a spokeswoman for the
Department of Homeland Security, said: ''The mission of the Department of
Homeland Security is to protect Americans from terrorism and the mission of
Customs and Border Protection is to prevent terrorists and their weapons from
entering our country. It is incumbent upon Customs officers to be right each and
every time. Terrorists only have to get it right once.'' She said she could not
discuss the details of the case.

None of those detained were ever charged with any crime.

The detentions have drawn national attention. ''Citizens have a right to go to
religious conferences and governments don't have any authority to question them
whether it's out of the country or inside the country,'' said Christopher Dunn,
a lawyer with New York Civil Liberties Union. ''It's no different than if this
happened in Madison Square Garden.''

Named as defendants in the complaint are Michael Chertoff, secretary of homeland
security, and two officials with United States Customs and Border Protection.

A spokeswoman for Customs and Border Protection, Kristie Clemens, has been
quoted widely in newspapers as stating that Muslims who attended the conference
were stopped because the government had ''ongoing credible information'' that
Islamic conferences may be used to promote terrorist activities, including
fund-raising. Several calls to her were not returned.

The annual conference draws thousands of Muslims from Canada, the United States
and elsewhere and features lectures by Islamic scholars, music concerts and
other cultural activities. Among the conference's keynote speakers was Hamza
Yusuf, a prominent imam from Hayward, Calif., who has advised President Bush on
Islamic issues, according to the complaint. Organized by college students, the
conference promotes peace, tolerance and unity, said several people who attended
it.

Asmaa Elshinawy, 20, decided to attend the conference after reading about it on
the Internet, she said. She wanted to learn how to improve the image of her
faith among her fellow Americans, she said. ''We have a responsibility to show
people living in this country what Islam is really about,'' said Ms. Elshinawy,
a preschool teacher who lives in Brooklyn, where she was born and raised by her
Egyptian parents. ''It's about peace and loving your neighbor.''

Ms. Elshinawy and five friends from Brooklyn and New Jersey rented a van and
attended the conference for three days. On their way home on the afternoon of
Dec. 27, a border agent at the Lewiston Bridge border crossing asked them if
they had ''been at the conference,'' according to the complaint. When they said
yes, they were told to pull over, and then were detained in a building, she
said.

''I walked in and I saw all Muslim families inside,'' she said. ''It looked like
an Arab cafe.''

Ms. Elshinawy recognized some of the people from the conference. Agents took
away the women's cellphones and interrogated some of them about why they
attended the conference, she said. Their fingerprints were taken, and they were
photographed. When they were released around 9 p.m., they found their van in
disarray, she said. A video camera was open and its contents appeared to have
been viewed, according to the complaint.

The lawsuit seeks to have the government's actions declared unlawful, and an
injunction against further enforcement of such ''policies and practices,''
according to the complaint. The men and women also want all information,
fingerprints, and photographs obtained during the detentions to be expunged.

''Customs has fairly broad latitude in terms of searching for contraband,'' said
David Cole, a professor of constitutional law at Georgetown University and
author of ''Enemy Aliens: Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the
War on Terrorism.'' ''But they don't have a broad latitude for seizing citizens
and taking their fingerprints without having any indication that they have
violated Customs-enforced rules.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Asmaa Elshinawy, 20, photographed at the New York Civil
Liberties Union, was one of dozens of American Muslims detained by border agents
in December while returning from a religious conference in Toronto. (Photo by
Cary Conover for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); LAWYERS (93%); BORDER CONTROL (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(91%); LITIGATION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); FUNDRAISING (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (75%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (74%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (73%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); FINGERPRINTING (71%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
COMMUNICATIONS (69%); ARRESTS (66%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (54%)
Terrorism; Islam; False Arrests, Convictions and Imprisonments; Search and
Seizure; Suits and Litigation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (55%) Customs Service (US); Homeland Security Department

PERSON: MICHAEL CHERTOFF (58%) Andrea Elliott

CITY: TORONTO, ON, CANADA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); ONTARIO, CANADA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (95%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

REGION: Toronto (Canada); Buffalo (NY)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1035 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Microsoft Comes Under Fire For Reversal on Gay Rights Bill

BYLINE: By SARAH KERSHAW

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, April 21


The Microsoft Corporation, at the forefront of corporate gay rights for decades,
is coming under fire from gay rights groups, politicians and its own employees
for withdrawing its support for a state bill that would have barred
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.

Many of the critics accused the company of bowing to pressure from a prominent
evangelical church in Redmond, Wash., located a few blocks from Microsoft's
sprawling headquarters.

The bill, or similar versions of it, has been introduced repeatedly over three
decades; it failed by one vote Thursday in the State Senate. Gay rights
advocates denounced Microsoft, which had supported the bill for the last two
years, for abandoning their cause. Blogs and online chat rooms were buzzing on
Thursday with accusations that the company, which has offered benefits to
same-sex partners for years, had given in to the Christian right.

''I think people should feel betrayed,'' said Tina Podlodowski, a former
Microsoft senior manager and former Seattle city councilwoman who now runs an
advocacy group for AIDS patients. ''To me, Microsoft has been one of the big
supporters of gay and lesbian civil rights issues, and they did it when it
wasn't an issue of political expediency, when it was the right thing to do.''

Microsoft officials denied any connection between their decision not to endorse
the bill and the church's opposition, although they acknowledged meeting twice
with the church minister, Ken Hutcherson.

Dr. Hutcherson, pastor of the Antioch Bible Church, who has organized several
rallies opposing same-sex marriage here and in Washington, D.C., said he
threatened in those meetings to organize a national boycott of Microsoft
products.

After that, ''they backed off,'' the pastor said Thursday in a telephone
interview. ''I told them I was going to give them something to be afraid of
Christians about,'' he said.

Microsoft's decision not to endorse the anti-discrimination bill and its
meetings with Dr. Hutcherson were first reported Thursday by The Stranger, an
alternative weekly newspaper in Seattle.

The bill, which had passed in the State House, would have extended protections
against discrimination in employment, housing and other fields to gay men and
lesbians. It was supported by other high-tech companies and multinational
corporations including Nike, Boeing, Coors and Hewlett-Packard.

Microsoft officials said that the recent meetings with the minister did not
persuade them to back away from supporting the bill, because they had already
decided to take a ''neutral'' position on it. They said they had examined their
legislative priorities and decided that because they already offer extensive
benefits to gay employees and that King County, where Microsoft is based,
already has an anti-discrimination law broader than what the state bill
proposed, they should focus on other legislative matters.

''Our government affairs team made a decision before this legislative session
that we would focus our energy on a limited number of issues that are directly
related to our business,'' said Mark Murray, a company spokesman. ''That
decision was not influenced by external factors. It was driven by our desire to
focus on a smaller number of issues in this short legislative session. We
obviously have not done a very good job of communicating about this issue.''

''We're disappointed that people are misinterpreting those meetings,'' he said.

But State Representative Ed Murray, an openly gay Democrat and a sponsor of the
bill, said that in a conversation last month with Bradford L. Smith, Microsoft's
senior vice president and general counsel, Mr. Smith made it clear to him that
the company was under pressure from the church and the pastor and that he was
also concerned about the reaction to company support of the bill among its
Christian employees, the lawmaker said.

Mr. Smith would not comment for this article.

Representative Murray said that in a recent conversation with Mr. Smith, Mr.
Smith said that the minister had demanded the company fire Microsoft employees
who testified this year on behalf of the bill, but that Mr. Smith had refused.
According to Representative Murray, Mr. Smith said ''that while he did not do
the many things that the minister had requested, including firing employees who
had testified for the bill, he believed that Microsoft could not just respond to
one group of employees, when there were other groups of employees who felt much
different.

''My refrain back to him was that this is a historic moment, that I only had a
few weeks, and I wanted Microsoft to do the right thing,'' the legislator said.
''Their concern, he said, was that obviously they were hearing from fairly
conservative employees who were connected to this minister. They needed to sort
out how they were going to deal with those problems.''

Representative Murray said the company's contention that the decision not to
support the bill had nothing to do with the church was ''an absolute lie.''

A Microsoft employee who said he attended a meeting this month with Mr. Smith
and about 30 employees, most of them gay, said that Mr. Smith discussed his
meetings with Dr. Hutcherson and left the impression that the company was
changing its policy on the bill as a result of those meetings.

''Brad was very clear that the decision to be neutral on the bill was made
subsequent to his meeting with Ken Hutcherson,'' said the employee, who spoke on
condition of anonymity because he feared retribution from the company. ''My gut
feeling is that the pastor and his threat of a boycott and the general
sensitivity around this issue was a factor in this decision.''

He added, ''At the meeting, what Brad told us was that Microsoft made its
decision on the bill between the first and second meetings he had with
Hutcherson.''

The Washington bill was one of several similar bills being debated in state
legislatures across the country, which remains divided on social issues like
same-sex marriage.

Dr. Hutcherson, who has become a leading national critic of same-sex marriage,
said he believed he could have organized a widespread boycott of Microsoft. He
said he told the Microsoft executives, ''If you don't think the moral issue is
not a big issue, just count the amount of votes that were cast on moral issues
in the last election.''

''A lot of Christians would have joined me,'' he said, ''But it would have been
a lot more people, too.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (97%); LGBT RIGHTS (93%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (89%); RELIGION (89%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (86%); COHABITATION
(78%); AIDS & HIV (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%);
CHAT ROOMS (74%); INTERNET & WWW (74%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); SAME SEX
MARRIAGE & UNIONS (73%); CITY GOVERNMENT (72%); BOYCOTTS (71%); MULTINATIONAL
CORPORATIONS (71%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (69%); INTERVIEWS (69%); MARRIAGE
(50%) Homosexuality; Law and Legislation; Discrimination; Computers and the
Internet; Boycotts; Homosexuality

COMPANY: MICROSOFT CORP (96%); BOEING CO (51%); HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (51%)

ORGANIZATION: Microsoft Corp

TICKER: MSFT (NASDAQ) (96%); BOE (LSE) (51%); BA (NYSE) (51%); HPQ (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (96%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE
(96%); NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (51%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (51%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (51%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (51%);
NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT
MANUFACTURING (51%)

PERSON: Sarah Kershaw

CITY: SEATTLE, WA, USA (92%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Washington (State); King County (Wash)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1042 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abbas Puts His Own Stamp on Security Force

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, April 24


Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader, has named three new security chiefs as
part of his effort to reshape the security forces, one of the most contentious
issues confronting him.

On Saturday night, aides to Mr. Abbas announced new commanders for each of the
three main security branches: national security, intelligence and the police.

Israelis and Palestinians have each had longstanding grievances about the
performance of the security services, and there is still skepticism about
whether the new security chiefs will bring sweeping changes that have been
sought.

The shuffle included the ouster of Mousa Arafat, Yasir Arafat's cousin, who was
chief of national security in the Gaza Strip.

Under a new law, an estimated 1,000 officers who have reached the age of 60 will
be forced to retire, which will remove many veteran commanders who had ties to
Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader who died in November.

Mr. Abbas has sought to cushion the blow by promising comfortable retirement
benefits, and he named Mousa Arafat a security adviser with the rank of cabinet
minister.

Still, it marks a change of direction from the rule of Yasir Arafat. When he
established the Palestinian Authority a decade ago, he built an elaborate
security service with a dozen agencies and 40,000 men.

The new security commanders already were high-ranking officers. Suleiman Helis
will be in charge of national security, Tareq Abu Rajab, was promoted from
deputy to intelligence chief; and Alaa Husni, a senior police officer, was named
chief of police.

''I am sure that we will succeed in imposing security because this is the demand
of our people,'' Mr. Husni said at a news conference in Gaza City on Sunday.

After the Palestinian uprising began in September 2000, Israel and the United
States complained repeatedly that Mr. Arafat had refused to order his security
services to prevent Palestinian attacks against Israel.

Mr. Abbas ''is different from Arafat,'' said Boaz Ganor, director of the
International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism in Israel. ''He believes and
understands that terror is counterproductive for the Palestinians.''

''Naming new heads of security services is crucial because the former ones
showed they are not capable of fighting the terrorists,'' he said, adding ''we
will have to see if anything actually changes in the field.''

Many Palestinians say the security services have been a leading source of
corruption and have failed to halt lawlessness among Palestinians.

Mr. Abbas has acknowledged these problems. After his election as president of
the Palestinian Authority in January, he ordered the security forces to prevent
attacks against Israel. In February, he announced a truce with Israel, and more
recently, the security forces were slimmed down, leaving just the three main
agencies.

''We acted vigorously throughout the entire population to achieve a calm because
we are convinced that it is necessary for us, and not just to please Israel,''
Mr. Abbas told Israeli journalists who visited him last week in his West Bank
headquarters in Ramallah.

Israel says the Palestinian factions continue to carry out almost daily
shootings, and the Palestinian security forces are doing little or nothing to
prevent them.

Some Palestinians expressed doubts on Sunday. ''I don't think we will see change
from these new security leaders; they all come from the same corrupt system,''
said Khalil Abu Shammala, a Palestinian who heads the Al Dameer Association for
Human Rights, based in Gaza.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mahmoud Abbas has named Alaa Husni, center, a senior police
officer, as Palestinian police chief. Mr. Husni appeared yesterday with the
departing chief, Mahmoud Asfor, after the transfer of authority in Gaza City.
(Photo by Hatem Moussa/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); TERRORISM (89%); EMPLOYEE PROMOTIONS (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); RETIREMENT & RETIREES (67%);
CORRUPTION (65%) Palestinians

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (93%) Greg Myre; Mahmoud (Pres) Abbas; Mousa Arafat; Yasir
Arafat

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Israel

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1050 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Croatia: U.N. Prosecutor Keeps Union Hopes On Hold

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 71 words


Croatia's hopes of starting entry talks with the European Union were dashed
again. In remarks after a meeting with European Union officials in Luxembourg,
Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, said that Croatia was still not fully cooperating
with the tribunal and that a top war crimes suspect, Gen. Ante Gotovina, ''is
still in Croatia.''   Nicholas Wood (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
GENOCIDE (84%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (84%) European Union;
United Nations

PERSON: Ante (Gen) (Ret) Gotovina; Carla Del Ponte

COUNTRY: CROATIA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%);
LUXEMBOURG (72%)

REGION: Croatia; Europe

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1054 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 64 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a new willingness by
Serbia and other countries in the region to turn over those accused of war
crimes for international prosecution misidentified the court at The Hague that
tries such cases. It is the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, not the World Court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (84%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (82%) Correction Stories; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%)
International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court); International Criminal
Tribunal

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1055 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecution Hits Snags At Hearing on Iraq Killings

BYLINE: By JOHN DeSANTIS; New York Times Regional Newspapers

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., April 27


Prosecutors in the case of a marine accused of murdering two Iraqis advised one
of their own witnesses on Wednesday that he could face charges for talking to
reporters, and vigorously cross-examined another who praised the defendant.

The developments came at a preliminary hearing that will determine whether the
marine, Second Lt. Ilario Pantano, will face a court-martial in the deaths of
Hamaady Kareem and Tahah Ahmead Hanjil, who were shot in the back on April 15,
2004, near Mahmudiyah, Iraq.

Under questioning from a civilian defense lawyer for Lieutenant Pantano, one
witness, Sgt. Daniel Coburn, acknowledged that he had violated orders not to
discuss the case with the news media. The admission came after the lawyer,
Charles Gittins, quoted what appeared to have been transcripts of conversations
Sergeant Coburn had with a New York Magazine writer.

During a break, prosecutors advised Sergeant Coburn of his right against
self-incrimination and advised him to seek legal counsel because he could be
criminally charged.

The sergeant was one of two servicemen with Lieutenant Pantano when the shooting
occurred, and the defense has suggested that he was disgruntled with the
defendant and tried to portray a combat shooting as a murder. The defense argues
that the lieutenant acted in self-defense.

Before being warned that he could face charges himself, Sergeant Coburn gave the
most detailed testimony to date about what happened that April day after his
platoon stopped a car leaving what was believed to be an insurgent hideout.

He told a hearing officer that Lieutenant Pantano was angered when he learned
that intelligence officers had decided not to detain Mr. Kareem and Mr. Hanjil.

''These two were going to be let go because there was no proof they had anything
to do with the house,'' Sergeant Coburn testified, adding that the lieutenant
''looked a little upset that these guys were going to get off.''

He said Lieutenant Pantano was ''mumbling to himself'' and told the two Iraqis
to go back and search their own vehicle, though it had already been twice
searched by a Navy corpsman, George Gobles.

Lieutenant Pantano ordered that the detainees' plastic handcuffs be cut off, the
sergeant testified, and that the lieutenant then ordered him and Corpsman Gobles
to take positions facing away from the car.

The two detainees, Sergeant Coburn said, were on their knees searching the
inside of their car when staccato bursts of gunfire caused him to turn around,
and he saw Lieutenant Pantano firing at the detainees.

"He was still firing,'' the sergeant said. ''I was trying to figure out when he
was going to stop.''

Corpsman Gobles, who testified earlier in the day, gave a similar account, but
also said Lieutenant Pantano had told the two men to ''stop'' in Arabic and
English.

''And I heard shots fired,'' Corpsman Gobles said, testifying, as did Sergeant
Coburn, that the men were shot in the back.

During a lengthy cross-examination by the defense, Corpsman Gobles lauded
Lieutenant Pantano's service in combat.

"He was a damned good leader,'' Corpsman Gobles said. ''I felt the safest with,
you know, this platoon, because more than anything because of Lieutenant
Pantano, his leadership.''

When prosecutors questioned Corpsman Gobles once again about that statement and
others, Mr. Gittins said they could not cross-examine their own witness.

But Maj. Stephen Keane, the lead prosecutor, said he could do so under military
rules, because Corpsman Gobles had become a defense witness.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); LAWYERS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (79%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); WRITERS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); TRANSCRIPTS (74%); MURDER (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); SELF DEFENSE (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Courts-Martial

COMPANY: NEW YORK MAGAZINE (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2721 PERIODICALS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%)

PERSON: John Desantis; Ilario G (Lt) Pantano

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Mahmudiya (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1056 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Abu Ghraib, the Big Shots Walk

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 716 words


When soldiers in war are not properly trained and supervised, atrocities are all
but inevitable. This is one reason why the military command structure is so
important. There was a time, not so long ago, when commanders were expected to
be accountable for the behavior of their subordinates.

That's changed. Under Commander in Chief George W. Bush, the notion of command
accountability has been discarded. In Mr. Bush's world of war, it's the grunts
who take the heat. Punishment is reserved for the people at the bottom. The
people who foul up at the top are promoted.

It was a year ago today that the stories and photos of the shocking abuses at
Abu Ghraib prison first came to the public's attention. It was a scandal that
undermined the military's reputation and diminished the standing of the U.S.
around the world.

It would soon become clear that the photos of hooded, naked and humiliated
detainees were evidence of a much larger problem. The system for processing,
interrogating and detaining prisoners at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere in Iraq was
dangerously out of control, and the command structure responsible for it had
collapsed. Detainees were beaten, tortured, sexually abused and, in some
instances, killed. Many detainees should never have been imprisoned at all, as
they had committed no offenses.

So what happened? A handful of grunts were court-martialed, a Marine major was
cashiered, and the Army plans to issue a new interrogation manual that bars
certain harsh techniques. There was no wholesale crackdown on criminal behavior.

We learned last week that after a high-level investigation, the Army had cleared
four of the five top officers who were responsible for prison policies and
operations in Iraq. The fifth officer, Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski of the Army
Reserve, had already been relieved of her command of the military police unit at
Abu Ghraib. (She has complained, and not without reason, that she was a
scapegoat for the failures of higher-ranking officers.)

As Eric Schmitt wrote in The Times: ''Barring new evidence, the inquiry by the
Army's inspector general effectively closes the Army's book on whether the
highest-ranking officers in Iraq during the Abu Ghraib prison scandal should be
held accountable for command failings described in past reviews.''

This is the way atrocities are dealt with in Mr. Bush's world of war. The
higher-ups responsible for training, supervising and disciplining the troops --
in other words, the big shots who presided over a system that ran shamefully
amok -- escaped virtually unscathed.

The abuses at Abu Ghraib, which seemed mind-boggling at the time, turned out to
be symptomatic of the torture, abuse and institutionalized injustice that have
permeated the Bush administration's operations in its so-called war against
terror. Euphemisms like rendition, coercive interrogation, sleep adjustment and
waterboarding are now widely understood. Yes, Virginia, it is the policy of the
United States to kidnap individuals and send them off to regimes skilled in the
art of torture.

Two things are needed. First, a truly independent commission, along the lines of
the bipartisan 9/11 panel, should be set up to thoroughly investigate U.S.
interrogation and detention operations, and make recommendations to correct
abuses.

Second, the U.S. government should make it clear, beyond any doubt, that torture
and any other inhumane treatment of prisoners is wrong, just flat wrong, and
will not be tolerated under any circumstances.

''In our contemporary world, torture is like the slave trade or piracy was to
people in the 1790's,'' said Michael Posner, executive director of Human Rights
First, which is suing Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld over the prisoner abuse
issue. ''Torture is a crime against mankind, against humanity. It's something
that has to be absolutely prohibited.''

If the president made it clear that men and women up and down the chain of
command would be held responsible for the abuses that occur on their watch, the
abuses would plummet. Instead, the message the administration has sent is that
its demands for accountability will be limited to a few hapless, ill-trained
grunts.

The big shots who presided over behavior that has shamed America in the eyes of
the world can count on this president's embrace.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (92%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (89%); TORTURE (89%); PRISONS (88%); EVIDENCE (88%); SCANDALS (88%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); JAIL
SENTENCING (74%); CORRECTIONS (74%); TERRORISM (73%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (73%);
WAR ON TERROR (71%); SEX OFFENSES (66%); RANKINGS (61%); POLICE FORCES (57%)
Prisoners of War; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Courts-Martial

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1061 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 1, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 498 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-22

Iran Makes Nuclear Threat
Iran threatened to move forward with its nuclear program, a move that comes
after a similar threat from North Korea and just 48 hours before representatives
of 189 countries will meet to review the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.   1

Vietnam Celebrates
At the 30th anniversary of Saigon's fall, signs of change were everywhere, from
parade floats carrying the logos of American credit card companies to the
Vietnamese government reaching out to former enemies for trade and friendship.
3

U.S. Ally Has Abuse Record
As evidence builds that the United States has sent terror suspects to Uzbekistan
for detention and interrogation, Uzbekistan's treatment of its own prisoners
continues to earn it admonishments from around the world.   1

Bombing Kills 15 in Iraq
Bombing attacks killed more than 15 Iraqis in the capital and in the northern
part of the country, and three civilians in Falluja were killed in rocket
attacks, officials said.   22

Man Dies in Cairo Bombing
A bomb killed an Egyptian man near a popular museum in the central area, and
later two women attacked tourists on a bus in the south of the city, security
officials said.   14

Nepal Lifts Emergency Rule
The King of Nepal announced the lifting of emergency rule in his Himalayan
kingdom but left a host of unanswered questions about whether basic rights would
be restored.   16

Support for Sinn Fein
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, is poised to pick up
seats in local and British parliamentary elections, a result that would seal its
political dominance among Catholic voters in Northern Ireland, political
analysts say.   24

NATIONAL   26-36

Defining Social Security
By gingerly suggesting for the first time how he would cut Social Security in
the future while protecting low-income workers, President Bush reopened a
historic battle over what the program is about.   1

New Guantanamo Abuses
A high-level military investigation into allegations of detainee abuse at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, has concluded that several prisoners were mistreated,
perhaps illegally, as a result of efforts to devise innovative methods to gain
information.   35

Crackdown on Molesters
With a bill on a broad new crackdown on sex offenders awaiting Gov. Jeb Bush's
signature, Florida will soon begin the nation's most aggressive monitoring of
child molesters.   26

OBITUARIES   36-37

Mel Gussow
A longtime cultural reporter and critic for The New York Times who championed
playwrights of the post World War II period, he was 71.   36

NEW YORK/REGION   39-44

Ground Zero Security Fears Security concerns outlined last month by the New York
Police Department have set off a serious reassessment of plans for the former
World Trade Center site. People involved in the rebuilding effort say that the
revisions that need to be made to the site's most prominent feature, the Freedom
Tower, could delay the start of construction from several months to a year.   1

Chess   44
Cong. Vote   43
Weather   45

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (87%); SOCIAL SECURITY (86%);
ELECTIONS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS
(77%); ANNIVERSARIES (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TERRORISM (75%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (75%); THEATER & DRAMA (73%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (73%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (72%); PARADES & MARCHES (72%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (71%); CHILD ABUSE (70%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (69%); WORLD WAR II
(69%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (67%); POLICE FORCES (67%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (65%);
VOTERS & VOTING (64%); WRITERS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (57%); PAYMENT CARDS
& SERVICES (56%); CREDIT CARDS (56%); CONSTRUCTION DELAYS & STOPPAGES (50%); LOW
INCOME PERSONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: SINN FEIN (82%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: HO CHI MINH CITY, VIETNAM (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); NEPAL (92%); IRAQ
(92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); VIETNAM (92%); UZBEKISTAN
(92%); VIET NAM (90%); CUBA (87%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Day 113 of the President's Silence

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 749 words


Finally, finally, finally, President Bush is showing a little muscle on the
issue of genocide in Darfur.

Is the muscle being used to stop the genocide of hundreds of thousands of
villagers? No, tragically, it's to stop Congress from taking action.

Incredibly, the Bush administration is fighting to kill the Darfur
Accountability Act, which would be the most forceful step the U.S. has taken so
far against the genocide. The bill, passed by the Senate, calls for such steps
as freezing assets of the genocide's leaders and imposing an internationally
backed no-fly zone to stop Sudan's Army from strafing villages.

The White House was roused from its stupor of indifference on Darfur to send a
letter, a copy of which I have in my hand, to Congressional leaders, instructing
them to delete provisions about Darfur from the legislation.

Mr. Bush might reflect on a saying of President Kennedy: ''The hottest places in
hell are reserved for those who in a period of moral crisis maintain their
neutrality.''

Aside from the effort to block Congressional action, there are other signs that
the administration is trying to backtrack on Darfur. The first sign came when
Condoleezza Rice gave an interview to The Washington Post in which she deflected
questions about Darfur and low-balled the number of African Union troops needed
there.

Then, in Sudan, Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick pointedly refused to
repeat the administration's past judgment that the killings amount to genocide.
Mr. Zoellick also cited an absurdly low estimate of Darfur's total death toll:
60,000 to 160,000. Every other serious estimate is many times as high. The
latest, from the Coalition for International Justice, is nearly 400,000, and
rising by 500 a day.

This is not a partisan issue, for Republicans and the Christian right led the
way in blowing the whistle on the slaughter in Darfur. As a result, long before
Democrats had staggered to their feet on the issue, Mr. Bush was telephoning
Sudan's leader and pressing for a cease-fire there.

Later, Mr. Bush forthrightly called the slaughter genocide, and he has continued
to back the crucial step of a larger African Union force to provide security.
Just the baby steps Mr. Bush has taken have probably saved hundreds of thousands
of lives.

So why is Mr. Bush so reluctant to do a bit more and save perhaps several
hundred thousand more lives? I sense that there are three reasons.

First, Mr. Bush doesn't see any neat solution, and he's mindful that his father
went into Somalia for humanitarian reasons and ended up with a mess.

Second, Mr. Bush is very proud -- justly -- that he helped secure peace in a
separate war between northern and southern Sudan. That peace is very fragile,
and he is concerned that pressuring Sudan on Darfur might disrupt that peace
while doing little more than emboldening the Darfur rebels (some of them
cutthroats who aren't negotiating seriously).

Third, Sudan's leaders have increased their cooperation with the C.I.A. As The
Los Angeles Times reported, the C.I.A. recently flew Sudan's intelligence chief
to Washington for consultations about the war on terror, and the White House
doesn't want to jeopardize that channel.

All three concerns are legitimate. But when historians look back on his
presidency, they are going to focus on Mr. Bush's fiddling as hundreds of
thousands of people were killed, raped or mutilated in Darfur -- and if the
situation worsens, the final toll could reach a million dead.

This Thursday marks Holocaust Remembrance Day. The best memorial would be for
more Americans to protest about this administration's showing the same lack of
interest in Darfur that F.D.R. showed toward the genocide of Jews. Ultimately,
public pressure may force Mr. Bush to respond to Darfur, but it looks as if he
will have to be dragged kicking and screaming by Republicans and Democrats
alike.

Granted, Darfur defies easy solutions. But Mr. Bush was outspoken and active
this spring in another complex case, that of Terry Schiavo. If only Mr. Bush
would exert himself as much to try to save the lives of the two million people
driven from their homes in Darfur.

So I'm going to start tracking Mr. Bush's lassitude. The last time Mr. Bush let
the word Darfur slip past his lips publicly (to offer a passing compliment to
U.S. aid workers, rather than to denounce the killings) was Jan. 10. So today
marks Day 113 of Mr. Bush's silence about the genocide unfolding on his watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); WAR
CRIMES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); ARMIES (76%); ARMED FORCES (70%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (60%) United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%); AFRICAN UNION (54%) Central
Intelligence Agency

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); JOHN F KENNEDY (79%); ROBERT ZOELLICK (58%);
CONDOLEEZZA RICE (57%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (88%); SOMALIA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1072 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 4, 2005 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Sentencing Hearing Starts for G.I. Featured in Abu Ghraib Pictures

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: KILLEEN, Tex., May 3


Seeking to paint a sympathetic portrait of Pfc. Lynndie R. England, the Army
reservist who faces sentencing for abusing naked Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib
prison, her school psychologist testified Tuesday that she suffered as a child
from a learning disability that left her too shy to speak.

''She was a student that teachers loved -- she did what she was told,'' the
psychologist, Thomas C. Denne, from Kaiser, W.Va., told the six military
officers picked to choose Private England's punishment.

As part of a plea deal Monday at her court-martial here at Fort Hood, Private
England, 22, would get no more than 30 months in prison, people close to the
prosecution have said, but the jury could recommend a lesser term.

When asked outside court if he found any conflict between the accounts of
Private England's shyness and the notorious images of her pointing at the
genitals of humiliated Iraqi prisoners, one of her lawyers, Rick Hernandez,
said: ''I don't. You have to take everything into consideration.''

He added, ''Just for posing in those photos, she never meant or did any abuse.''

Among the witnesses scheduled to testify on Private England's behalf on
Wednesday is Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr., the father of her 7-month-old
son, who is serving 10 years for mistreating detainees with her and other
American soldiers at Abu Ghraib in 2003.

Specialist Graner, 36, who was locked up off the courtroom on Tuesday while
waiting to testify, passed a statement to reporters saying, ''Knowing what
happened in Iraq, it was upsetting to see Lynn plead guilty to her charges.''
But he added hopes that the plea would result in a lesser sentence and said he
was sending her ''love and support'' from people ''all over.''

Prosecutors opened the sentencing hearing with a large-screen showing of the
prime evidence, the still pictures and a videotape of the abuse of the Iraqi
detainees.

Among them was one of Private England's posing with naked prisoners who had been
forced to simulate masturbation, the lead prosecutor, Capt. Chris Graveline,
said. Specialist Graner told her, Captain Graveline said, ''Here's your birthday
present, or words to that effect.''

Private England had her back to spectators in court so her expression was not
visible. But her lawyer, Mr. Hernandez, said, ''She maintained a stoic reaction,
at our request.''

In contrast, Dr. Denne, the psychologist and director of assessment of the
Mineral County schools in the poor West Virginia area where Private England grew
up, portrayed her as a troubled child, born a ''blue baby'' deprived of oxygen,
and suffering from a malformation of her tongue that required it to be clipped.
As a result, he said, she was ''electably mute -- we knew she could talk, she
just didn't.''

Private England was so shy in kindergarten, Dr. Denne said, that she spoke only
to a teacher's aide and would not answer his questions. Dr. Denne tested her
again in the second, fifth and eight grades and found her to suffer, he said,
from an inability to process information, an ailment affecting fewer than 2
children in 100.

But Dr. Denne said that by high school Private England had learned to manage her
disability so that she graduated with a 3.0 average and was not rejected by the
Army.

The judge, Col. James L. Pohl, interrupted Dr. Denne's testimony to ask, ''Are
you saying she had trouble telling right from wrong?''

Dr. Denne replied, ''I don't know that with great certainty, sir.''

Judge Pohl was not satisfied. ''The problem here,'' he told the defense, ''is
you're creating some inference she had trouble knowing right from wrong.''

The judge then instructed the jurors that in her guilty plea Private England
''admitted she knew it was wrong and chose to do it.''

The defense also presented several other military officers who testified about
the conditions at Abu Ghraib. Maj. David DiNenna, an operations officer for
Private England's unit, said the troops were housed in former prisoner quarters
with ''probably the foulest odor I ever experienced.''

But Major DiNenna also acknowledged under cross-examination that there was a
''zero tolerance policy'' for prisoner abuse. ''We were to treat them with
dignity and respect,'' he said. ''It was posted everywhere.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 7, 2005



CORRECTION: An article on Wednesday about a sentencing hearing for Pfc. Lynndie
R. England, who is accused of having abused Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib
prison, misspelled the name of the hometown of Thomas C. Denne, her high school
psychologist, who testified that she suffered from a learning disability as a
child. It is Keyser, W.Va., not Kaiser.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (91%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
TESTIMONY (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%);
INFANTS & TODDLERS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); LEARNING DISABILITIES
(72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); MASTURBATION (67%); DISABLED PERSONS (57%)
Torture  ; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Ralph Blumenthal; Lynndie R (Pfc) England

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1073 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 5, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bring Charles Taylor to Justice

BYLINE: By Ed Royce.

Ed Royce, Republican of California, is vice chairman of the House subcommittee
on Africa.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: Washington


NEARLY two years after Charles Taylor fled Monrovia under pressure from
advancing rebels and a force of Marines on ships off Liberia, he sits exiled in
Nigeria, plotting to undermine an international effort to rebuild the country he
did so much to destroy. Although Mr. Taylor has been indicted on charges of
fueling a brutal war in neighboring Sierra Leone, a deal brokered by Nigeria and
the United States has kept him beyond the reach of justice.

But when President Bush meets with President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria today,
he has the chance to press him to bring Mr. Taylor before the body that indicted
him, the Special Court for Sierra Leone. In so doing, Mr. Bush will not only
help safeguard West Africa's fragile stability but strengthen the rule of law
and the role of a court that the United States has done so much to create and
support.

After he terrorized his way to power in Liberia, Charles Taylor backed the
brutal Revolutionary United Front, a rebel group that murdered, raped and
mutilated tens of thousands in Sierra Leone in the 1990's. But in return for
agreeing to go into exile and to stay out of politics, Mr. Taylor was able to
escape a 17-count Special Court indictment for war crimes and crimes against
humanity handed down against him in 2003; instead, he landed softly in Nigeria.
The State Department said this was a temporary step intended to stop the killing
in Liberia. This deal, bad then, is worse today.

What's more, Mr. Taylor constantly violates the terms of the agreement. He is in
regular telephone contact with former aides and is working with parties set to
contest and, most likely, disrupt the Liberian elections scheduled for October.
Last month, Jacques Klein, the United Nations special representative in Liberia,
reported that Mr. Taylor was intruding in Liberian politics. When he left
Liberia, he told followers, ''God willing, I will be back.'' He reaffirmed his
intention on Nigerian television in spring of 2004.

Sierra Leone and Liberia, though stabilized, remain fragile. The United States
has spent nearly $750 million rebuilding Liberia since Mr. Taylor left. Leaving
him at large threatens to knock down what the United States has built up.
Moreover, the United States has spent $22 million to create the Special Court,
which will chip away at West Africa's culture of impunity, foster the regional
rule of law and, more broadly, provide a model for international justice besides
the International Criminal Court. While the court has tried some of those
responsible for Sierra Leone's mayhem, its legacy will be determined by whether
it tries Charles Taylor.

Given Nigeria's own unhappy recent past as a dictatorship and its current role
as a force for peace and stability in Africa, Mr. Obasanjo's harboring of Mr.
Taylor is perplexing. Many Nigerians understand this, including the Nigerian
Union of Journalists and the Nigerian Bar Association, which have criticized Mr.
Obasanjo's policy.

But so far the United States has yet to press President Obasanjo for rendition.
Why the United States continues to coddle Charles Taylor is something of a
mystery. On Wednesday the House of Representatives passed a resolution calling
on Nigeria to send Mr. Taylor to the Special Court. The European Parliament
passed a similar resolution in February. Last week, a bipartisan group of
senators asked Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to request that Nigeria
transfer Mr. Taylor to the Special Court. But according to one published report,
a senior administration official recently assured Mr. Obasanjo that Mr. Bush
would not raise the matter during his visit.

Sending Mr. Taylor to the Special Court is right and sensible. Mr. Bush, who has
spoken so purposefully on other occasions about the need for freedom, justice
and accountability, can make those same points about one of Africa's worst
warlords in his conversation with Mr. Obasanjo today.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); US PRESIDENTS
(76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); JOURNALISM (75%);
SEX OFFENSES (72%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE
(65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%); MURDER (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Elections; United States
International Relations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Ed (Rep) Royce; Charles Taylor; George W (Pres)
Bush; George W (Pres) Bush; Olusegun (Pres) Obasanjo

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (91%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (97%); LIBERIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); SIERRA LEONE (95%);
AFRICA (93%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria  ; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1077 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Vows to Help Bring Liberian to Justice

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


The administration took a cautious stance on Thursday on the deposed Liberian
leader Charles Taylor, pledging to help bring him to justice over war crimes but
refusing to say whether President Bush would push to have him expelled from
Nigeria, where he has been sheltered.

Mr. Bush met Thursday with Nigeria's president, Olusegun Obasanjo, and has been
under pressure from Republicans to prod him into sending Mr. Taylor to be tried
in war crimes in the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is supported by the
United Nations. That tribunal has indicted Mr. Taylor on 17 counts of crimes
against humanity, including murder and enslavement, in connection with his
support for rebels in Sierra Leone, Liberia's neighbor.

Mr. Bush's chief spokesman, Scott McClellan, declined to say before the meeting
whether Mr. Bush would raise the subject of Mr. Taylor with the Nigerian
president. And Mr. Obasanjo, addressing reporters at the White House afterward,
spoke generally of his hope that some accord could be reached on Mr. Taylor.

''Nobody should, of course, condone any crime that anybody has committed, no
matter how highly placed,'' Mr. Obasanjo said, indicating that he and Mr. Bush
had discussed the issue.

''The administration and Congress share a common goal,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''A
way needs to be found for Charles Taylor to be held to account for the crimes
that he has committed.''

Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also discussed Mr. Taylor in a meeting with
Mr. Obasanjo earlier on Thursday, the State Department spokesman, Richard A.
Boucher, said. Asked whether Ms. Rice had suggested that Mr. Taylor be sent to
the special Sierra Leone court, Mr. Boucher said only that the issue of how to
bring Mr. Taylor to justice was ''a matter of continuing discussion.''

On Wednesday, the House of Representatives passed a resolution calling on
Nigeria to send Mr. Taylor to Sierra Leone to stand trial.

In late 1989, Mr. Taylor organized a rebellion in Liberia that gained a
reputation for appalling violence. He became Liberia's president in 1997, though
the fighting continued. Exiled in 2003, he was given shelter in Nigeria, in a
deal involving Nigeria, the United States and African leaders.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria after a White House meeting with
President Bush yesterday. (Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (93%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (89%) David Stout; George W (Pres)
Bush; Charles Taylor; Olusegun (Pres) Obasanjo; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); NIGERIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1078 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abbas's Allies Win Palestinian Elections

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: GAZA, Friday, May 6


The Fatah movement of the Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas captured a clear
majority of the more than 80 towns and villages that staged local elections,
beating back a strong challenge by the Islamic movement Hamas, an election
official said Friday morning.

Thursday's voting in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip was seen as an important
test for Mr. Abbas, who himself was elected just four months ago.

Fatah won a majority in 50 of the municipalities, while Hamas captured 28, the
director general of the local election commission, Firas Iari, said in the West
Bank city of Ramallah, Agence France-Presse reported Friday. It was not
immediately clear which groups, if any, controlled six other municipalities that
voted on Thursday.

The balloting was the third of four rounds of municipal elections in the West
Bank and Gaza. In years past, municipal officials were appointed, with almost
all coming from Fatah's ranks. But Fatah's traditional dominance was facing its
first major threat from Hamas. A common refrain among voters has been that these
leaders have failed to deliver basic services and that corruption is widespread.

''We've been trying the same people for years, and they've done nothing for
us,'' Suleiman al-Arja, 53, said Thursday at a polling place in Rafah, at the
southern end of the Gaza Strip. ''We want new faces. We want change.''

The atmosphere was festive, and the city center was clogged with Hamas
supporters waving green banners and Fatah backers hoisting yellow flags.

''Hamas, Hamas, Islam is the solution,'' chanted a group of schoolboys wearing
green Hamas baseball caps.

Hamas, which had boycotted Palestinian elections until the municipal voting
began five months ago, has won the support of many Palestinians with its attacks
against Israel, including its suicide bombing campaign. But the group has
pledged to observe a temporary truce.

Hamas, which calls for Israel's destruction and seeks to establish an Islamic
state, also provides a broad array of charitable services to impoverished
Palestinians. It has a reputation for being well organized and has used its
influence at mosques to build electoral support.

Fatah, a secular, nationalist movement founded by Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian
leader who died last November, still has the strongest political network in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Opinion polls still show Fatah as the leading
political movement, though it has steadily lost ground to Hamas in recent years.

''All my family supports Fatah, and we think Abu Mazen is trying to do the right
thing,'' said Ghaliah al-Sharif, 68, using Mr. Abbas's nickname. She described
herself as religious and criticized Hamas as portraying Fatah backers as
atheists.

The voting took place without any reports of serious problems. But, while the
ballots were being counted, gunmen stormed into two polling places in the West
Bank village of Attarah and destroyed three ballot boxes, Reuters reported.

In Rafah, the seats were hotly contested. Fatah and Hamas supporters
occasionally traded gunfire in the campaign, said Hassan Abu Amra, an election
monitor with the Palestinian Center for Human Rights.

Fatima Essa, 65, said she feared the Fatah-Hamas rivalry would turn violent
after the election, and was splitting her vote in the hopes that both groups
would have roughly equal numbers on the 15-seat municipal council in Rafah.
Voters in Rafah were allowed to vote for 15 of the 70 candidates on the ballot.
''I don't want to see more problems,'' she said. ''I want them to work together.
We are all brothers and sisters. There is no need to fight.''

Palestinians are planning parliamentary elections in July. Fatah controls
three-fourths of the legislature, but Hamas is considered likely to gain a
sizable number of seats.

In another development, an unidentified Israeli Army officer was suspended
Thursday, a day after his troops fatally shot two Palestinian teenagers in a
stone-throwing clash near Ramallah in the West Bank.

''The company commander was suspended in light of errors both in the way he
conducted himself and in the way in which he commanded his force,'' the military
said.

The youths were among about 300 Palestinians who threw stones on Wednesday night
at six Israeli soldiers guarding a site where Israel is building its West Bank
separation barrier, the Israeli military said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Palestinians had their names checked by workers at a polling
station in Rafah yesterday. The voting, in more than 80 towns, was the third of
four rounds of municipal elections in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
 Backers of the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, and his Fatah faction
celebrated in Rafah yesterday as their candidates pulled ahead. (Photographs by
Emilio Morenatti/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL FATAH (92%); HAMAS
(92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (89%); VOTERS & VOTING
(89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (85%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CITIES
(78%); BALLOTS (78%); BOMBINGS (77%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (72%); APPOINTMENTS (71%); BOYCOTTS (66%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (62%);
POLLS & SURVEYS (53%) Elections; Palestinians; Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); ABU NIDAL ORGANIZATION (59%) Fatah Revolutionary
Council; Hamas (Islamic Fundamentalist Movement)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (93%) Greg Myre; Mahmoud (Pres) Abbas

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (95%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank; Israel

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1086 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pictures From Iraq Send a Message

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 34 words



To the Editor:

Bob Herbert's column should be a reminder that it is an atrocity to send young
men into another country under orders to kill other young men.

Gerald M. Sutliff
Castro Valley, Calif., May 5, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

PERSON: Gerald M Sutliff; Bob Herbert

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (90%); UNITED STATES (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1087 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pictures From Iraq Send a Message

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 47 words



To the Editor:

What kind of children are we raising who would do such things? What kind of Army
do we have that would permit such things?

What kind of leaders do we have who would send our children away into such
dehumanization unnecessarily?

Toni Mendell
Laguna Woods, Calif., May 5, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%)
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Toni Mendell; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1089 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 56 words


An article on Wednesday about a sentencing hearing for Pfc. Lynndie R. England,
who is accused of having abused Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison, misspelled
the name of the hometown of Thomas C. Denne, her high school psychologist, who
testified that she suffered from a learning disability as a child. It is Keyser,
W.Va., not Kaiser.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); TESTIMONY (88%); WAR
CRIMES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); LEARNING DISABILITIES (83%); DISABLED
PERSONS (80%) Correction Stories; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Courts-Martial; Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Lynndie R (Pfc) England; Thomas C Denne

COUNTRY: IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Keyser (W Va); Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1090 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Police Watch House of Bosnia War Figure

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 253 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, May 6


Police officers and spies have practically taken over the house of Bosnia's most
wanted war crimes fugitive, Radovan Karadzic, eager to see if he will return
home for the funeral of his mother, a Sarajevo daily newspaper reported Friday.

Dr.

Karadzic's mother, Jovanka Karadzic, 83, died Thursday after a short illness in
a hospital in the northwestern town of Niksic in neighboring Serbia and
Montenegro, and the paper said her funeral could be an opportunity to arrest her
son, the Bosnian Serb wartime leader.

The daily, Dnevni Avaz, reported that scores of local police and intelligence
officers as well as dozens of international intelligence agency officials had
moved in on Dr. Karadzic's house in his wartime headquarters in Pale, a village
east of Sarajevo where his wife still lives. The house of his daughter Sonja was
also under surveillance.

''Photos are being taken of everybody who even passes by these two houses,''
Dnevni Avaz reported.

''It is very likely that Radovan Karadzic might give in to emotion and come to
the funeral tomorrow despite the risk of being arrested,'' the newspaper
reported, adding that border police officers had stepped up control on the
border with Serbia and Montenegro.

Dr. Karadzic led Serbs in the Bosnian war and was indicted in 1995 by the
international war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in connection with
atrocities, including genocide, during the armed conflict with Bosnia's Muslims
and Croats from 1992 to 1995.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARRESTS (79%); POLICE FORCES (79%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
BORDER CONTROL (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (75%); RELIGION (50%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (54%)

PERSON: Radovan Karadzic; Jovanka Karadzic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA (94%); MONTENEGRO (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1096 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbian Nationalists Turn a Funeral Into a Tribute to a Fugitive

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: NIKSIC, Serbia and Montenegro, May 8


Jovanka Karadzic, an 83-year-old widow, was laid to rest in this Montenegrin
town this weekend with honors befitting a national heroine.

Her great achievement, most here said, was her son, Radovan, a psychiatrist and
poet, but better known to the outside world as the leader of the Bosnian Serbs
during Bosnia's civil war, from 1992 to 1995. He is one of the most wanted war
crimes suspects sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, in The Hague.

Almost 10 years have passed since the tribunal indicted him as the main advocate
of killing or forcing out Bosnia's Muslims and Croats during the war, in which
an estimated 150,000 people were killed. But in spite of repeated efforts to
seize him, mainly by NATO-led troops in Bosnia, he has avoided capture.

Officials at the war crimes tribunal say a well-financed support network that
includes police officers and members of the intelligence services in Bosnia,
Serbia and Montenegro, as well as members of the Serbian Orthodox Church, has
enabled Dr. Karadzic to remain on the run.

The funeral of Ms. Karadzic provided her son's admirers -- for whom Dr. Karadzic
still holds near mythical status -- an opportunity to show their support for
him. It was also a reminder of his elusiveness.

Former soldiers, a few wearing T-shirts bearing Dr. Karadzic's picture and the
slogan ''Serbian Hero,'' attended a packed service at the main public cemetery
here. The two most senior members of Montenegro's Serbian Orthodox Church led
the funeral, which was attended by people who had traveled from Bosnia and
Serbia for the occasion.

Amfilohije Radovic, the metropolitan of Montenegro, described Ms. Karadzic as
''the mother of an immortal.'' He described a conversation he said he once had
with her. ''She once said: 'I would be a happy mother if they brought my son's
dead body for me to kiss if I know he had died devoted to truth and his people.
I would be an unhappy mother if they brought him to me alive and he had betrayed
his people and his fate.'''

For Serbian nationalists, who make up the largest block of voters in both Serbia
and Bosnia's Serbian republic, Dr. Karadzic remains a symbol of defiance against
the rest of the world, all the more important perhaps since their governments
have begun to cooperate with the tribunal.

Substantial evidence of Dr. Karadzic's whereabouts has been scarce. The
tribunal's chief prosecutor said at one stage Dr. Karadzic had been given refuge
at a Serbian Orthodox monastery near Niksic, a claim the church denied. A
Bosnian newspaper also published claims that he had cut off his thick gray
locks, and adopted a monk's habit.

Although Serbian and Bosnian Serb authorities long stonewalled on arresting
suspects because of popular opposition to handing them over, international
pressure has borne fruit, diplomats in the region maintain, with the transfer of
12 Serbian war crimes suspects this year.

As the 10th anniversary of the end of the war approaches late this year,
expectations have increased that officials will arrest Dr. Karadzic and the
other most wanted suspect, Ratko Mladic, the leader of the Bosnian Serb Army
during the war.

Serbia's deputy prime minister, Miroljub Labus, said his government hoped that
both would be arrested before the anniversary in July of the Srebrenica
massacre, the worst atrocity of the war, when at least 7,000 Muslim men and boys
were killed by Serbian forces.

''It is particularly scandalous that Karadzic and Mladic are at large now that
we approach the Srebrenica commemoration,'' said Carla Del Ponte, the tribunal's
chief prosecutor, in an interview on BBC radio in April.

The police appeared to have ruled out the possibility that Dr. Karadzic would
show up here, and they had no visible presence.

''He is here,'' said Zoran Stesevic, a former Bosnian Serb soldier attending the
funeral.

''In our hearts and minds,'' a friend, Jeca Vojvodic, quickly added, and then
smiled.

As the funeral broke up, a lone voice wailed across the graveyard, ''Long live
Rada!''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); RELIGION (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); WRITERS (77%); INDICTMENTS
(76%); EVIDENCE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); PHYSICIANS
& SURGEONS (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (53%); CEMETERIES
(50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%) International
Criminal Tribunal

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Jovanka Karadzic; Radovan Karadzic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%);
MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1101 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Behind Failed Abu Ghraib Plea, A Tangle of Bonds and Betrayals

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1631 words


In a military courtroom in Texas last week was a spectacle worthy of ''As the
World Turns'': Pfc. Lynndie R. England, the defendant, holding her 7-month-old
baby; the imprisoned father, Pvt. Charles A. Graner Jr., giving testimony that
ruined what lawyers said was her best shot at leniency; and waiting outside,
another defendant from the notorious abuses at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, Megan
M. Ambuhl, who had recently wed Private Graner -- a marriage Private England
learned about only days before.

To some, the grave misdeeds at Abu Ghraib, where the three soldiers worked for
six months in 2003, have become a twisted symbol of the American military
occupation of Iraq. But the scandal is also one rooted in the behavior of
military reservists working at the prison, an environment that testimony has
portrayed as more frat house than military prison, a place where inmates were
routinely left naked and soldiers took pictures of one another simulating sex
with fruit.

The reservists' treatment of Iraqi prisoners and their entanglements with one
another -- pieced together from documents, court testimony, e-mail and
interviews -- have produced a dark soap opera, one whose episodes have continued
to play out in the months since the scandal erupted, and culminated in the Texas
courtroom last week.

As with any soap opera, past episodes help explain the most recent.

Private England, who is now waiting for charges to be filed against her again,
and Private Graner began dating while they were training with their Army Reserve
unit, the 372nd Military Police Company, based in Cresaptown, Md.

A hell-raising young woman from West Virginia, Private England, now 22, was
married at 19, on a whim, she told friends, and violated her parents' wishes
when she joined the Reserve in high school to make money for college.

Private Graner, 36, a Pennsylvania prison guard and a former marine, had
rejoined the military in a burst of patriotism after the terrorist attacks of
Sept. 11, 2001.

He was fresh from an ugly divorce in 2000. His ex-wife, Staci Morris, had taken
out three protective orders against him, and after he was arrested for harassing
her in 2001, Private Graner admitted that he had dragged her around by her hair.

He introduced the two women, and Ms. Morris said she felt ''selfish relief''
that with someone new, her ex-husband would stop being obsessed with her. And
she liked Private England, finding her quiet and adoring.

''If he was as charming with her as he is with most women at the beginning, I
can understand it,'' Ms. Morris said. ''Charming, compliments, you name it. The
things you would love to hear as a young woman.''

Just after the 372nd received orders to go to Iraq in February 2003, Private
Graner, Private England and another soldier had a last party weekend in Virginia
Beach. They drank heavily, and when their friend passed out, Private Graner and
Private England took turns taking photographs of each other exposing themselves
over his head.

In Iraq, Private England was disciplined several times for sleeping with Private
Graner, against military rules. She flouted warnings to stay on the wing where
she worked as a clerk, and spent most of her nights in the cellblock where he
worked the night shift.

One night in October, he told her to pose for photographs holding a leash tied
around the neck of a naked and crawling detainee. He e-mailed one home: ''Look
what I made Lynndie do.'' The now infamous pictures of detainees masturbating,
he said, were a birthday gift for her.

Specialist Ambuhl, who has been discharged from the Army, was Private Graner's
partner on the nightshift. If he and Private England were loud and bawdy -- they
made a video of themselves having sex -- Ms. Ambuhl was soft-spoken and serious.
Private England had joined the army to see the world; Ms. Ambuhl had already
been on college study trips to Kenya and the Galapagos Islands. She had worked
as a technician in a medical laboratory in Virginia, where she grew up, and like
Private Graner, signed up to defend the nation after Sept. 11.

She had been involved with another soldier in the unit. But by late December,
she had ended that relationship and started one with Private Graner. In e-mail
messages, the two dreamily recalled their nights stolen away in the crowded
prison cells where the military police lived.

''I was missing u too,'' she wrote just after Christmas 2003. ''When I heard
your voice coming up the stairs, it made me happy and kinda nervous too (good
nervous).'' She reassured him that she would not get back together with her
ex-boyfriend.

But Private Graner had not completely cut off relations with Private England. On
Jan. 2, 2004, he was caught sleeping in Private England's quarters and demoted.

A few days later, Ms. Ambuhl e-mailed him again. ''I really do care about you,''
she wrote. ''It's just that part of me says I just got hurt from a relationship
so don't put myself in the position to get hurt again.''

She fantasized about when they might be truly alone. ''Is it going to feel
strange for just the two of us to be in a room together, with no chance of
anyone walking in??'' she wrote a few days later. ''Just kidding, I can't
wait.'' They talked about taking a leave together in February.

But on Jan. 13, a soldier slipped investigators a disk with the graphic
photographs of detainees. The investigation began the next day.

Private Graner, quickly identified as the ringleader in the abuse, e-mailed his
father in early March to discuss the accusations against him, then popped ''more
good news:'' Private England was two months pregnant -- he spelled her name
Lynndee -- and the pregnancy would most likely get them sent home from Iraq.

They found out she was pregnant two days after breaking up.

''I stopped seeing her back in january but when all this garbage came out i
started seeing her again,'' he wrote. ''chances are very good that it is my
child....o well....daddy what did you bring home from the war????''

Ms. Ambuhl sent Private Graner e-mail in mid-March, after stumbling over old
photos of them. ''it seems like a dream that we were ever together, if you could
call it that.''

''doin ok lately?'' she asked. ''U seem kinda distant.'' She let off a flash of
exasperation with Private England. ''We never tried to exclude u and England,''
she wrote. ''You never wanted to go to chow or anything with us. And she does
exactly what you do so you can't help that.''

Private England -- but not Private Graner -- was sent back to the United States
because of the pregnancy. The Army moved Private Graner and Ms. Ambuhl, along
with four other soldiers under investigation, to a tent apart from the rest of
their unit. And they resumed their relationship.

In April, Ms. Ambuhl e-mailed Private Graner an article headlined, ''Study Finds
Frequent Sex Raises Cancer Risk.'' She added, ''We could have died last night.''

Privates England and Graner were no longer speaking when their son was born in
October. She named him Carter Allan England.

Ms. Ambuhl, who had by then pleaded guilty and been discharged, was subpoenaed
to testify at Private Graner's trial at Fort Hood, Tex., in January.

On the stand, prosecutors forced her to acknowledge the relationship, and
accused her of lying to protect Private Graner.

''You don't want your friend to go to jail, do you?'' the lead prosecutor, Maj.
Michael Holley, asked.

''No, sir,'' she said quietly.

The two spent evenings together during the trial, and it was there that Private
Graner proposed. He was convicted, sentenced to 10 years in a military prison
and demoted from specialist to private. He had earlier been demoted from
corporal.

Ms. Ambuhl had gone back to work at the laboratory and was living with her
parents. They accompanied her to Fort Hood for the wedding in April. Another man
stood in for Private Graner, because he had begun serving his sentence and Ms.
Ambuhl, as an admitted co-conspirator, is not allowed to see him.

Private England heard about the wedding from her lawyers, who heard about it
from a reporter the Friday before her trial was to begin. She had worked out a
plea agreement that limited her time in prison to 30 months, and the jury could
have given her less time. She planned to have her son live with her mother while
she was in prison.

Ms. Morris, Private Graner's ex-wife, had been subpoenaed to tell the jury that
Private Graner was a bad influence, and over pizza in a hotel room, she
befriended Private England. She told Private England that she regretted not
warning her away from him at the beginning.

''She said, 'I guess I should be grateful for Megan?''' Ms. Morris recalled,
''And I said, 'Yeah, honey, you should be.'''

The day before his testimony, Private Graner sent a note to reporters saying he
regretted that ''Lynn'' had pleaded guilty and hoped her plea would get her a
light sentence. Private England did not return any such affection. She leaned
down to a courtroom artist sketching Mr. Graner: ''Don't forget the horns and
goatee.''

Prosecutors advised defense lawyers against putting Private Graner on the stand,
but they did it anyway. He testified that he had ordered Private England to
remove a prisoner from a cell by a leash and that it had been a legitimate
military exercise. This presented what seemed to be a contradiction -- a
defendant pleading guilty but presenting a witness who testified that she was
innocent. The military judge threw out her plea agreement and ordered that the
court-martial process start over.

''It's nothing you did,'' the judge, Col. James L. Pohl, told her, ''It's what
he did.''

Private England turned to Ms. Morris. ''Well, he screws everything up, doesn't
he?'' Ms. Morris recalled Private England saying.

''I have to agree with you,'' Ms. Morris replied.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Megan M. Ambuhl, Pvt. Charles A. Graner Jr.'s wife. (Photo by
L.M. Otero/Associated Press)(pg. A13)
 Charles A. Graner Jr. and Lynndie R. England on a 2003 holiday. (Photo by
England family, via Associated Press)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); PRISONS (90%); SCANDALS (90%); MILITARY COURTS
(90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WOMEN (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMIES
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); MARRIAGE (76%); CRIMINAL
HARASSMENT (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (71%);
RESTRAINING ORDERS (71%); ARRESTS (64%); TERRORISM (61%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Charles A Jr (Pvt) Graner; Lynndie R (Pfc) England; Megan
M (Pfc) Ambuhl

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1104 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court-Martial Opens in an Iraqi Abuse Case

BYLINE: By VIKAS BAJAJ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex., May 12


Military prosecutors in the trial of a former Abu Ghraib prison guard said
Thursday that photographs, including one of a hooded detainee standing on a box
with wires in his hand, were irrefutable evidence of the guard's guilt.

The case against the guard, Specialist Sabrina Harman, one of seven soldiers
accused of abuses at the Baghdad prison in fall 2003, is largely based on photos
she took or posed in. Prosecutors also told a military panel serving as
Specialist Harman's jury that she had told investigators that the wires were her
idea.

''None of these actions fall into a gray area,'' Capt. Chuck Neill, one of two
prosecutors, said during opening statements.

Specialist Harman's defense team, led by Frank Spinner, a civilian lawyer from
Colorado Springs, asked the panel to consider ''the context in which these
events occurred.''

Specialist Harman, 27, is charged with conspiracy, dereliction of duty and
maltreatment of subordinates, and faces up to six and a half years in prison if
convicted.

Among the four instances of abuse she is accused of, the most well known
involves a hooded Iraqi prisoner who was photographed standing on a box with
wires in his hand. Specialist Harman is accused of telling the man that he would
be electrocuted if he fell off. She is also pictured writing ''rapeist'' on the
thigh of a detainee who the defense claims had been accused of raping a fellow
prisoner.

Mr. Spinner argued that the reserve unit assigned to the prison was ill trained
to handle a large number of raucous prisoners. Specialist Harman was the
lowest-ranking soldier among those prosecuted in the scandal, he said, and was
repulsed by the abuses, which she reported to superiors, to no avail.

He also said that the incident was a joke and that the inmate in the photograph
had had a friendly relationship with Specialist Harman.

Mr. Spinner also argued that prisoners who did not know they were being
photographed or could not read the English written on them had not been abused
because they were not aware of what was happening to them. The judge, Col. James
L. Pohl, rejected the argument. ''That's not the law,'' Colonel Pohl said.

Most of the day was taken up by selecting members of the panel. Seven potential
members were dismissed for reasons including being too closely associated with
Abu Ghraib operations and reading news coverage about past trials in recent
days.

Specialist Harman, dressed in her uniform, intently watched the panel selection
process. During breaks she smiled and laughed occasionally in conversations with
the courtroom sketch artist, her defense team and a family friend.

Last week, another former guard, Pfc. Lynndie R. England, pleaded guilty to
abusing detainees. During the sentencing phase her lawyers called her former
lover, Pvt. Charles A. Graner Jr., to the stand. Private Graner, who was demoted
from specialist, testified that he had ordered Private England to remove a
prisoner from a cell by a leash and that it had been a legitimate military
exercise. The judge considered the testimony a contradiction of Private
England's admission of guilt and threw out her plea. She is waiting for charges
to be refiled.

Four other reservists have pleaded guilty and received sentences ranging from
discharge to eight and a half years in prison. Private Graner was convicted at
trial and sentenced to 10 years in a military prison.

                             --------------------


Balking Sailor Is Sentenced

 SAN DIEGO, May 12 (AP) -- A sailor was sentenced Thursday to three months of
hard labor for refusing to ship out for the Persian Gulf in protest against the
war in Iraq.

The sailor, Pablo Paredes, a 23-year-old New Yorker, was also demoted from petty
officer third class to seaman recruit, the lowest rank in the Navy.

A military judge, Lt. Cmdr. Bob Klant, imposed the sentence a day after finding
Seaman Paredes guilty of refusing to board the amphibious assault ship Bonhomme
Richard, which received orders for the Persian Gulf in December.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialist Sabrina Harman, left, at Fort Hood yesterday with a
member of her defense team. She is charged with mistreating Iraqi prisoners.
(Photo by Paul Buck/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY COURTS (91%); CORRECTIONS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS
(78%); SENTENCING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%);
GUILTY PLEAS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); CONSPIRACY (73%); SEX OFFENSES (72%)
Courts-Martial; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

PERSON: vikas bajaj; Sabrina (Specialist) Harman

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); ENGLAND (52%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1107 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Witness Clears Abu Ghraib Guard of Some Abuse

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 322 words

DATELINE: FORT HOOD, Tex., May 13


A prosecution witness called in the court-martial of an Army reservist who is
charged in the Abu Ghraib scandal said Friday that it was he, not the defendant,
who had handed electrical wires to a hooded Iraqi forced to stand on a box for
an hour.

The witness, testifying under cross-examination, also said he had never seen the
defendant, Specialist Sabrina Harman, participate in that episode, in which the
prisoner was told he would be electrocuted if he fell off the box, or several
other instances of mistreatment attributed to her by prosecutors.

Specialist Harman, 27, of Lorton, Va., appeared in several of the most notorious
photographs showing prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib. The witness, Pvt. Ivan L.
Frederick II, who is serving an eight-year prison sentence as part of a plea
bargain, said he was the person who took a widely seen photo of her and
Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr. with a pyramid of naked prisoners.

But, Private Frederick said, he did not see Specialist Harman around when guards
forced a group of prisoners to masturbate and simulate other sexual acts, a
scene she is accused of photographing.

The witness said the prisoner forced to stand on the box, whom the guards called
Gilligan, had been subjected to that treatment because a criminal investigator
wanted him deprived of sleep before questioning. The investigator said Gilligan
might have information about the location of four missing American soldiers, the
witness said.

The prosecution, which called 10 witnesses, rested Friday after testimony from
another figure in the Abu Ghraib abuse. That witness, Armin Cruz, who has
finished serving his sentence and is now out of the Army, said that three
prisoners suspected of raping a fourth, a teenage boy, had been stripped and
forced to roll around on a cold floor. He said he had seen Specialist Harman
help handcuff them together in an embrace to humiliate them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (92%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%); ARMIES (90%); SCANDALS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%);
TESTIMONY (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%);
MASTURBATION (67%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Courts-Martial; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Ivan L II (Pvt) Frederick; Sabrina (Army Specialist) Harman

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1110 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesians to Avoid Trials for Crimes in East Timor

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: DILI, East Timor


After ducking and dodging for more than five years, it appears that the
Indonesian officers responsible for the devastation of East Timor in 1999 have
reached safe ground and will avoid prosecution under a new agreement signed by
the leaders of both countries.

The agreement, signed in March, creates a Commission of Truth and Friendship
that would, in the words of East Timor's foreign minister, Jose Ramos-Horta,
''resolve once and for all the events of 1999'' and ''finally close this
chapter.''

But because of the immunity it provides from prosecution, the agreement has
become the source of new controversy. In parallel, the United Nations has formed
a Commission of Experts that will carry out a review of the judicial processes
in Indonesia and East Timor.

After 24 years of occupation in this former Portuguese colony, Indonesia was
forced to pull out its troops by a binding United Nations-sponsored referendum
in September 1999. As they retreated, they orchestrated a campaign of
destruction in which much of East Timor was razed. An estimated 1,400 people
were killed in 1999 and another 250,000 were forced into exile after the vote.

The Truth and Friendship commission, made up of five members from each nation,
is weaker than attempts around the world in recent years to find ways to call to
account the perpetrators of mass atrocities.

The commission will have the power to recommend amnesty for those involved, but,
as it states explicitly ''will not lead to prosecution.''

It will ''emphasize institutional responsibilities'' instead of identifying and
blaming individual perpetrators. It will have the power to recommend
rehabilitation for those ''wrongly accused,'' but not to propose rehabilitation
or reparations for victims.

Mr. Horta said recently that East Timor was bending over backward to accommodate
Indonesia because of the futility of pursuing culprits who are outside its
jurisdiction and because of the priority this tiny nation or 900,000 people
placed on good relations with its powerful neighbor.

Critics say the two nations are putting their national interests ahead of
universal principles of justice.

''Crimes committed against humanity are a matter of concern for the entire
international community,'' the Judicial System Monitoring Program, an
independent East Timorese legal organization, said in a statement. ''They cannot
be ignored or disposed of as a matter of bilateral political concern.''

Prosecutions in crimes against humanity have spread since the early 1990's when
international criminal tribunals were set up for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. An International Criminal Court opened in 2002 as a permanent and
independent court for judging war crimes.

A different model of mixed international tribunals, with national and foreign
judges, is being pursued in Sierra Leone, Cambodia, Kosovo and in East Timor
itself. Each of these, like the new Truth and Friendship commission, sets a
precedent and sends a signal to both perpetrators and victims in the future.

The creation of the commission does not rule out the possibility of an
international tribunal, but analysts say that is extremely unlikely soon.

The United Nations has an unusual stake in the case of East Timor, where it was
a victim of the violence surrounding the referendum. Thirteen United Nations
workers were killed, its property was vandalized and its staff members were
surrounded and threatened. The United Nations Commission of Experts, formed in
February, will review the failure in both countries to fulfill a United Nations
resolution demanding that ''all those responsible for such violence be brought
to justice.'' More than five years later, no Indonesian has been punished.

The Truth and Friendship agreement is seen by many analysts as an attempt by
both countries to preempt the work of the United Nations commission. Indonesia
has shown reluctance to cooperate with it.

In Indonesia, an ad hoc tribunal was created in 2000 in a deal to avoid
international prosecutions by the United Nations. Doubts about the government's
good faith appeared to be confirmed when all 16 Indonesian defendants went free
in politicized trials.

In East Timor, a court set up with United Nations help has indicted nearly 400
people, of whom more than 300 are in Indonesia. The authorities there have
refused to extradite them for trial in East Timor.

The result is that the only people who have been imprisoned for the violence are
low level members of East Timorese militias that an independent Indonesian
inquiry found had been directed by Indonesia.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Last week, students in Dili, East Timor, passed the shell of a
market destroyed in riots in 2002. Indonesian forces devastated the nation.
(Photo by Maxine Hicks for The International Herald Tribune)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); AMNESTY
(77%); JURISDICTION (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); REFERENDUMS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%)
Reparations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Seth Mydans

CITY: DILI, TIMOR-LESTE (92%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); RWANDA (79%);
KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: East Timor; Indonesia; East Timor

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1111 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bodies Are Exhumed From Kosovo Grave

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: MALISEVO, Serbia and Montenegro, May 14


United Nations forensics experts are exhuming bodies presumed to be Serbs from a
mass grave in the Kosovo town of Malisevo, the second such find in a month,
officials said Saturday.

''There are multiple remains of bodies and at least two complete bodies,'' said
Marcia Poole, spokeswoman for the United Nations mission, which has run the
province since the 1998-99 war. ''They are presumed to be Serbs missing since
1998.''

Some 3,000 people, including about 500 Serbs, are still missing from the
conflict between Serbian security forces and ethnic Albanian separatist
guerrillas.

Malisevo was a rebel stronghold.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); FORENSICS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); WAR &
CONFLICT (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (85%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Forensic Medicine

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); KOSOVO (94%); MONTENEGRO
(90%); ALBANIA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Malisevo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1112 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Newsweek Apologizes for Report of Koran Insult

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from
Washington for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1446 words


Newsweek apologized yesterday for printing a small item on May 9 about reported
desecration of the Koran by American guards at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, an item
linked to riots in Pakistan and Afghanistan that led to the deaths of at least
17 people. But the magazine, while acknowledging possible errors in the article,
stopped short of retracting it.

The report that a Koran had been flushed down a toilet set off the most
virulent, widespread anti-American protests in Afghanistan since the fall of the
Taliban government more than three years ago.

''We regret that we got any part of our story wrong, and extend our sympathies
to victims of the violence and to the U.S. soldiers caught in its midst,'' Mark
Whitaker, Newsweek's editor, wrote in the issue of the magazine that goes on
sale at newsstands today. In an accompanying article, the magazine wrote that
its reporters had relied on an American government official, whom it has not
identified, who had incomplete knowledge of the situation.

But Mr. Whitaker said in an interview later: ''We're not retracting anything. We
don't know what the ultimate facts are.''

The information at issue is a sentence in a short ''Periscope'' item on May 9
about a planned United States Southern Command investigation into the abuse of
prisoners at the detention facility in Guantanamo. It said that American
military investigators had found evidence in an internal report that during the
interrogation of detainees, American guards had flushed a Koran down a toilet as
a way of trying to provoke the detainees into talking.

Pentagon officials said that no such information was included in the internal
report and responded to Newsweek's apology with unusual anger.

In a statement, Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman, said: ''Newsweek hid behind
anonymous sources, which by their own admission do not withstand scrutiny.
Unfortunately, they cannot retract the damage they have done to this nation or
those that were viciously attacked by those false allegations.''

The original account, he said, was ''demonstrably false'' and ''was
irresponsible and had significant consequences that reverberated throughout
Muslim communities around the world.''

Lawrence Di Rita, the top spokesman for the Pentagon, called the editor's note
''very tepid and qualified.'' He added later, ''They owe us all a lot more
accountability than they took.''

Newsweek's apology comes as the use of anonymous sources by news organizations
around the country is under heightened scrutiny. Reader surveys have said that
the use of unnamed officials is one of the biggest reasons their trust in the
news media has eroded, and several news organizations, including The New York
Times, have been tightening the rules on the use of unnamed officials.

Mr. Whitaker said yesterday that the magazine adhered as often as possible to a
policy of identifying its sources of information. But, he said, ''there are
certain sources who will only talk to us on a not-for-attribution basis,
particularly when it involves sensitive information, and who would be worried
about retribution or other consequences if their identities were known.''

He said that in this case, the magazine had followed careful and proper
reporting techniques. The source had been reliable in the past, he said, and was
in a position to know about the report he was describing.

In addition, the reporters, Michael Isikoff, a veteran investigative reporter,
and John Barry, a national security correspondent, showed a draft of the article
to the source and to a senior Pentagon official asking if it was correct. The
source corrected one aspect of the article, which focused on the Southern
Command's internal report on prisoner abuse.

''But he was silent about the rest of the item,'' Newsweek reported. ''The
official had not meant to mislead, but lacked detailed knowledge of the SouthCom
report.''

In its article published today, the magazine said that although the reference to
the Koran was a side element in an article, it was worth printing because it had
come from an American government official. Other news organizations had written
that American guards had desecrated the Koran, Newsweek said, but those reports
were based on testimony from former detainees who had been released from
Guantanamo.

The magazine said that because of reports of other abuses of prisoners by guards
at Guantanamo, the possibility that a Koran was flushed down the toilet did not
seem that far-fetched. But it said that to Muslims, such an act was especially
inflammatory.

In its reconstruction of what happened, Newsweek reported that a copy of the
original news item was apparently waved at a news conference on May 6 in
Pakistan (the articles are dated several days after their actual publication).

By Tuesday, students in the eastern city of Jalalabad in Afghanistan had started
anti-American demonstrations, citing the Newsweek article. It is unclear exactly
how the students and other protesters learned of the article, though many
Afghans get information from radio programs broadcast in local languages by the
Voice of America, BBC and Radio Liberty, which often broadcast foreign news
reports.

Mr. Di Rita, the Pentagon spokesman, said that the Pentagon began to dig into
the allegations in the Newsweek article last Tuesday, when the violence started
in Afghanistan. The next day, the military's Southern Command said in a
statement that the four-star commander, Gen. Bantz J. Craddock, had ordered an
investigation into the report.

At a Pentagon news conference last Thursday, reporters asked Gen. Richard B.
Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, about the incident. He played
down the Newsweek connection to the violence, citing an assessment from the
senior commander in Afghanistan, Lt. Gen. Karl Eikenberry of the Army.

General Myers said it was General Eikenberry's view that ''the violence that we
saw in Jalalabad was not necessarily the result of the allegations about
disrespect for the Koran.'' He said General Eikenberry believed the violence
stemmed from the country's reconciliation process.

''He thought it was not at all tied to the article in the magazine,'' General
Myers added.

But some senior Pentagon civilians and military officers in Washington
challenged General Eikenberry's assessment and said they saw a direct link
between the violence and the Newsweek article.

President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, commenting on the reported desecration
after returning home on Saturday from a trip to Europe, said he blamed ''enemies
of stability'' for exploiting student anger about it to foment violence. Afghans
in Ghazni, a city south of Kabul that suffered some of the worst violence, have
also said that local ''troublemakers'' may have taken advantage of the anger to
shoot at police.

At his news conference, General Myers said that military investigators at
Guantanamo were searching their interrogation logs to find the case cited in the
Newsweek article.

''They have looked through the logs, the interrogation logs, and they cannot
confirm yet that there were ever the case of the toilet incident, except for one
case, a log entry, which they still have to confirm, where a detainee was
reported by a guard to be ripping pages out of a Koran and putting in the toilet
to stop it up as a protest,'' he said. ''But not where the U.S. did it.''

This explanation had little or no effect on the demonstrations in Afghanistan,
which spread throughout the week, leaving at least 17 civilians dead and many
more wounded.

By the end of the week, the military had completed its internal inquiry and was
convinced that the allegation as reported by Newsweek never happened and that
the article had played a significant role in inciting the violence in
Afghanistan, Mr. Di Rita said. He informed Newsweek that its report was wrong.

Newsweek said this prompted Mr. Isikoff to go back to his source to try to
confirm the original account.

''But the official, still speaking anonymously, could no longer be sure that
these concerns had surfaced in the SouthCom report,'' Newsweek wrote, suggesting
that it had perhaps been in other investigative reports. ''Told of what the
Newsweek source said, Di Rita exploded,'' the magazine wrote. '''How could he be
credible now?''' it quoted him as saying.

On CNN yesterday, Stephen J. Hadley, President Bush's national security adviser,
said the administration was looking into the report ''vigorously,'' and that if
it proved to be true, disciplinary action would be taken against those
responsible. He also said that certain radical Islamic elements were using the
report as an excuse to incite protests against the government.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A man held a Koran yesterday at a protest in Karachi in
response to reports that Americans had desecrated the Koran at Guantanamo Bay.
(Photo by Asif Hassan/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
 An Afghan man picked up a Koran yesterday at the Pul-i-Khishti mosque in Kabul.
(Photo by Ahmad Masood/Reuters)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (91%); RIOTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
NEWS REPORTING (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RELIGION (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (69%);
GENOCIDE (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); NAVIES (64%) Demonstrations
and Riots; Koran; Islam; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: Newsweek (Magazine); Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: Katharine Q Seelye; Mark Whitaker

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1115 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Mournful Math of Darfur: The Dead Don't Add Up

BYLINE: By Marc Lacey

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; LETTER FROM AFRICA; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1062 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan


Darfur's dead have been tossed into the bottoms of wells, dumped into mass
graves, interred in sandy cemeteries and crudely cremated. Children have been
snatched from the arms of their mothers and thrown into fires, villagers dragged
on the ground behind horses and camels by ropes strung around their necks.

All of which makes the important and politically charged task of counting the
precise number of victims of the two-plus years of war in western Sudan a
virtually impossible exercise.

Is the death toll between 60,000 and 160,000, as Deputy Secretary of State
Robert B. Zoellick told reporters during a recent trip to the region?

Or is it closer to the roughly 400,000 dead reported recently by the Coalition
for International Justice, a Washington-based nongovernmental organization that
was hired by the United States Agency for International Development to try to
determine whether the killing amounts to genocide. (Former Secretary of State
Colin L. Powell called the Darfur killing genocide last year, but Mr. Zoellick
has studiously avoided the issue.) The State Department has said the higher
mortality figures offered by some groups are ''skewed'' by overestimates of the
number of deaths from violence in Darfur, rather than from disease and other
causes.

Those trying to tally the terror are engaging in guesswork for a cause. They say
they are trying to count the deaths to shock the world into stopping the number
from rising higher than it already is. Sudan has not issued an estimate of its
own, although officials in Khartoum label the numbers floating around as
propaganda.

With death certificates nonexistent, census figures hopelessly out of date and
much of Darfur's population uprooted from its home villages and scattered into
makeshift settlements and camps, the only feasible way to count is through
broad-brush statistical analysis.

To the survivors, the various estimates are impossible to grasp. In the middle
of the mayhem, they often had no idea how many people were slain in their own
tiny villages when the government-backed militias, known as the janjaweed, swept
in full of so much fury.

''So many died,'' Ibrahim Adam Abdallah said simply, his face blank, when asked
how many lives were lost in Seraf, a settlement in South Darfur that was first
emptied a year ago and set on fire in April, to ensure that no one ever goes
home.

John Hogan, the John D. MacArthur professor of sociology and law at Northwestern
University who led the compilation of the numbers for the Coalition for
International Justice, argues that devising a death toll for Darfur is worth the
effort, even if it is a rough approximation. ''To focus the attention of people,
it's important to give them some sense of the scale of what's happening in
Darfur,'' he said.

Error is inevitable, Mr. Hogan acknowledged. ''Obviously, this is not correct to
the person, or even the 10 or the 100,'' he said. ''But it's much better to have
information of some kind -- and this is a good estimate -- than no
information.''

Whatever the actual figure, it is undoubtedly a moving target. People are still
dying from sickness, starvation and exposure at rates that experts say are
higher than the already elevated rates at which they died before the conflict
began in early 2003. And although Darfur has long been known for its
lawlessness, violent deaths are regarded as far higher than normal, as well.

Totaling up the dead in Africa's wars has always been particularly challenging,
from the mass killing in Rwanda (in which somewhere around 800,000 people died)
to the continuing war in Congo (where the toll is now estimated to be in the
neighborhood of 3.8 million).

The continued insecurity in Darfur and the rugged nature of the vast battlefield
make counting its dead a particularly error-prone exercise.

The World Health Organization looked into the health consequences last year when
it estimated that 70,000 people had died over a seven-month period from
malnutrition and disease linked to the conflict.

Researchers for the Coalition for International Justice then released their more
comprehensive review. They were not able to get into Sudan, but under an
American government contract they managed to conduct 1,136 interviews with
refugees in eastern Chad, asking them whether they had family members who had
died in violent circumstances or were missing.

From this survey, the coalition's researchers established a death rate of 1.2
per 10,000, which is alarmingly high. Applying that figure to the estimated
number of displaced people in Chad, the coalition concluded that 142,944 people
may have been killed by government forces or allied militias, the main groups
ravaging the civilian population.

The figure is rough. It assumes that every missing relative has died, which will
surely not prove true. It assumes that the death rate among relatives of the
refugees in Chad is similar to the rate among those who remained in Darfur,
which may or may not be accurate.

The Coalition for International Justice then took the W.H.O. study and --
assuming that same number of people died in the beginning of the conflict from
sickness as two years later -- projected the death estimates for the entire
Darfur war. The total number of health-related deaths came to 253,619, for a
grand total of 396,563 deaths.

In its attempt to determine whether the killing amounted to genocide, the United
Nations International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur conducted extensive
interviews in all three Darfur states and studied numerous raids in minute
detail. In some cases, the commission reported the number of militiamen who
swept into a village, the number of government bombers flying overhead and the
number of corpses left behind.

Despite such precision, the commission made no attempt to come up with a
Darfur-wide death toll. In fact, commissioners found that totaling up the number
of damaged villages in Darfur was difficult enough. Estimates range from 700 to
well over 2,000.

Still, the counting continues, and eventually, when Darfur's violence mercifully
ends, a number will be agreed upon. That number, like the figure of 800,000 for
the Rwanda massacre, will be forever appended to the awful events. The rest of
the world, slow to react to Darfur, will then have plenty of opportunity to
think about it, and wonder why it was able to grow as large as it did.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Refugees in the Jebel Marra mountains of southern Darfur.
Estimates of the death toll are wildly divergent.
 Two survivors, woman with grandchild. Hours earlier, two of their family died.
(Photographs by Jan Grarup/Rapho)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); CEMETERIES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
MAMMALS (77%); FIRES (77%); ARSON (77%); POPULATION SIZE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (68%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); CENSUS (66%); SOCIOLOGY (66%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE
(63%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: US AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (56%) Coalition for
International Justice

PERSON: ROBERT ZOELLICK (79%) Marc Lacey; Robert B (Deputy Sec) Zoellick

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (88%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1117 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Officers Punished in 2003 For Mistreatment of Detainees

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


Two Army officers staged mock executions of Iraqi prisoners in 2003 and were
given career-ending punishments, according to military officials and newly
released documents.

Mock executions, in which a prisoner is made to believe that his death is
imminent, are prohibited by the Army as a form of torture.

The details of the investigations were described in documents sought by the
American Civil Liberties Union under the Freedom of Information Act. The Army
provided the documents on Tuesday.

In one case, on July 13, 2003, a captain with the Third Armored Cavalry
Regiment, based in Fort Carson, Colo., took an Iraqi welder out to the desert
and had him dig his own grave before staging an attempt to shoot him, according
to documents. The captain was looking for information on a bombing two days
before.

The welder was released.

The captain also captured eight people in a vehicle and at one point fired his
gun to make the seven passengers believe he had just killed the driver. He then
went to the home of a man whose identity had been provided by the driver and
threatened to kill him in front of his family. The documents do not say if the
victims were connected to the bombing.

The captain was court-martialed, convicted of aggravated assault and battery,
and sentenced to 45 days' confinement and loss of $12,000 in pay, said Lt. Col.
Jeremy Martin, an Army spokesman. The conviction ''effectively ended his
career,'' Colonel Martin said. He said the captain's name was not available.

The other mock execution involved a second lieutenant with the Third Brigade of
the First Armored Division, based in Fort Riley, Kan., who received
administrative punishment and an other-than-honorable discharge, Colonel Martin
said. He said the man's last name was Yancy but he could not provide his first
name.

The documents describe two mock executions involving the lieutenant and a
sergeant in June 2003. In at least one of the cases the victim was a looter.

The document described other reported abuses, including an incident in which
several soldiers were investigated for a staged photograph with a hooded
detainee. There was no evidence the detainee was physically abused, but such
photographs are a violation of policy.

In another case, a soldier was investigated for taunting a Muslim detainee with
a Star of David.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (93%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SENTENCING
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); SHOOTINGS
(77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (73%); ASSAULT & BATTERY
(71%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (71%); TERRORISM (68%) Torture; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; United States International Relations;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

STATE: COLORADO, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1120 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 19, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Plan Would Broaden F.B.I.'s Terror Role

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


The Bush administration and Senate Republican leaders are pushing a plan that
would significantly expand the F.B.I.'s power to demand business records in
terror investigations without obtaining approval from a judge, officials said on
Wednesday.

The plan, which is likely to be considered next week in a closed session of the
Senate intelligence committee, would allow federal investigators to subpoena
records from businesses and other institutions without a judge's sign-off if
they declared that the material was needed as part of a foreign intelligence
investigation.

The proposal, part of a broader plan to extend antiterrorism powers under the
USA Patriot Act, was concluded in recent days by Republican leaders on the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in consultation with the Bush
administration, Congressional officials said.

Administration and Congressional officials who back the idea said the plan would
give the F.B.I. a much-needed tool to track leads in terrorism and espionage
investigations that would be quicker and less cumbersome than existing methods.
They said the administrative subpoena power sought for the F.B.I. in terror
cases was already in use in more than 300 other types of crimes, including
health care fraud, racketeering and drug trafficking.

''Why not provide that same tool to national security investigators as well?''
asked an aide to the intelligence committee who was involved in the proposal,
speaking on condition of anonymity because the issue will be discussed at a
closed meeting scheduled for May 26. ''There wasn't really a whole lot of cogent
argument against it.''

But word of the proposal on Wednesday generated immediate protests from civil
rights advocates, who said that it would give the F.B.I. virtually unchecked
authority in terror investigations, and the plan is likely to intensify the
growing debate in Congress over the balance between fighting terrorism and
protecting privacy rights.

''This is a dramatic expansion of the federal government's power,'' said Lisa
Graves, senior counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington.
''It's really a power grab by the administration for the F.B.I. to secretly
demand medical records, tax records, gun purchase records and all sorts of other
material if they deem it relevant to an intelligence investigation.''

Kevin Madden, a Justice Department spokesman, said officials there welcomed the
intelligence panel's efforts ''to support provisions that enhance law
enforcement's ability to combat terrorism effectively and are particularly
heartened by their support for the USA Patriot Act.''

Support for the idea among many Democrats and some Republicans in Congress is
uncertain, and the Senate intelligence committee's plan to push the proposal
could set off a struggle with the Senate Judiciary Committee. The Judiciary
Committee has joint authority for oversight of foreign intelligence surveillance
law -- which would be expanded under the current proposal -- but its members
have shown some reluctance to expand the F.B.I.'s counterterrorism powers.

A Judiciary Committee aide said that Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican
who leads the Judiciary Committee, wanted to study the intelligence committee's
proposal closely to determine if it was warranted. ''Being a former prosecutor,
he understands what tools are needed for law enforcement, but he also
understands that there are serious concerns about ensuring people's liberties,''
said the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of provoking
tensions with the intelligence committee.

With 16 provisions of the Patriot Act set to expire at the end of the year, the
Bush administration has made the permanent extension of the law one of its top
legislation priorities. But critics are seeking to scale back provisions in the
law that they say are vulnerable to abuse, and more than 380 governmental
bodies, including seven states, have adopted formal resolutions voicing concerns
about the broad reach of the law.

One provision of the law that has generated perhaps more criticism than any
other is Section 215, derided by critics as the ''library records'' provision.
It allows the F.B.I. to go to a secret intelligence court to demand access to
material from businesses and other institutions as part of intelligence
investigations.

The Justice Department said in a newly declassified report last month that it
had used the power 35 times since late 2003 to gain information on apartment
leasing, driver's licenses, financial records and other data in intelligence
investigations. To date, it said, it has not used the authority to demand
records from libraries or bookstores or to get information related to medical or
gun records -- all areas of concern to critics.

Democrats and civil liberties advocates said on Wednesday that they were
concerned that the F.B.I.'s expanded subpoena power under the intelligence
committee's proposal would render obsolete the limited safeguards under Section
215. While that provision requires the Justice Department to receive the
approval of the secret intelligence court before demanding records, the
administrative subpoenas under the new proposal would not.

''This all comes down to not wanting an F.B.I. agent to have to go to a
prosecutor and then the court to get formal approval for a subpoena,'' said a
Democratic Congressional official, speaking on the condition of anonymity
because the panel's proposal is still considered confidential. ''This becomes a
substitute.''

But supporters of the plan said they had built in safeguards.

The F.B.I. could only issue the demands for records with the approval of the
director or senior officials down through the rank of a special agent in charge,
officials said. In addition, those given subpoenas would not automatically be
bound to silence unless the F.B.I. determined that disclosure could threaten
national security. The Justice Department would have to report twice a year on
its use of the power, and the law would be amended to specify that material must
be ''relevant'' to a foreign intelligence investigation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%);
SUBPOENAS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US
PATRIOT ACT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); HEALTH CARE
(78%); LEGISLATION (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); MEDICAL RECORDS (78%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); SEARCH & SEIZURE
(76%); POLITICAL DEBATES (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (62%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(51%) Terrorism; Search and Seizure; Law and Legislation

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%) Federal Bureau of
Investigation

PERSON: Eric Lichtblau; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Midwest: Illinois: Seeking To Pressure Sudanese Government

BYLINE: By Gretchen Ruethling (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 125 words


The General Assembly passed a bill prohibiting the state from doing business
with companies that do business in Sudan. The legislation, which passed both
houses on Tuesday and which is the first of its kind in the nation, bars the
state treasurer, retirement systems and pension funds from contracting with,
lending to or investing in companies that work in Sudan. The bill seeks to
pressure the Sudanese government to end genocide and terrorism in the Darfur
region, said State Senator Jacqueline Y. Collins, Democrat of Chicago, a
co-sponsor. Two of the state's five pension systems have about $1 billion
invested in 32 companies that work in Sudan, Ms. Collins said. Similar
legislation has been proposed in six other states.   Gretchen Ruethling (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); PENSION FUNDS (87%);
TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAR
CRIMES (86%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (74%); TERRORISM (53%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

PERSON: Gretchen Ruethling

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (68%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (92%); MIDWEST USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Illinois; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 76 words



To the Editor:

It is incredible to people outside of the United States that no one in a
position of authority has yet been held accountable for the repeated and
continuing torture of innocent people in Iraq and Afghanistan.

If this is not a silent acknowledgment that this administration and the people
it represents have no concern for the rights and well-being of the people they
claim to have liberated, what would be?

Andrew Norris
Frankfurt, May 20, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Torture; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Andrew Norris

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (90%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1127 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 44 words



To the Editor:

The news of the torture and death of an Afghan prisoner left me ashamed and
disgusted. Whatever the crimes, or putative crimes, of the captive, such
behavior demeans the United States, its citizens and its Army.

Mary Sharp Cronson
New York, May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(85%) Torture; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of
War; United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Mary Sharp Cronson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1128 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 61 words



To the Editor:

The May 20 front-page article about Afghan inmates' deaths refers to ''young,
poorly trained soldiers.'' What age and level of training are needed to
understand that torturing innocent people to death is not such a good idea?

Is such horrific abuse part of the return to values about which we hear so much?


David J. Edmondson
Alexandria, Va., May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (87%); MILITARY TRAINING (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Prisoners of War; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: David J Edmondson

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1129 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 98 words



To the Editor:

We seem to have forgotten a lot since World War II. Then, we treated German
prisoners decently in the hope that this would encourage the German military to
do the same for American prisoners.

That policy had another effect. The most impressively pro-American people I met
during my 20 years of working in Germany were former German prisoners of war.
Each attributed his feelings to the humane treatment he received as a P.O.W. of
the United States.

The Bush administration seems to have decided that this kind of thing is
unimportant.

Steve Miller
Athens, Ohio, May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) World War II (1939-45); War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (83%)

PERSON: Steve Miller

STATE: OHIO, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); GERMANY (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(72%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1130 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 80 words



To the Editor:

I feel a deep, unspeakable sorrow for my country after reading about the
torture, abuse and brutal murder of two Afghan prisoners of war by our military.

The lies and deceits continue: ''Military spokesmen maintained that both men had
died of natural causes, even after military coroners had ruled the deaths
homicides.''

This cannot be America. What has happened to us? To our sense of honor? To our
human decency?

(Rev.) Robert Close
Locust Valley, N.Y., May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HOMICIDE (87%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (87%); POWS & MIAS (87%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (86%); GENOCIDE (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); CORONERS COURTS & OFFICES (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Torture

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (91%)

PERSON: Robert (Rev) Close

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1131 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Tale of Torture, a Cry of Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 107 words



To the Editor:

Re ''In U.S. Report, Brutal Details of 2 Afghan Inmates' Deaths'' (front page,
May 20):

We are reminded yet again of American brutality in the torture and murder of
possibly innocent detainees. At the top, our leadership deplores this persistent
reality, yet only a very few lower-echelon service members are punished.

When will the American people put a stop to the outrageous practice of torture
and the absurd and sickening acceptance of our leaders' lack of culpability?

In the name of decency, torture by Americans must stop, and those who authorize
it must be held accountable.

Arlene Rosso-Baron
Orlando, Fla., May 20, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%);
GENOCIDE (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Torture;
Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Arlene Rosso-Baron

CITY: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (77%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1138 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Patterns of Abuse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 555 words


President Bush said the other day that the world should see his administration's
handling of the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison as a model of transparency and
accountability. He said those responsible were being systematically punished,
regardless of rank. It made for a nice Oval Office photo-op on a Friday morning.
Unfortunately, none of it is true.

The administration has provided nothing remotely like a full and honest
accounting of the extent of the abuses at American prison camps in Iraq,
Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. It has withheld internal reports and
stonewalled external inquiries, while clinging to the fiction that the abuse was
confined to isolated acts, like the sadistic behavior of one night crew in one
cellblock at Abu Ghraib. The administration has prevented any serious
investigation of policy makers at the White House, the Justice Department and
the Pentagon by orchestrating official probes so that none could come even close
to the central question of how the prison policies were formulated and how they
led to the abuses.

But a two-part series in The Times by Tim Golden provides a horrifying new
confirmation that what happened at Abu Ghraib was no aberration, but part of a
widespread pattern. It showed the tragic impact of the initial decision by Mr.
Bush and his top advisers that they were not going to follow the Geneva
Conventions, or indeed American law, for prisoners taken in antiterrorist
operations.

The series details the killing of two Afghan prisoners at the Bagram prison
camp, one of them an innocent taxi driver who was tormented to death by American
soldiers. The investigative file on Bagram, obtained by The Times, showed that
the mistreatment of prisoners was routine: shackling them to the ceilings of
their cells, depriving them of sleep, kicking and hitting them, sexually
humiliating them and threatening them with guard dogs -- the very same behavior
later repeated in Iraq.

This pattern should not surprise anyone by now. The same general who organized
the harsh interrogation techniques at Guantanamo Bay was later sent to Iraq, as
were some of the prison guard units from Bagram. Guards at the Iraq and
Afghanistan prisons were sent to their duties from civilian life, with no
experience and little training.

One thing they were taught at Bagram was the ''common peroneal strike'' -- a
blow to the side of the leg just above the knee that can cause severe damage. It
is clearly out of bounds for a civilized army, but it was used at Bagram
routinely. The taxi driver, Dilawar, died after ''blunt force injuries to the
lower extremities'' stopped his heart, according to the autopsy report.

The trouble is, normal bounds did not apply at Bagram, because the president had
muddied the water with conflicting orders. In a February 2002 memo, he spoke of
giving prisoners humane treatment, but only when it suited ''military
necessity,'' and he also said members of Al Qaeda and the Taliban were not
entitled to prisoner-of-war status. That led interrogators to believe that they
''could deviate slightly from the rules,'' according to an Army Reserve sergeant
who served at Bagram.

It now appears that those slight deviations included killing prisoners, and then
covering up the reason they died.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); LAW OF WAR (75%);
ARMIES (75%); MILITARY BASES (75%); TALIBAN (75%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); AUTOPSIES (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(69%); DOGS (69%); NAVIES (68%); GENOCIDE (65%); AL-QAEDA (64%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (64%); ARMED FORCES (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Editorials;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(56%) Taliban (Afghan Group); Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Bagram (Afghanistan); Iraq; Afghanistan; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1139 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New York: Manhattan: Subway Photo Ban Rejected

BYLINE: By Michael Wilson (NYT); Compiled by John Sullivan

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 183 words


A proposed ban on taking photographs in the subway, meant to thwart potential
terrorists, has been rejected as too broad to be enforceable, the police said
yesterday. The measure, proposed in May 2004, would have banned people from
photographing, videotaping or filming inside subway cars and stations; the press
and businesses or individuals with permits would have been exempt. After public
comment and discussions with the New York Civil Liberties Union, the police
considered a partial ban on photos of tunnels, control booths and other areas
closed to the public, but decided against it, said Christopher Dunn, the
associate legal director of the civil liberties group. ''From the outset, we
have believed that a total ban would unnecessarily infringe on First Amendment
rights,'' he said. The decision was first reported in The Daily News yesterday.
Paul J. Browne, a police spokesman, said, ''We don't feel the broad ban is
necessary, and as a practical matter is unenforceable.'' People taking photos of
areas deemed sensitive will still be questioned, Mr. Browne said.   Michael
Wilson (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION (88%); POLICE FORCES (88%); URBAN RAIL SYSTEMS (87%) Terrorism;
Transit Systems; Photography; Security and Warning Systems; Subways

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%) American Civil Liberties
Union

PERSON: Michael Wilson

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1140 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Iraqi Police Officer's Death, A Soldier's Varying Accounts

BYLINE: By MONICA DAVEY; Gretchen Ruethling contributed reporting from Chicago
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2305 words


The American soldier and the Iraqi police officer were on patrol together
outside a flea market south of Baghdad, chatting from time to time, when one of
them suddenly started shooting.

What prompted the gunfire is a matter of dispute, but one thing is not: The
soldier, Cpl. Dustin M. Berg, fired three times at his Iraqi partner, Hussein
Kamel Hadi Dawood al-Zubeidi, and killed him. As Corporal Berg ran away, he
picked up Mr. Zubeidi's AK-47 and shot himself in the side.

In the days that followed, Corporal Berg lied about what happened, saying Mr.
Zubeidi was the one who had shot him. And for months he went right on lying,
after he recovered from his wound, after he left Iraq, even after he received a
Purple Heart he did not deserve with his parents watching at a solemn ceremony
back home in Indiana.

Corporal Berg has long acknowledged that he killed Mr. Zubeidi in a rush of
moments that day in November 2003, but says he did so only after the officer
abruptly raised his gun in a threatening way. Everything Corporal Berg now
admits doing wrong after that -- shooting himself and lying about the events --
grew out of fear for what would happen to him, he says, and the knowledge that
other soldiers in his unit had already been investigated for incidents in Iraq.

''I just didn't think anyone was going to believe me,'' Corporal Berg wrote in
his most recent sworn statement, ''and I didn't want to get into trouble for
something I thought was the right thing to do.''

Corporal Berg, a 22-year-old member of the Indiana National Guard, has been
charged with murder and is scheduled for another military hearing on Monday. He
is one of a handful of soldiers and marines who have been accused in connection
with the deaths of Iraqis and who say they were acting in self-defense.

Unlike the prisoner abuses that have alarmed and riveted the public, these
lesser-known cases have created divisions over the definition of murder in a
fluid war zone. In Iraq, these stories have caused bitter resentment and
distrust of the troops. Among Americans, they have strained units, leaving some
Army supervisors saying troops seem reluctant to carry out their duties, and
have led to an outpouring of anger in hometowns across the United States.

''These guys go out and do what their country asks them to do, and now they're
being told they did it wrong?'' said Rich Hendrix, a Vietnam-era veteran who
spent a recent afternoon inside the American Legion Hall in Ferdinand, Corporal
Berg's hometown of 2,300 in Southern Indiana, where residents overwhelmingly say
they support him. ''I say they're doing the best they can. You can't even be
sure who's your friend and who's your enemy over there, so what are they
supposed to do?''

Since the war in Iraq began more than two years ago, more than 20 American
soldiers and marines have been accused of crimes in connection with the deaths
of Iraqis, including the small number of cases in which service members have
claimed self-defense. Navy personnel are also being investigated in the deaths
of two detainees, though no charges have been filed. At least 10 service members
have been convicted, but in most cases on less serious charges than those they
originally faced.

No two wars are alike, making it impossible to compare these cases with those of
past conflicts, and some people with military experience disagree over whether
anything is different in the Iraq prosecutions.

'The Same Arguments'

 In Vietnam, after a much longer involvement, 95 American soldiers and 27
marines were convicted of killing noncombatants. Gary D. Solis, who teaches law
at the United States Military Academy at West Point, said many of those cases
are similar to descriptions of killings in Iraq now being prosecuted.

''Look, there are guys who go out and for whatever reason murder defenseless
people,'' Mr. Solis said. ''They're crimes. And we're hearing the same arguments
now that we heard then: that in the fog of war, you have to make instantaneous
decisions. We heard exactly the same thing back then.''

In some of the 20 cases, prosecutors allege that flagrant acts led to death. One
soldier was convicted of murder in the death of a 17-year-old Iraqi whom he
allegedly had sex with in a guard tower. Four others are accused of suffocating
a detainee in a sleeping bag during an interrogation. Another was accused of
shooting an unarmed Iraqi as he ran from a truck and, some witnesses said, waved
a white cloth.

In other cases, service members have admitted their roles in the deaths, but
have claimed that their actions were akin to ''mercy killings,'' striking final
blows to wounded Iraqis who were suffering.

Difficult Cases

 But perhaps the most contentious cases are those of the handful of service
members like Corporal Berg, who claim that they acted only to protect themselves
from what they considered threats to their lives, as allowed by military rules.
Some witnesses, however, say they saw something else entirely.

A marine from New York says he shot and killed two Iraqis he had just captured
in a house raid because they made a hostile move in his direction; but why,
then, did he empty his weapon, reload and shoot some more? A private from
Louisiana said an Iraqi cowherd lunged toward another soldier in a field, so he
shot and killed him; but the unarmed cowherd was in handcuffs, a fact, the
soldier insisted, that he did not notice at first.

Jack B. Zimmermann, a Texas lawyer who has defended service members in similar
cases and who also was a prosecutor and criminal judge in the Marine Corps, said
he considers these cases ''the closer questions -- the troublesome ones.''

And some military lawyers say they believe that those cases are being
investigated more often in this war. Perhaps, they say, round-the-clock news
media coverage of the fighting in Iraq has also meant increased scrutiny.
Perhaps such cases are simply more likely to arise in a war complicated by urban
combat and the fear of suicide bombers, hidden explosives and an uncertain
enemy.

''In earlier wars, I don't think some of these homicide cases would be
prosecuted at all,'' said Guy L. Womack, a Houston lawyer and retired Marine
lieutenant colonel who prosecuted marines and has represented the Army reservist
accused of being the ringleader of prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib. ''We're
second-guessing things we don't need to second-guess.''

In Iraq, criminal investigations like the one into Corporal Berg's shooting left
a strange mark on other soldiers, acknowledged Capt. Rodney J. Shambarger, one
of Corporal Berg's supervisors.

Some of the soldiers told Captain Shambarger that they felt ''less apt'' to fire
their weapons for fear of being investigated themselves, according to a summary
of the captain's sworn testimony at a hearing in Corporal Berg's case. On a few
occasions, he said, the soldiers seemed to stop following the military rules of
engagement. In one incident, a soldier watched as a vehicle ran a checkpoint,
but he did not fire his weapon.

Captain Shambarger says Corporal Berg had a good reputation in his Guard unit,
made up of soldiers from Ferdinand and the nearby town of Jasper. He was calm
and quiet and did his job, the captain said, a ''10 soldier'' on a scale of 1 to
10. He was not the kind who was a ''thrill seeker,'' nor was he a hotshot
looking to return from war with a pile of medals.

A Young Soldier

 In 2002, when Dustin Berg left for basic training at Fort Benning, Ga., he was
the first of four brothers to go anywhere much beyond Ferdinand, a town with
mostly German roots and a place so precisely kept up that one resident describes
Thursday as ''mowing day.''

Looking back, Mary Lee Berg said she never had an inkling that her son might
want to become a soldier. But at 17, while he was still studying at Forest Park
High School and was busy with pole vaulting and the FFA, Dustin asked her to
sign a waiver that would let him join the military before his 18th birthday.

Ms. Berg said no; a year later, he did not need her signature.

After he arrived in Iraq in early 2003, Corporal Berg's phone calls home were
upbeat, full of stories about the enormous rooms and gold bathroom appliances in
Saddam Hussein's palaces, his mother said. But he also told of a rugged
existence for his unit, simple netting to sleep under and a child's wading pool
in lieu of a shower.

That November, a soldier arrived at Ms. Berg's home with alarming news: Corporal
Berg had been hit by small arms fire, presumably from the enemy, during a
security mission.

Ms. Berg said she never asked her son much about what happened. A counselor
trained to help military families told her not to push or pry. So she let it
alone, even when he came home a few months later and even after he and three
other members of the First Battalion, 152nd Infantry drove three hours to Camp
Atterbury to be pinned with Purple Hearts, decorations meant for those wounded
in combat.

Accounts of a Shooting

 Capt. Dan Stigall, the Army's prosecutor at Fort Knox in Corporal Berg's case,
declined to be interviewed for this article, and Connie Shaffery, a spokeswoman
for Fort Knox, said prosecutors would not provide documents, besides basic
charging papers, because the case is continuing. But summarized transcripts of
sworn testimony from a February Article 32 hearing, the military's equivalent of
a grand jury proceeding, and copies of Corporal Berg's most recent sworn
statement to an Army investigator offer a glimpse of the case from both sides.

On Nov. 23, 2003, behind a village flea market, Corporal Berg fired three rounds
from his weapon, he wrote in the statement, striking Mr. Zubeidi in the head and
chest. Corporal Berg then took Mr. Zubeidi's gun and shot himself in the left
side.

Moments later, Corporal Berg ran from the area, toward several soldiers, holding
his wound and screaming that he did not want to die, Sgt. First Class Joseph
Milton said in sworn testimony. Sergeant Milton said he kept asking who had shot
him, but Corporal Berg was rambling, emotional and nearly in tears. He spoke of
a man in a red turban and a white ''man dress.'' As he bled, he never mentioned
the Iraqi police officer, Sergeant Milton said.

In the months that followed, Corporal Berg provided military investigators with
conflicting descriptions of what happened. At first, he told them that Mr.
Zubeidi shot him before he fired his weapon. Other times, he said he shot first
and Mr. Zubeidi returned fire.

Then in June 2004, Corporal Berg said he wanted to ''clear up the facts'' and
admitted to investigators that he had fired all the shots, including the one
into his own side.

In that sworn, written statement, Corporal Berg described working the patrol
shift with Mr. Zubeidi. They talked about their lives in Iraq and in the United
States, about weapons and knives -- ''all kinds of stuff,'' Corporal Berg wrote.
Then, Corporal Berg said, he saw the man in a red turban and white ''man
dress,'' a description that his lawyer said was similar to that of a suspected
insurgent reported in the area a day before.

But when Corporal Berg told Mr. Zubeidi that he was going to radio the man's
description so it could be investigated, he said Mr. Zubeidi said, ''No, my
friend.''

Corporal Berg said he reached for his radio anyway, and saw Mr. Zubeidi lift his
weapon. ''His face turned blank and his eyes looked vicious,'' Corporal Berg
wrote. ''I thought he was going to kill me.'' So, he said, he began firing. He
said he started to run away, but stopped at the police officer's weapon, which
was lying on the ground, and started to panic about how the military might view
the shooting and shot himself.

Before Corporal Berg's shooting, Captain Shambarger said, three other soldiers
in his unit were investigated for various incidents, leaving others tense. In
other units, too, service members say they are wondering how the military is
deciding which cases to try and which to drop. A marine captured on videotape
killing an unarmed Iraqi in a mosque in Fallujah was cleared this month, while
Second Lt. Ilario Pantano, a marine, is waiting to find out whether his shooting
of the two Iraqis after a house raid will go to a court-martial or will be
dropped, as advised by a hearing officer this month.

Other Investigations

 As of late April, Army officials said they had opened 367 investigations into
alleged abuse or homicide in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2002. Of those, 218 had
been resolved, including 35 courts-martial and 105 administrative or other
nonjudicial punishments against 129 soldiers.

In the case of Corporal Berg, he is charged with unpremeditated murder, multiple
counts of false swearing, a false official statement, wounding himself in a
combat zone and wearing a medal he did not qualify for.

Special Agent Clarence Joubert, an Army investigator who questioned Corporal
Berg, probed one possible motive in the shooting. He asked Corporal Berg whether
it was true that he had asked other Iraqi police officers to shoot him, so he
could return to the United States.

Corporal Berg said no: ''That was never said.''

''I shot myself 'cause I was scared of what was going to happen to me with the
military,'' Corporal Berg wrote in his statement. ''It was not because of
medals, drugs or even because it was maybe a way out of the desert.''

Corporal Berg now stands at the edge of two paths.

One leads through Fort Knox, where he has been required to live and work on
weekdays while awaiting his hearing and perhaps a formal court-martial. If
convicted, he could face life in prison.

The other goes back to Ferdinand, where he and his fiancee were married in front
of 400 guests last weekend, and where a mortgage has been signed, a baby is on
the way and his boss insists that his old job upholstering furniture is still
available at Best Chairs Inc.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cpl. Dustin M. Berg with his future wife, Amber Kunkler, and
his friend John Hoppenjans before leaving for Iraq. He is facing charges
including unpremeditated murder and giving false statements to investigators.
(pg. A14)
Cpl. Dustin M. Berg, a 22-year-old guardsman from Indiana, shot and killed an
Iraqi officer and then used his gun to shoot himself in the side. (Photo by
David Pierini/The [Dubois County, Ind.] Herald, via Associated Press)(pg.
A1)Chart/Photos: ''Soldiers Under Scrutiny''Second Lt. Erick Anderson, 26
(Army)FROM: Twinsburg, OhioACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Murder and conspiracy to
commit murder.OUTCOME: In January, the Army announced it had dismissed charges
but said at the time it could file charges against him later.Staff Sgt. Jonathan
J. Alban-Cardenas, age unknown
Staff Sgt. JohnnyM. Horne Jr., 31 (Army)FROM: CaliforniaACCUSED OF OR CHARGED
WITH: Shooting a young Iraqi who was in a burning truck with burns and other
injuries. Soldiers said they wanted to put him out of his misery.OUTCOME:
Alban-Cardenas was sentenced to one year in prison and dishonorably discharged.
Horne was sentenced to three years in prison and dishonorably discharged.Cpl.
Dustin M. Berg, 22 (Army National Guard)FROM: Ferdinand, Ind.ACCUSED OF OR
CHARGED WITH: Killing an Iraqi police officer, shooting himself to make it look
like self-defense and then lying about it.OUTCOME: His Article 32 hearing, the
military's version of a grand jury proceeding, will be reopened today. A
court-martial could come later.Specialist Charley Hooser, 28
Specialist Rami Dajani, 25 (Army)FROM: Fort Hood, Tex.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED
WITH: Hooser shot and killed an Iraqi translator who was working with him and
Dajani while, they said, the three of them were joking around.OUTCOME: Hooser
pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter and received three years. Dajani
pleaded guilty to being an accessory and received 18 months.Specialist Brent
May, 22 (Army)FROM: Salem, OhioACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Shooting an Iraqi man
in the head while searching homes in Baghdad.OUTCOME: He was convicted of
unpremeditated murder and sentenced to five years in prison and a dishonorable
discharge.Pvt. Federico D. Merida, 25 (Army National Guard)FROM: Biscoe,
N.C.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Shooting and killing a 17-year-old Iraqi
soldier. He told authorities that they had had sex in a guard tower, a North
Carolina newspaper reported.OUTCOME: He pleaded guilty to unpremeditated murder,
was sentenced to 25 years in prison and will receive a dishonorable
discharge.Capt. Roger Maynulet, 30 (Army)FROM: ChicagoACCUSED OF OR CHARGED
WITH: Killing an injured Iraqi driver.OUTCOME: He was tried on charges of
assault with intent to commit murder, but was convicted of a lesser charge. He
was dishonorably discharged.Pfc. Edward L. Richmond Jr., 21 (Army)FROM:
Gonzales, La.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Shooting a handcuffed Iraqi cowherd in
the head. A witness said the Iraqi stumbled
Richmond said he lunged at his partner.OUTCOME: He was convicted of
manslaughter, sentenced to three years in prison and dishonorably
discharged.Second Lt. Ilario Pantano, 33 (Marine Corps)FROM: New YorkACCUSED OF
OR CHARGED WITH: Murdering two people after a house search for suspected
insurgents in Iraq.OUTCOME: After an Article 32 hearing, an investigating
officer recommended that felony charges be dropped, but no decision has been
made.First Lt. Jack Saville, 25
Staff Sgt. Tracy E. Perkins, 33 (Army)FROM: Fort Carson, Colo.
Scott City, Miss.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Manslaughter for their role in
forcing a detainee into the Tigris River, whose family said he died
there.OUTCOME: Saville pleaded guilty to lesser charges and was sentenced to 45
days. Perkins was convicted of assault and obstruction of justice. He is serving
a six-month sentence.Maj. Clarke Paulus, 36 (Marine Corps)FROM: Morristown,
N.J.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Ordering a beaten prisoner to be dragged by his
neck and left in the sun. The cause of the prisoner's death became a matter of
debate.OUTCOME: Convicted of dereliction of duty and maltreatment. A
court-martial jury said he should be dismissed from the military.Chief Warrant
Officers Lewis E. Welshofer Jr., Jefferson L. Williams
Specialist Jerry L. Loper
Sgt. First Class William J. Sommer, ages unknown (Army)FROM: Fort Carson,
Colo.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Murdering an Iraqi general in a detention
facility by smothering him in a sleeping bag during an interrogation.OUTCOME:
Outcomes are pending. One is waiting for a courtmartial
 the others are awaiting the results of Article 32 hearings.Staff Sgt. Shane A.
Werst, 32 (Army)FROM: El Toro, Calif.ACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Shooting an
Iraqi man, then planting a gun on him to make it look like self-defense.OUTCOME:
His court-martial on charges of murder and obstruction of justice is scheduled
to begin today at Fort Hood.Sgt. Michael P. Williams, 26 (Army)FROM:
MemphisACCUSED OF OR CHARGED WITH: Initially accused in three deaths, including
the shooting death of an unarmed Iraqi man during house searches.OUTCOME: A
military spokesman in Baghdad, where the case was tried, could not provide
details.(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (92%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); FIREARMS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); ARMED
FORCES (86%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); ARMIES (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); SELF
DEFENSE (72%); EVIDENCE (71%); CORRECTIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (62%); POLICE FORCES (58%); MURDER (57%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Courts-Martial

PERSON: Monica Davey; Dustin M (Cpl) Berg

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

STATE: INDIANA, USA (94%); COLORADO, USA (92%); TEXAS, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY,
USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1141 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Rumsfeld Stain

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT.

E-mail: bobherb@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 728 words


How does Donald Rumsfeld survive as defense secretary?

Much of what has happened to the military on his watch has been catastrophic. In
Iraq, more than 1,600 American troops have died and many thousands have been
maimed in a war that Mr. Rumsfeld mishandled from the beginning and still has no
idea how to win. The generals are telling us now that the U.S. is likely to be
bogged down in Iraq for years, and there are whispers circulating about the
possibility of ''defeat.''

Potential recruits are staying away from the armed forces in droves. Most
Americans want no part of the administration's hapless venture in Iraq. A woman
in Connecticut with two college-age sons said to me recently: ''My boys should
die in Baghdad? For what?''

Parents from coast to coast are going out of their way to dissuade their
children from joining the military. Recruiters, desperate and in many cases
emotionally distraught after repeatedly missing their monthly goals, began
abandoning admission standards and signing up individuals who were physically,
mentally or morally unfit for service.

The abuses became so widespread that the Army suspended recruiting on Friday so
recruiters could spend the day being retrained in the legal and ethical
standards they are supposed to maintain. The Army is going through its toughest
year for recruiting since the nation went to an all-volunteer military in 1973.

The military spent decades rebuilding its reputation and regaining the respect
of the vast majority of the American people after the debacle in Vietnam. Under
Mr. Rumsfeld, that hard-won achievement is being reversed. He invaded Iraq with
too few troops, and too many of them were poorly trained and inadequately
equipped. The stories about American troops dying on the battlefield because of
a lack of protective armor have now been widely told.

The insurgency in Iraq appeared to take Mr. Rumsfeld completely by surprise. He
expected to win the war in a walk. Or, perhaps, a strut.

Now the military is in a fix. Many of the troops have served multiple tours in
Iraq and are weary. The insurgency remains strong, and the Iraq military has
proved to be a disappointing ally.

A senior American officer, quoted last week in The Times, said that while he
still believed the effort in Iraq would succeed, it could take ''many years.''

As if all this were not enough, there is also the grotesque and deeply shameful
issue that will always be a part of Mr. Rumsfeld's legacy -- the manner in which
American troops have treated prisoners under their control in Iraq, Afghanistan
and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. There is no longer any doubt that large numbers of
troops responsible for guarding and interrogating detainees somehow loosed their
moorings to humanity, and began behaving as sadists, perverts and criminals.

The catalog of confirmed atrocities is huge. Consider just one paragraph from a
long and horrifying story on Friday by Tim Golden of The Times about the torture
and brutal deaths of two Afghan inmates at the hands of U.S. troops:

''In sworn statements to Army investigators, soldiers describe one female
interrogator with a taste for humiliation stepping on the neck of one prostrate
detainee and kicking another in the genitals. They tell of a shackled prisoner
being forced to roll back and forth on the floor of a cell, kissing the boots of
his two interrogators as he went. Yet another prisoner is made to pick plastic
bottle caps out of a drum mixed with excrement and water as part of a strategy
to soften him up for questioning.''

These were among the milder abuses to come to light. The continuum of bad
behavior that has been a hallmark of the so-called war on terror extends from
this kind of activity to incidents of extreme torture and death.

Neither the troops nor the American public signed on for a war in Iraq that
would last many years. And I can't believe there are many Americans who wanted
their military sullied by the wanton behavior of the torture crowd.

The troops who do their jobs honestly and diligently, and who fight bravely when
they have to, have been betrayed by leaders who encouraged abusive behavior and
allowed atrocities to flourish.

Mr. Rumsfeld has driven the military into a ruinous quagmire, and there is no
evidence at all that he's capable of finding a serviceable route out.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RECRUITING (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHICS (72%);
TERRORISM (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Civil War
and Guerrilla Warfare  ; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (65%); VIET
NAM (54%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1146 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2005 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Inquiry by U.S. Reveals 5 Cases Of Koran Harm

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER; Neil A. Lewis contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


An American military inquiry has uncovered five instances in which guards or
interrogators at the Guantanamo Bay detention facility in Cuba mishandled the
Koran, but found ''no credible evidence'' to substantiate claims that it was
ever flushed down a toilet, the chief of the investigation said on Thursday.

All but one of the five incidents appear to have taken place before January
2003. In three cases, the mishandling of the Koran appears to have been
deliberate, and in two it was accidental or unintentional, the commander said,
adding that four cases involved guards, and one an interrogator. Two service
members have been punished for their conduct, one recently.

In announcing preliminary findings of his investigation, which began about two
weeks ago, Brig. Gen. Jay W. Hood, commander of the Guantanamo Joint Task Force,
said the Koran mishandling did not occur as part of any effort to demoralize or
intimidate detainees for interrogation.

But General Hood declined to give further details until he had completed the
investigation, which was started after Newsweek magazine published an article
asserting that a separate investigation by the military was expected to find
that a Koran had been flushed down a toilet at the detention center. The
article, which the magazine subsequently retracted, prompted violence in the
Muslim world that claimed at least 17 lives.

''I'd like you to know that we have found no credible evidence that a member of
the Joint Task Force at Guantanamo Bay ever flushed a Koran down a toilet,''
General Hood said in a Pentagon news briefing.

He said that his investigators conducted a new interview with one detainee who
had been quoted in F.B.I. documents that were released Wednesday as having said
under interrogation in 2002 that guards flushed a Koran down a toilet.

In the new interview, conducted on May 14 as part of General Hood's
investigation, the detainee said he was not a witness to any Koran abuse.

General Hood said his investigators asked the detainee whether he personally had
seen any incidents of Koran abuse, ''and he allowed as how he hadn't, but he had
heard guards -- that guards at some other point in time had done this.''

The general said he could offer no explanation for any contradiction between the
detainee's statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in July 2002 and
the interview conducted by his team on May 14.

Investigators never asked the detainee specifically about a Koran flushed down a
toilet, General Hood said, nor did they mention his previous statements under
interrogation, ''but he was asked about defiling, desecration, mistreatment of
the Koran.''

It was not clear whether the military had also reinterviewed other inmates who
are known, through the interrogation reports that were released on Wednesday, to
have reported other instances of mishandling the Koran. General Hood did not say
how many people, or whom, his team has questioned.

The five instances in which the Koran was mishandled, General Hood said, were
among 13 cases investigated in the past two weeks.

''None of these five incidents was a result of a failure to follow standard
operating procedures in place at the time the incident occurred,'' General Hood
said.

But he added that in the initial months after the Guantanamo prison was set up,
and until early 2003, there were not explicit, written rules about the Koran.
And he said one incident concerned the breaking of another, unspecified rule,
rather than the prison's standard operating procedures.

The investigation also explored six more accusations of Koran abuse involving
guards. In each of those instances, General Hood said, the guard ''either
accidentally touched the Koran, touched it within the scope of his duties, or
did not actually touch the Koran at all.''

Military policy acknowledges that some Muslims view a non-Muslim touching the
Koran as a desecration.

In two other instances of the 13 that were investigated, interrogators either
touched a Koran or stood over the Islamic holy book during an interrogation,
General Hood said.

Neither instance is being termed Koran mishandling: One involved placing two
Korans on a television, General Hood said, and in the second the Koran was not
touched, and the perceived insult was unintentional.

''We've also identified 15 incidents where detainees mishandled or
inappropriately treated the Koran, one of which was, of course, the specific
example of a detainee who ripped pages out of their own Koran,'' the general
added.

He appeared to be referring to a report cited repeatedly by Pentagon officials,
including Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that
a detainee had torn pages out of a Koran and used them to stop up a toilet,
perhaps in protest of his treatment.

The abuse of detainees, especially at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, has
embarrassed the military and the Bush administration and created a political
challenge as they defend the campaign against global terrorism against
accusations that it is anti-Islam.

''We're in an environment where people react to impressions,'' Lawrence Di Rita,
the Pentagon spokesman, said at the news conference Thursday about Guantanamo.

''And so what we're trying to make sure people understand is that the impression
they ought to have is that the guards, the interrogators, the command down there
have been extraordinarily cautious, and yet there have been instances where
inadvertent mishandling has occurred or other types of mishandling,'' Mr. Di
Rita added.

General Hood's inquiry is expected to be completed in advance of a wider
investigation into contentions of prisoner mistreatment at Guantanamo. That
broader report could be even more critical of the military because it is based
on statements from F.B.I. agents -- not detainees, whose credibility can be
challenged -- who say they observed abusive and possibly illegal treatment of
detainees.

''I want to assure you that we are committed to respecting the cultural dignity
of the Koran and the detainees' practice of faith,'' General Hood said. ''Every
effort has been made to provide religious articles associated with the Islamic
faith, accommodate prayers and religious periods, and provide culturally
acceptable meals and practices.''

For the inquiry into Koran abuse, investigators reviewed three years' worth of
records and 31,000 documents, both electronic files and on paper, the general
said.

General Hood said he was confident that ''guidance to the guard force for
handling the Koran is adequate'' at Guantanamo -- at least the procedures for
handling the Koran ordered in January 2003.

But he acknowledged ''that there was a significant period of time at the very
beginning of operations in Guantanamo, in which there were not written
guidelines'' governing how to handle a Koran.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 28, 2005



CORRECTION: A front-page article yesterday reported on an American military
inquiry's finding that guards or interrogators at the Guantanamo Bay detention
center in Cuba ''mishandled'' the Koran in five cases. The headline exceeded the
Pentagon's characterization, saying that the investigation revealed ''harm'' to
the Koran. The Pentagon did not give specifics of the mishandling, so it was not
known whether a Koran was actually damaged.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brig. Gen. Jay W. Hood discussed preliminary findings of an
inquiry into instances of possible desecration of the Koran at Guantanamo Bay.
(Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images)(pg. A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (91%); EVIDENCE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
PRISONS (78%); RELIGION (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); NAVIES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); GENOCIDE (70%); MAGAZINE
PUBLISHING (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%) Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); Koran; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Islam

COMPANY: NEWSWEEK INC (55%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Newsweek (Magazine)

INDUSTRY: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%)

PERSON: Thom Shanker; Jay W (Brig Gen) Hood

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1148 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 28, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 893 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-6

U.N. Nonproliferation Talks Fail After One Month
A monthlong conference to strengthen the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty ended
at the United Nations in failure, with its chairman saying the disagreements
between nuclear-armed and non-nuclear states ran so deep that ''very little has
been accomplished.''   A1

Saudi King Hospitalized
Saudi Arabia's ailing King Fahd was hospitalized in Riyadh, the kingdom's
official news agency reported, and a Saudi official said the king was in stable
but serious condition.   A2

McCain Supports Compromise
Senator John McCain of Arizona signaled his support for a compromise in which
the White House might allow Senate leaders access to highly classified documents
in return for a final vote on Mr. Bolton's nomination.   A3

Militant's Condition Revised
A posting on the Internet site for Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, the group led by Abu
Musab al-Zarqawi, said he was ''in good health and runs the jihad operation by
himself.''   A6

Muslims Protest America
Denouncing reports of Americans desecrating the Koran, thousands of protesters
chanted anti-American slogans and burned American flags at rallies in Pakistan,
Egypt, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Middle East.   A5

Pakistan Shrine Attacked
An explosion ripped through the Bari Imam shrine in Pakistan, described by some
witnesses as a suicide bombing, killing at least 19 people and wounding nearly
70.   A5

Putin Promises Change
President Vladimir V. Putin acknowledged Russia had lingering problems with
human rights, and said his administration would work actively in the next two
years to make improvements.   A3

NATIONAL   A7-9;12

Major G.O.P. Fund-Raiser Is Now an Outcast in Ohio
Thomas Noe has been a confidant of just about every Republican official elected
statewide in Ohio. But Republicans are distancing themselves after his lawyers
said they could not account for $13 million the state invested in a fund he
managed.   A1

34 States Support Reporters
Two reporters facing up to 18 months in jail for refusing to testify about their
sources gained some unlikely allies as the attorneys general of 34 states filed
a brief in the Supreme Court supporting the reporters.   A8

No Sex Drugs for Offenders
Some states have begun banning Medicaid coverage for erectile dysfunction drugs
for sexual offenders following a federal warning.   A8

Suit Over Governor Survives
A Superior Court judge in Washington State declined to dismiss a Republican
lawsuit aimed at removing Gov. Christine Gregoire from office because of
accusations of fraud and illegal votes in her election.   A8

Rector to Leave Elite School
Under investigation by tax authorities and falling short of its fund-raising
goals, the elite New Hampshire boarding school St. Paul's said its rector will
retire at the end of the school year, two years ahead of schedule.   A7

Both Sides Rest in Jackson Trial
The defense and the prosecution rested in the sexual molesting trial of Michael
Jackson.   A7

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Anti-Darwin Film at Smithsonian
Fossils at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History have been used
to prove Darwin's theory of evolution, but a movie to be shown at the
institution aims to debunk it.   A8

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Third-Party Outsiders Are Now Power Brokers
The Independence Party of New York has emerged as the third most powerful
vote-getter in many state and local races and is expected to endorse the
re-election bid of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. A decade ago, some politicians
distanced themselves from Fred Newman and Lenora Fulani, the party's leaders,
but recently political leaders have been eager to court them.   B4

Ex-Clinton Aide Acquitted
A federal jury acquitted David F. Rosen, left, the chief fund-raiser for Hillary
Rodham Clinton's 2000 United States Senate campaign, of charges that he had
caused false filings to be made to the Federal Election Commission.   B1

A Showpiece Subway Stop
The spectacular European-style train terminal at Coney Island reaches a
milestone this weekend. The restoration of full subway service to southern
Brooklyn will be completed after more than three years.   B1

Religion Journal   B7

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-7

Venus Williams Loses
Venus Williams lost to Sesil Karatantcheva, 6-3, 1-6, 6-1, in the third round of
the French Open.   D1

ARTS   B9-20

OBITUARIES   C14

Eddie Albert
A film and television actor best known for his role on ''Green Acres,'' he was
99.   B21

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

Are Homes Overvalued?
Housing is not nearly as overpriced as stocks were in the late 1990's, but many
areas of the country are indeed showing signs of irrational exuberance,
according to an analysis by Economy.com.   C1

F.D.A. Requests Viagra Note
The Food and Drug Administration has asked Pfizer, the maker of Viagra, to add a
note to the drug's label to make patients aware of a possible link to partial
vision loss, which was reported by 38 men taking Viagra.   C1

Barclays Pay Package
The English bank Barclays' compensation package for its new president, up to $28
million, may prompt analysts and shareholders to bristle against what they see
as a trend toward American-style pay packages.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: The Senate in blinders; local wine tasting; China honors a friend;
Carolyn Curiel on the new Los Angeles mayor.

Columns: Matt Miller, John Tierney.

Bridge   B15
Crossword   B17
TV Listings   B202
Weather   D8


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (91%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (89%); FUNDRAISING (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (86%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); MEDICAID (77%); TESTIMONY
(77%); GOVERNORS (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); NEWS REPORTING (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); BOMBINGS (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); RELIGION (72%); SEX OFFENSES (70%); LAWYERS (70%);
WITNESSES (70%); UROGENITAL DISORDERS & INJURIES (70%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (68%);
BOARDING SCHOOLS (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (68%); JUDGES (68%); QURAN & ISLAMIC
TEXTS (67%); SUPREME COURTS (67%); LITIGATION (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(65%); JAIL SENTENCING (61%); SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION (60%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%);
TAX AUTHORITIES (50%); TAXES & TAXATION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ (76%); JOHN MCCAIN (72%); CHRISTINE GREGOIRE
(50%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (50%)

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (90%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (93%); MALAYSIA
(79%); INDONESIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EGYPT (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (72%)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1149 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 28, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abuses in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 104 words



To the Editor:

Re your May 20 and 22 front-page articles about the deaths of two Afghans at the
Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan and your related May 23 editorial, ''Patterns of
Abuse'':

The incidents described occurred two and a half years ago. The Department of the
Army conducted a thorough investigation in which charges were leveled against
more than two dozen individuals, some of whom have begun court-martial
proceedings.

Indeed, your account was based upon the thousands of pages of documents
developed by Army criminal investigators and other official sources.

Lawrence Di Rita
Pentagon Spokesman
Washington, May 24, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); ARMIES (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAR CRIMES (85%);
MILITARY COURTS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Bagram Air Base (Afghanistan);
Courts-Martial; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Lawrence Di Rita

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1155 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Day 141 Of Bush's Silence

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: NYALA, Sudan


A reader from Eugene, Ore., wrote in with a complaint about my harping on the
third world:

''Why should the U.S. care for the rest of the world?'' he asked. ''The U.S.
should take care of its own. It's way past time for liberal twits to stop
pushing the U.S. into nonsense or try to make every wrong in the world our
responsibility.''

And while that reader wasn't George W. Bush, it could have been. Today marks Day
141 of Mr. Bush's silence on the genocide, for he hasn't let the word Darfur
slip past his lips publicly since Jan. 10 (even that was a passing reference
with no condemnation).

There are several points I could make to argue that it's in our own interest to
help Darfur. Turmoil in Darfur is already destabilizing all of Sudan and
neighboring Chad as well, both oil-exporting countries. And failed states
nurture terrorists like Osama and diseases like polio, while exporting refugees
and hijackers.

But there's an even better argument: Magboula, a woman I met at the Kalma Camp
here.

She lived with her husband and five children in the countryside, but then as the
Arab janjaweed began to slaughter black African tribes like her own, she and her
family fled to the safety of a larger town. In December, the Sudanese Army
attacked that town, and they ran off to the bush. Two months ago, the janjaweed
militia caught up with them.

First the raiders shot her husband dead, she said, her voice choking, and then
they whipped her, taunted her with racial insults against black people and
mocked her by asking why her husband was not there to help her. Then eight of
them gang-raped her.

They may also have mutilated her. At one point she spoke of being slashed with a
knife in the shoulder and chest, but when I asked her about it, she kept
changing the subject.

''I was very, very ashamed, and very frightened,'' she said, leaving it at that.

After the attack, Magboula was determined to save her children. So they traipsed
together on a journey across the desert to the Kalma Camp, where a small number
of foreign aid workers are struggling heroically to assist 110,000 victims of
the upheaval. Magboula carried her 6-month-old baby, Abdul Hani, in her arms,
and the others, ranging from 2 to 9, stumbled beside her.

Magboula finally arrived at Kalma a few weeks ago. But the Sudanese government
is blocking new arrivals like her from getting registered, which means they
can't get food and tents. So Magboula is getting no rations and is living with
her children under a straw mat on a few sticks.

Then a few days ago, Abdul Hani, Magboula's baby, died.

She and her children are surviving on handouts from other homeless people who
arrived earlier and are getting U.N. food. They have almost nothing themselves,
but they at least have the compassion to help those who are even needier.

The world might also respond if people could see what is going on, but Sudan has
barred most reporters from the area. I'm here because I accompanied Kofi Annan
on a visit -- bless him for coming! -- and then jumped ship while here.

Magboula and the 2.2 million other homeless people from Darfur need food and
shelter, and President Bush has been good about providing that. But above all
they need the international community to shame Sudan for killing and raping
people on the basis of their tribe. Each time Sudan has been subjected to strong
moral pressure, it has backed off somewhat -- but lately the attention has
subsided, and Mr. Bush even killed the Senate-passed Darfur Accountability Act,
which would have condemned the genocide.

What killed Magboula's husband and child was, indirectly, the world's moral
indifference.

Others can still be saved if there is unrelenting pressure on Sudan to disarm
the janjaweed, on intransigent Sudanese rebels to negotiate seriously for peace
(instead of lounging about their hotel suites) and on governments like Egypt's
and China's to stop being complicit in the Darfur genocide.

When Americans see suffering abroad on their television screens, as they did
after the tsunami, they respond. I wish we had the Magboula Channel, showing her
daily struggle to forge ahead through humiliation and hunger, struggling above
all to keep her remaining children alive. If you multiply Magboula by 2.2
million, you get the reasons why we should care.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); CHILDREN (87%);
INFANTS & TODDLERS (87%); SEX OFFENSES (86%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%);
GENOCIDE (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); EXPORT TRADE
(72%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (72%); IMMIGRATION (72%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (69%);
TERRORISM (67%); PETROLEUM EXPORTS & IMPORTS (67%); HIJACKING (67%); RURAL
COMMUNITIES (66%); SHOOTINGS (64%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare
; Sex Crimes; Foreign Aid; Immigration and Refugees

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: EUGENE, OR, USA (90%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1156 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Expanding Terror Battle Under Guise of Charter Flights

BYLINE: This article was reported by Scott Shane, Stephen Grey and Margot
Williams and written by Mr. Shane.; Ford Fessenden contributed reporting for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2691 words

DATELINE: SMITHFIELD, N.C.


The airplanes of Aero Contractors Ltd. take off from Johnston County Airport
here, then disappear over the scrub pines and fields of tobacco and sweet
potatoes. Nothing about the sleepy Southern setting hints of foreign intrigue.
Nothing gives away the fact that Aero's pilots are the discreet bus drivers of
the battle against terrorism, routinely sent on secret missions to Baghdad,
Cairo, Tashkent and Kabul.

When the Central Intelligence Agency wants to grab a suspected member of Al
Qaeda overseas and deliver him to interrogators in another country, an Aero
Contractors plane often does the job. If agency experts need to fly overseas in
a hurry after the capture of a prized prisoner, a plane will depart Johnston
County and stop at Dulles Airport outside Washington to pick up the C.I.A. team
on the way.

Aero Contractors' planes dropped C.I.A. paramilitary officers into Afghanistan
in 2001; carried an American team to Karachi, Pakistan, right after the United
States Consulate there was bombed in 2002; and flew from Libya to Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, the day before an American-held prisoner said he was questioned by
Libyan intelligence agents last year, according to flight data and other
records.

While posing as a private charter outfit -- ''aircraft rental with pilot'' is
the listing in Dun and Bradstreet -- Aero Contractors is in fact a major
domestic hub of the Central Intelligence Agency's secret air service. The
company was founded in 1979 by a legendary C.I.A. officer and chief pilot for
Air America, the agency's Vietnam-era air company, and it appears to be
controlled by the agency, according to former employees.

Behind a surprisingly thin cover of rural hideaways, front companies and shell
corporations that share officers who appear to exist only on paper, the C.I.A.
has rapidly expanded its air operations since 2001 as it has pursued and
questioned terrorism suspects around the world.

An analysis of thousands of flight records, aircraft registrations and corporate
documents, as well as interviews with former C.I.A. officers and pilots, show
that the agency owns at least 26 planes, 10 of them purchased since 2001. The
agency has concealed its ownership behind a web of seven shell corporations that
appear to have no employees and no function apart from owning the aircraft.

The planes, regularly supplemented by private charters, are operated by real
companies controlled by or tied to the agency, including Aero Contractors and
two Florida companies, Pegasus Technologies and Tepper Aviation.

The civilian planes can go places American military craft would not be welcome.
They sometimes allow the agency to circumvent reporting requirements most
countries impose on flights operated by other governments. But the cover can
fail, as when two Austrian fighter jets were scrambled on Jan. 21, 2003, to
intercept a C.I.A. Hercules transport plane, equipped with military
communications, on its way from Germany to Azerbaijan.

''When the C.I.A. is given a task, it's usually because national policy makers
don't want 'U.S. government' written all over it,'' said Jim Glerum, a retired
C.I.A. officer who spent 18 years with the agency's Air America but says he has
no knowledge of current operations. ''If you're flying an executive jet into
somewhere where there are plenty of executive jets, you can look like any other
company.''

Some of the C.I.A. planes have been used for carrying out renditions, the legal
term for the agency's practice of seizing terrorism suspects in one foreign
country and delivering them to be detained in another, including countries that
routinely engage in torture. The resulting controversy has breached the secrecy
of the agency's flights in the last two years, as plane-spotting hobbyists,
activists and journalists in a dozen countries have tracked the mysterious
planes' movements.

Inquiries From Abroad

 The authorities in Italy and Sweden have opened investigations into the
C.I.A.'s alleged role in the seizure of suspects in those countries who were
then flown to Egypt for interrogation. According to Dr. Georg Nolte, a law
professor at the University of Munich, under international law, nations are
obligated to investigate any substantiated human rights violations committed on
their territory or using their airspace.

Dr. Nolte examined the case of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen who American
officials have confirmed was pulled from a bus on the Serbia-Macedonia border on
Dec. 31, 2003, and held for three weeks. Then he was drugged and beaten, by his
account, before being flown to Afghanistan.

The episode illustrates the circumstantial nature of the evidence on C.I.A.
flights, which often coincide with the arrest and transporting of Al Qaeda
suspects. No public record states how Mr. Masri was taken to Afghanistan. But
flight data shows a Boeing Business Jet operated by Aero Contractors and owned
by Premier Executive Transport Services, one of the C.I.A.-linked shell
companies, flew from Skopje, Macedonia, to Baghdad and on to Kabul on Jan. 24,
2004, the day after Mr. Masri's passport was marked with a Macedonian exit
stamp.

Mr. Masri was later released by order of Condoleezza Rice, the national security
adviser at the time, after his arrest was shown to be a case of mistaken
identity.

A C.I.A. spokeswoman declined to comment for this article. Representatives of
Aero Contractors, Tepper Aviation and Pegasus Technologies, which operate the
agency planes, said they could not discuss their clients' identities. ''We've
been doing business with the government for a long time, and one of the reasons
is, we don't talk about it,'' said Robert W. Blowers, Aero's assistant manager.

A Varied Fleet

 But records filed with the Federal Aviation Administration provide a detailed,
if incomplete, portrait of the agency's aviation wing.

The fleet includes a World War II-era DC-3 and a sleek Gulfstream V executive
jet, as well as workhorse Hercules transport planes and Spanish-built aircraft
that can drop into tight airstrips. The flagship is the Boeing Business Jet,
based on the 737 model, which Aero flies from Kinston, N.C., because the runway
at Johnston County is too short for it.

Most of the shell companies that are the planes' nominal owners hold permits to
land at American military bases worldwide, a clue to their global mission.
Flight records show that at least 11 of the aircraft have landed at Camp Peary,
the Virginia base where the C.I.A. operates its training facility, known as
''the Farm.'' Several planes have also made regular trips to Guantanamo.

But the facility that turns up most often in records of the 26 planes is little
Johnston County Airport, which mainly serves private pilots and a few local
corporations. At one end of the 5,500-foot runway are the modest airport
offices, a flight school and fuel tanks. At the other end are the hangars and
offices of Aero Contractors, down a tree-lined driveway named for Charlie Day,
an airplane mechanic who earned a reputation as an engine magician working on
secret operations in Laos during the Vietnam War.

''To tell you the truth, I don't know what they do,'' said Ray Blackmon, the
airport manager, noting that Aero has its own mechanics and fuel tanks, keeping
nosey outsiders away. But he called the Aero workers ''good neighbors,'' always
ready to lend a tool.

Son of Air America

 Aero appears to be the direct descendant of Air America, a C.I.A.-operated air
''proprietary,'' as agency-controlled companies are called.

Just three years after the big Asian air company was closed in 1976, one of its
chief pilots, Jim Rhyne, was asked to open a new air company, according to a
former Aero Contractors employee whose account is supported by corporate
records.

''Jim is one of the great untold stories of heroic work for the U.S.
government,'' said Bill Leary, a professor emeritus of history at the University
of Georgia who has written about the C.I.A.'s air operations. Mr. Rhyne had a
prosthetic leg -- he had lost one leg to enemy antiaircraft fire in Laos -- that
was blamed for his death in a 2001 crash while testing a friend's new plane at
Johnston County Airport.

Mr. Rhyne had chosen the rural airfield in part because it was handy to Fort
Bragg and many Special Forces veterans, and in part because it had no tower from
which Aero's operations could be spied on, a former pilot said.

''Sometimes a plane would go in the hangar with one tail number and come out in
the middle of the night with another,'' said the former pilot. He asked not to
be identified because when he was hired, after responding to a newspaper
advertisement seeking pilots for the C.I.A., he signed a secrecy agreement.

While flying for Aero in the 1980's and 1990's, the pilot said, he ferried King
Hussein, Jordan's late ruler, around the United States; kept American-backed
rebels like Jonas Savimbi of Angola supplied with guns and food; hopped across
the jungles of Colombia to fight the drug trade; and retrieved shoulder-fired
Stinger missiles and other weapons from former Soviet republics in Central Asia.


Ferrying Terrorism Suspects

 Aero's planes were sent to Fort Bragg to pick up Special Forces operatives for
practice runs in the Uwharrie National Forest in North Carolina, dropping
supplies or attempting emergency ''exfiltrations'' of agents, often at night,
the former pilot said. He described flying with $50,000 in cash strapped to his
legs to buy fuel and working under pseudonyms that changed from job to job.

He does not recall anyone using the word ''rendition.'' ''We used to call them
'snatches,''' he said, recalling half a dozen cases. Sometimes the goal was to
take a suspect from one country to another. At other times, the C.I.A. team
rescued allies, including five men believed to have been marked by Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, for assassination.

Since 2001, the battle against terrorism has refocused and expanded the C.I.A.'s
air operations. Aero's staff grew to 79 from 48 from 2001 to 2004, according to
Dun and Bradstreet.

Despite the difficulty of determining the purpose of any single flight or who
was aboard, the pattern of flights that coincide with known events is striking.

When Saddam Hussein was captured in Iraq the evening of Dec. 13, 2003, a
Gulfstream V executive jet was already en route from Dulles Airport in
Washington. It was joined in Baghdad the next day by the Boeing Business Jet,
also flying from Washington.

Flights on this route were highly unusual, aviation records show. These were the
first C.I.A. planes to file flight plans from Washington to Baghdad since the
beginning of the war.

Flight logs show a C.I.A. plane left Dulles within 48 hours of the capture of
several Al Qaeda leaders, flying to airports near the place of arrest. They
included Abu Zubaida, a close aide to Osama bin Laden, captured on March 28,
2002; Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who helped plan 9/11 from Hamburg, Germany, on Sept.
10, 2002; Abd al-Rahim al-Nashri, the Qaeda operational chief in the Persian
Gulf region, on Nov. 8, 2002; and Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the architect of 9/11,
on March 1, 2003.

A jet also arrived in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, from Dulles on May 31, 2003, after
the killing in Saudi Arabia of Yusuf Bin-Salih al-Ayiri, a propagandist and
former close associate of Mr. bin Laden, and the capture of Mr. Ayiri's deputy,
Abdullah al-Shabrani.

Flight records sometimes lend support to otherwise unsubstantiated reports. Omar
Deghayes, a Libyan-born prisoner in the American detention center at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, has said through his lawyer that four Libyan intelligence service
officers appeared in September in an interrogation cell.

Aviation records cannot corroborate his claim that the men questioned him and
threatened his life. But they do show that a Gulfstream V registered to one of
the C.I.A. shell companies flew from Tripoli, Libya, to Guantanamo on Sept. 8,
the day before Mr. Deghayes reported first meeting the Libyan agents. The plane
stopped in Jamaica and at Dulles before returning to the Johnston County
Airport, flight records show.

The same Gulfstream has been linked -- through witness accounts, government
inquiries and news reports -- to prisoner renditions from Sweden, Pakistan,
Indonesia and Gambia.

Most recently, flight records show the Boeing Business Jet traveling from Sudan
to Baltimore-Washington International Airport on April 17, and returning to
Sudan on April 22. The trip coincides with a visit of the Sudanese intelligence
chief to Washington that was reported April 30 by The Los Angeles Times.

Mysterious Companies

 As the C.I.A. tries to veil such air operations, aviation regulations pose a
major obstacle. Planes must have visible tail numbers, and their ownership can
be easily checked by entering the number into the Federal Aviation
Administration's online registry.

So, rather than purchase aircraft outright, the C.I.A. uses shell companies
whose names appear unremarkable in casual checks of F.A.A. registrations.

On closer examination, however, it becomes clear that those companies appear to
have no premises, only post office boxes or addresses in care of lawyers'
offices. Their officers and directors, listed in state corporate databases, seem
to have been invented. A search of public records for ordinary identifying
information about the officers -- addresses, phone numbers, house purchases, and
so on -- comes up with only post office boxes in Virginia, Maryland and
Washington, D.C.

But whoever created the companies used some of the same post office box
addresses and the same apparently fictitious officers for two or more of the
companies. One of those seeming ghost executives, Philip P. Quincannon, for
instance, is listed as an officer of Premier Executive Transport Services and
Crowell Aviation Technologies, both listed to the same Massachusetts address, as
well as Stevens Express Leasing in Tennessee.

No one by that name can be found in any public record other than post office
boxes in Washington and Dunn Loring, Va. Those listings for Mr. Quincannon, in
commercial databases, include an anomaly: His Social Security number was issued
in Washington between 1993 and 1995, but his birth year is listed as 1949.

Mr. Glerum, the C.I.A. and Air America veteran, said the use of one such name on
more than one company was ''bad tradecraft: you shouldn't allow an element of
one entity to lead to others.''

He said one method used in setting up past C.I.A. proprietaries was to ask real
people to volunteer to serve as officers or directors. ''It was very, very easy
to find patriotic Americans who were willing to help,'' he said.

Such an approach may have been used with Aero Contractors. William J. Rogers,
84, of Maine, said he was asked to serve on the Aero board in the 1980's because
he was a former Navy pilot and past national commander of the American Legion.
He knew the company did government work, but not much more, he said. ''We used
to meet once or twice a year,'' he said.

Aero's president, according to corporate records, is Norman Richardson, a North
Carolina businessman who once ran a truck stop restaurant called Stormin'
Norman's. Asked about his role with Aero, Mr. Richardson said only: ''Most of
the work we do is for the government. It's on the basis that we can't say
anything about it.''

Secrecy Is Difficult

 Aero's much-larger ancestor, Air America, was closed down in 1976 just as the
United States Senate's Church Committee issued a mixed report on the value of
the C.I.A.'s use of proprietary companies. The committee questioned whether the
nation would ever again be involved in covert wars. One comment appears
prescient.

When one C.I.A. official told the committee that a new air proprietary should be
created only if ''we have a chance at keeping it secret that it is C.I.A.,''
Lawrence R. Houston, then agency's general counsel, objected.

In the aviation industry, said Mr. Houston, who died in 1995, ''everybody knows
what everybody is doing, and something new coming along is immediately the focus
of a thousand eyes and prying questions.''

He concluded: ''I don't think you can do a real cover operation.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Casa 235 about to take off from Ruzyne Airport in Prague on a
flight to Afghanistan operated by the C.I.A.-connected Aero Contractors. (Photo
by Pavel Horejsi for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
(Satellite image from DigitalGlobe, via Keyhole Earthviewer)(pg. A12)Chart/Maps:
''Secret Fleet''A network of private companies owns and flies planes linked to
the C.I.A.AERO CONTRACTORSPremier Executive Transport Services2 PLANES, NOW SOLD
BUT STILL OPERATINGDevon Holding & Leasing5 PLANESStevens Express Leasing4
PLANESAviation Special ties7 PLANESCrowell Aviation Technologies1 PLANEPEGASUS
TECHNOLOGIESPath Corporation4 PLANESTEPPER AVIATIONRapid Air Transport3
PLANESBryan P. DyessAudrey M. TailorJames J. KershawErin Marie CobbPhilip P.
QuincannonLaura L. Owen339 Washington Street, Dedham, Mass.10601 Baltimore Ave,
Beltsville, Md.Connecting linesSix names and two addresses appear in the records
of two or more shell companies.Outer circleOperating companies maintain and fly
the planes.Inner circleSeven shell companies serve as owners of record for more
than 26 airplanes.(Jonathan Corum/The New York Times)Map of North Carolina
highlighting Johnston County Airport Smithfield.Boeing 737 Business JetPremier
Executive Transport Services
plane later sold. Landed in Baghdad on Dec.14, 2003, one day after the capture
of Saddam Hussein. Tail numbers include N313P and N4476S.Gulfstream VPremier
Executive Transport Services
 plane later sold. Flew from Libya to Guantnamo on Sept. 8, 2003. A Guantnamo
detainee said he was interrogated by Libyan agents the next day. Tail numbers
include N379P, N8068V and N44982.AC-130 HerculesRapid Air Transport. Intercepted
by an Austrian fighter plane while flying from Frankfurt, Germany, to Baku,
Azerbaijan, on Jan. 21, 2003. Tail numbers include N8183J.Maps of North America,
Europe and Asia track the aforementioned routes.(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); AIRPORTS (92%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AIR CHARTER SERVICES (90%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (90%); AIRLINES
(78%); AL-QAEDA (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (76%);
IRAQ WAR (76%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (76%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%);
CIVIL AVIATION (73%); AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(72%); SHELL CORPORATIONS (70%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (63%) Terrorism; Airlines
and Airplanes; Torture; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%); AL-QAEDA (83%) Central
Intelligence Agency; Aero Contractors Ltd; Pegasus Technologies; Tepper
Aviation; Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) Scott Shane

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%); BAKU, AZERBAIJAN (59%);
KARACHI,PAKISTAN (56%)

STATE: FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA
(79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (90%); GERMANY (90%); ASIA
(79%); PAKISTAN (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); EUROPE (79%); AZERBAIJAN (70%); CUBA
(70%); CENTRAL EUROPE (50%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1159 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq to Move Up Trial of Hussein and Start It in Summer

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Richard W. Oppel Jr. and Iraqi staff members of The
New York Times contributed reporting from Iraq for this article, and David Cloud
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 31


Iraq's month-old transitional government, keen to establish its authority after
weeks of intensifying insurgent violence, announced Tuesday that planned to move
up the trial of Saddam Hussein, bringing him to court this summer.

Jalal Talabani, the Kurdish politician who is the country's transitional
president, said in a CNN interview from his headquarters in northern Iraq on
Tuesday that he expected Mr. Hussein to be put on trial ''within two months,'' a
move that would break with earlier plans to defer his trial until later this
year or next.

Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari, at a news conference in Baghdad, gave a
strong endorsement of the role played by ''multinational forces,'' the formal
name for the 160,000 foreign troops serving here under American command,
including about 140,000 Americans and 20,000 in contingents from some 30 other
nations.

In New York, the United Nations Security Council, in a unanimously appproved
statement, extended the mandate of the American-led forces here beyond the end
of this year.

Mr. Jaafari said Iraq's need for outside military assistance, not pre-set
deadlines, should determine when American troop withdrawals should start.

''The multinational forces are not occupying forces, they are friendly forces,
and they are helping us to establish security, carrying out missions in the
interests of the Iraqi people, and under the authority of the government,'' Dr.
Jaafari said. The government, he said, wanted an extension of their mandate
''until we have defeated terrorism and restored security across the country.''

The renewal of the mandate for American forces came on a day of more jarring
developments in the war. The government announced that a shootout involving
American troops in the volatile western province of Anbar on Sunday had ended
with the discovery of the body of the province's kidnapped governor.

American soldiers involved in the shootout said a rocket-propelled grenade had
been fired at a patrol of Stryker armored vehicles from a cinder-block building
just north of Rawah, about 70 miles from the Syrian border. After they returned
fire, the soldiers said, they found four dead rebels and three who were wounded,
and identified all seven as foreigners, from Algeria, Jordan, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia and Syria.

Maj. Bryan Denny, executive officer of the Second Squadron of the 14th Cavalry,
said one captured man had told the Americans that they had a hostage in the
building. But exploding ammunition in the structure, and a warning from the
captive that the explosives included a homemade bomb, caused the Americans to
pull back, the major said.

When the soldiers entered, Major Denny said, they found the body of a hostage --
identified by the government as Raja Nawaf Farhan al-Mahalawi, the Anbar
governor kidnapped in an insurgent ambush on May 10 -- blindfolded and tied to a
propane tank.

The cause of the governor's death was not clear, although government officials
in Baghdad said his wounds suggested that he had been struck by falling masonry.

His death continued the grim history of the men who, by joining the
revolving-door succession of governors in Anbar, have tackled what may be the
country's most dangerous job. Rebels have forced two of Mr. Mahalawi's
predecessors to quit, including one who wept uncontrollably in an insurgent
video last year after he traded his resignation for the release of three sons
the rebels had kidnapped and threatened to behead.

On Tuesday, the American-led forces were hit by another fatal helicopter crash,
one in a string of accidents and downings that have raised the number of deaths
from crashes sharply in recent weeks.

Not long after dawn, an Italian AB-412 helicopter flying from Kuwait crashed
eight miles southeast of Nasiriya in southern Iraq, the main base for the 3,000
Italian troops deployed here. Four Italians attached to the Carabinieri
paramilitary police were killed, according to a Defense Ministry spokesman in
Rome, bringing to 59 the number of Italian servicemen killed in Iraq.

In Baghdad, the insurgent violence that erupted Sunday, at the start of an
Iraqi-led, citywide crackdown aimed at rooting out rebels who have staged dozens
of suicide car bombings, appeared to have subsided, with a second day of
relative quiet.

But at the Pentagon, officials cast doubt on the Iraq's claim that it was
deploying 40,000 soldiers to seal off Baghdad and search for insurgents. Of the
troop estimate, the Pentagon spokesman, Bryan Whitman, said: ''Somebody threw
that number out there, and it stuck. I don't know where it came from. We
certainly didn't put it out.''

He added, ''More important than the total numbers is that this is a sizable
Iraqi operation that demonstrates that Iraqi security forces are operating in
greater numbers and with greater effectiveness.''

On Monday, American troops burst into the Baghdad home of Mohsen Abdel Hamid,
leader of the Iraqi Islamic Party, a Sunni Arab group that has supported the
American-sponsored attempt to build a democracy here, and hauled him away on a
helicopter for interrogation, only to release him later after admitting it had
been a mistake.

At his news conference, Dr. Jaafari vigorously defended the Baghdad crackdown.
But he was blunt in his criticism of the detention, which caused widespread
anger among Iraqis and embarrassed his Shiite-led government as it seeks to draw
alienated Sunni Arabs into a fuller role in the political process.

Dr. Jaafari said he would ask for an explanation directly from the American
military commander, Gen. George W. Casey Jr.

''We condemned the arrest as soon as we heard about it,'' he said. ''From now
on, we will confront these matters so that we can be sure they won't be
repeated.'' But he added, ''I can assure you that the multinational forces are
not trying to interfere in the internal affairs of Iraq.''

His unambiguous support for the American troops and the decision to ask for an
open-ended renewal of the United Nations mandate suggested that pragmatists in
the governing coalition have prevailed for now over other Shiite politicians
more wary of the American presence.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mohsen Abdel Hamid, center, head of a leading Sunni Arab party,
at his home in Baghdad on Monday after he was detained and then released by
American troops. The military said his detention was a mistake. (Photo by Hadi
Mizban/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (86%); HOSTAGE TAKING (86%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); TERRORISM (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); GENOCIDE (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); EXECUTIVES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (69%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%); WAR CRIMES (68%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (53%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%); JALAL TALABANI (59%) John F Burns; Saddam Hussein;
Ibrahim Al- (Prime Min) Jaafari; Mohsen Abdel Hamid

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%); SYRIA (92%); JORDAN (79%); MOROCCO
(79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1160 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: Arrest Warrant For Milosevic's Wife Lifted

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 108 words


Serbia withdrew an international arrest warrant for Mira Markovic, left, the
wife of the former Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, allowing her to
return from self-imposed exile in Russia after more than two years. The decision
also means that she can visit her husband in The Hague, where he is in the
fourth year of his war crimes trial. The warrant was issued after Ms. Markovic
fled to Russia in 2003 to avoid appearing in court on charges of abuse of power
concerning the distribution of state housing. A Serbian court spokesman said she
had pledged to show up at a court hearing in September, and she will be arrested
if and when she returns.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (92%); ARRESTS (92%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); POLITICS (85%); GENOCIDE (84%) Politics and
Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Mira Markovic; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (95%); EUROPE (91%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Russia

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1166 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Killing in Darfur: Action and Inaction

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 134 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof writes that an indirect killer of Darfurians is ''the
world's moral indifference.'' This is a common assumption. But is it right?

John Quincy Adams said America was ''the well-wisher to the freedom and
independence of all'' but ''the champion and vindicator only of her own.''
Americans can tell right from wrong without crusading to right every wrong.

Likewise, world leaders, including President Bush, may well understand the
tragedy in Darfur yet believe that the costs of intervention are too great. They
may well not understand the tragedy. Either way, inaction does not tell us
enough.

Standing for moral right should not mean descending to analytical dishonesty.
And such a path might not be morally right after all.

Stephen Wertheim
Brookeville, Md., May 31, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (74%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (53%) Stephen Wertheim; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1167 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Killing in Darfur: Action and Inaction

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 124 words



To the Editor:

I read Nicholas D. Kristof's column with tears in my eyes. It is more than 60
years since the world, including this country, stood by as a mad tyrant
annihilated six million Jews and millions of others, not because of what they
did but because of who they were. Many of us could see our grandparents' faces
among those who were killed.

Since then, we have had civil wars, ethnic cleansing, rape and murder as tools
for wiping out entire minorities and cultures, and the world stands by.
Magboula, the Darfur woman Mr. Kristof writes about, could be any woman; she
could be your sister or my mother; she could be me.

What will history say of us 60 years from now? Will we ever learn?

Sarai G. Zitter
Monroe Township, N.J.
May 31, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); CIVIL WAR
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (68%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Sarai G Zitter; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (91%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1168 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Killing in Darfur: Action and Inaction

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 154 words



To the Editor:

Re Nicholas D. Kristof's May 31 column about the Darfur crisis:

There are indeed many citizens who agree that Americans have a responsibility in
stopping the genocide in Sudan, and Mr. Kristof leads in bringing these crimes
into the American consciousness. While President Bush has at last broken his
virtual silence on the subject this year, without an outcry from Americans, the
atrocities will continue.

For those of us who don't make our livelihood fighting this fight, though, we
need more effective ways to use the little free time we have.

Even in staying informed, contacting lawmakers and speaking with friends, family
and colleagues, I feel ineffective and powerless. How does a citizen transform
personal outcry and belief into a political outcome?

This link is not readily apparent and is a major obstacle in mobilizing American
leaders to act on the crimes in Sudan.

Leah Shalev
New York, June 2, 2005


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (56%) Leah Shalev; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SUDAN (96%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1169 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Mexico: Ex-President's Indictment Delayed

BYLINE: By Antonio Betancourt (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 130 words


Ignacio Carrillo Prieto, left, the special prosecutor appointed by President
Vicente Fox in 2002 to pursue cases against officials accused of rights
violations, has delayed an expected indictment against former President Luis
Echeverria. Mr. Carrillo had promised to file kidnapping and genocide charges
against Mr. Echeverria by the end of May, for an alleged role in the massacre of
student protestors in 1968. But this week he said his office was studying new
elements that would strengthen his case. Last year, he filed genocide charges
against Mr. Echeverria, 83, in the killings of two dozen student protesters in
1971, but a judge ruled that the time limit under the statute of limitations had
run out. That case is under review by the Supreme Court.   Antonio Betancourt
(NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%);
GENOCIDE (88%); LITIGATION (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (86%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (82%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (82%);
POLITICS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (66%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%); JUDGES
(66%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (66%) Politics and Government

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (90%) Antonio Betancourt; Ignacio Carrillo Prieto;
Vicente (Pres) Fox; Luis Echeverria

COUNTRY: MEXICO (93%)

REGION: Mexico

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1170 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Making Darfur a Cause

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 88 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof (column, May 31) makes it clear how lucky we Americans are
in that we don't have to wonder whether we'll survive until next week.

Whether you lean left or right, stopping the killing in Darfur seems like a
no-brainer. What political risk would there be in doing so?

A leadership position on this issue would earn President Bush accolades from the
holiest of the right, the crunchiest of the left and most everybody in between.
So what are we waiting for?

Frank Skraly
Watertown, Mass., May 31, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); GENOCIDE (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) United States International Relations; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (76%) Frank Skraly; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1171 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: Tribunal Has More Srebrenica Films

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 88 words


Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor for the United Nations war crimes tribunal
in The Hague, said in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, that her office had more
videotapes of the massacre of Bosnian Muslims from Srebrenica by Serbs in 1995
and would show them at the tribunal next week, when the trial of Slobodan
Milosevic resumes. She spoke as she was winding down a tour of former Yugoslav
states ahead of a report she is to give to the Security Council next week on the
region's cooperation with the court.   Nicholas Wood (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); RELIGION (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(87%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Recordings (Video);
Islam

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United
Nations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Carla Del Ponte; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(92%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1172 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Rockies: Colorado: Trial Ordered In Death Of Iraqi General

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 139 words


Three soldiers have been ordered to stand trial at Fort Carson on murder charges
concerning the death of an Iraqi general, who suffocated during an interrogation
in 2003. Chief Warrant Officers Lewis Welshofer and Jeff L. Williams and
Specialist Jerry Loper, all of the Third Armored Cavalry Regiment, also face
charges of assault and dereliction of duty during combat operations, an Army
spokeswoman said Thursday.

Prosecutors contend that the soldiers put Maj. Gen. Abed Mowhoush headfirst into
a sleeping bag, tied him up with an electrical cord and threw him to the ground.
The Army accuses the soldiers of sitting and standing on General Mowhoush's
chest. If convicted on all charges, the soldiers face life in prison without
parole, forfeiture of all pay and dishonorable discharges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CORRECTIONS
(88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%); ASSAULT & BATTERY
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); MURDER (58%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Fort Carson (Colo); United States Armament
and Defense; United States International Relations; Courts-Martial

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Lewis (Warrant Officer) Welshofer; Jeff L (Warrant Officer) Williams;
Jerry (Army Specialist) Loper; Abed (Maj Gen) Mowhoush

STATE: COLORADO, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1173 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 592 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

Chinese Military Spending Is a Threat, Rumsfeld Says
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, in a blunt public critique of China, said
Beijing's military spending threatened the security balance in the region and
called for an emphasis instead on political freedom and open markets.   A1

Stubborn Taliban Remain
American and Afghan officials have been predicting the collapse of the Taliban,
but the intensity of the fighting in remote corners of Afghanistan reveals the
Taliban to be still a wellsupplied fighting force.   A1

Revenge Killings by Israelis
Israeli forces said they carried out ''eye for an eye'' attacks on Palestinian
police officers, some of whom were unarmed, in 2002 in revenge for the killing
of six Israeli soldiers.   A3

Bombing in Iraq Kills 10
A suicide bomber detonated a belt of explosives at a gathering of Sufi Muslims
north of Baghdad, killing at least 10 people and wounding at least 11 others, an
Interior Ministry official said.   A6

U.S. Criticizes Mideast Allies
The United States criticized four of its closest allies in the Middle East for
doing little to stop ''modern slavery'' within their borders.   A5

NATIONAL   A10-12; A16

Military Finds Abuse Of Koran at Base in Cuba
A military inquiry has found that guards or interrogators at the Guantnamo Bay
detention center in Cuba abused the Koran, in some cases intentionally but in
others by accident, the Pentagon said.   A1

Red Tide Closes Waters
New England waters are being plagued by what may be the worstever outbreak of
red tide in the region, a Massachusetts official said. State officials have
closed shellfish beds from Maine to Cape Cod so that people do not ingest
infected oysters and clams.   A10

A Cloak-and-Dagger Past
W. Mark Felt, who became Deep Throat, learned the black arts of spying during
World War II when, as a young F.B.I. agent, he ran a case in which he used a
compromised German agent to feed the Third Reich false information.   A16

Famous Stamp Sold at Auction
One of the most famous American postage stamps, a 1918 24-cent airmail stamp
with the airplane in the center printed upside-down -- a design known to
collectors as the ''Inverted Jenny'' -- sold at auction for more than half a
million dollars, more than three times its presale estimate of $170,000.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Crucial Vote Is Postponed In West Side Stadium Plan
Supporters of a proposed football stadium on the West Side of Manhattan
postponed a crucial vote on its construction, shortly after the Assembly
speaker, Sheldon Silver, signaled that he was planning to vote against it. The
delay set up an expected frenzied weekend of talks intended to change Mr.
Silver's mind.   A1

Beliefs   B7

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-8

Unlikely Victory in French Open
Rafael Nadal, the unseeded 19-yearold tennis player, beat Roger Federer, the
world's No. 1 player, in four sets in the semifinals of the French Open.   D1

ARTS   B11-20

OBITUARIES   A13

Leslie Smith
Founder, president and longtime chief executive of Matchbox Toys who released
the first of his miniature Matchbox Cars in the mid-1950's, he was 87.   A13

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Energy Awareness in Japan
Japan is urging citizens to replace their appliances and buy hybrid vehicles, as
part of an effort to save energy and fight global warming.   A1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: A small but dangerous clause; overcast in Pennsylvania; New Jerseys
primary; Helene Cooper on a Kenyan woman taking on the establishment.

Columns: Matt Miller, John Tierney.

Bridge   B18
TV Listings   B20
Crossword   B18
Weather   B6

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEFENSE SPENDING (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); ESPIONAGE (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (73%); RELIGION (73%);
SLAVERY (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); SEAWEED & ALGAE (69%); STADIUMS & ARENAS
(62%); SPORTS FANS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (88%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (76%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); NORTHEAST USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); MAINE, USA (69%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); ISRAEL (93%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAQ (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); CUBA (69%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1174 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 331 words



Abbas Delays Elections, And Hamas Objects
The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, announced that he would postpone the
July 17 legislative elections, allowing more time for changes to a new election
law but drawing swift criticism from the militant group Hamas. Mr. Abbas had
promised a firm date for the elections to bring Hamas into the political system.
PAGE 20

Watergate's Next Generation
Nicholas T. Jones and Jarett A. Nixon were law school classmates and friends.
But what neither knew until the identity of Deep Throat was revealed last week
was that they come from opposite sides of one of the most profound divides in
modern American political history.   PAGE 22

A Lake's Murky Future
Last year's hurricanes in Florida churned up an oozy, polluted muck in Lake
Okeechobee, making it a soupy mess and crippling its ecosystem. Much of the
lake's plant life has died and some are predicting the demise of the lake
itself.   PAGE 22

Summer Reading
A special issue, with surveys of travel, cooking and gardening and a literary
map of Manhattan, showing where fictional New Yorkers lived, worked, played,
drank and walked.   BOOK REVIEW

All About Money
From hedge funds to billion-dollar mergers, from Wall Street to Silicon Valley
(again), money is moving all over the place. But where exactly is it going? And
who's taking it there? A special issue.   MAGAZINE

A Designer Tries Television
Tommy Hilfiger is hoping that ''The Cut,'' his new reality show on CBS, will do
for his image and career what ''The Apprentice'' has done for Donald J. Trump,
perhaps reviving his company's stagnant sales. But the show faces a number of
obstacles, including a glut of reality programming.   SUNDAY BUSINESS

Shredding Issue at A.C.L.U.
The American Civil Liberties Union has been shredding some documents over the
objections of its records manager and in conflict with its policies. The matter
has reignited questions over whether the group's practices are consistent with
its public positions.   PAGE 24


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
LAKES (90%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); HAMAS (90%); ELECTION LAW (90%);
REALITY TELEVISION (86%); POLITICS (78%); LAWYERS (74%); FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LITERATURE (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%);
WEATHER (69%); BOOK REVIEWS (68%); HEDGE FUNDS (51%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (90%); DONALD TRUMP (50%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (53%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (53%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1179 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

FIRST COURT CASE OF HUSSEIN STEMS FROM '82 DEATHS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Edward Wong contributed reporting from Baghdad for
this article, and Neil A. Lewis from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1541 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 5


The Iraqi court set up to hear cases against Saddam Hussein and his top aides
plans to bring him to trial by late summer or early fall in its first case,
involving the 1982 killings of nearly 160 men from Dujail, a predominantly
Shiite village north of Baghdad, after he survived an assassination attempt
there, according to a senior Iraqi court official.

By scheduling an early trial for Mr. Hussein on a small fraction of the
accusations against him, the Iraqi Special Tribunal has effectively ceded to
pressure from Iraq's transitional government, settling a behind-the-scenes power
struggle involving American lawyers who have guided the tribunal's work since
the court was established last year.

The Americans favored trying at least some Hussein aides first, saying doing so
would help build up a pattern of ''command responsibility'' that led
conclusively to him.

That approach, the American lawyers have said, would allow prosecutors to use
his aides' testimony against him, bolstering documents that were often
inconclusive on Mr. Hussein's role in the mass killings.

But that approach would most likely have delayed the trial until 2006, because
the tribunal, using two side-by-side courtrooms, each with a five-judge panel
sitting without a jury, would first have to work its way through trials of at
least some of his subordinates.

Laith Kubba, spokesman for Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari, who took power
last month as the head of Iraq's first Shiite-majority government, told
reporters on Sunday that the government wanted Mr. Hussein's trial to begin
within two months.

Mr. Kubba said there was ''no reason to waste time'' in preparing for a trial
that would hold Mr. Hussein, a Sunni Arab, to account in the 500 separate cases
of crimes against humanity, many involving Shiites and Kurds, that Mr. Kubba
said were under investigation.

''It is the government's view that the trial of Saddam should take place as soon
as possible,'' Mr. Kubba said.

Mr. Kubba said the government preferred an approach concentrating on 12 ''fully
documented cases,'' including Dujail, and that those would ensure that Mr.
Hussein, 68, received the death sentence.

The Jaafari government has said it will apply the death penalty -- available in
Iraq's criminal code, drafted under Mr. Hussein -- against those responsible for
the worst Hussein-era crimes, as well as by insurgents who have wracked Iraq
since his overthrow.

American officials, who have provided more than $75 million for the tribunal,
offered no comment on the Iraqi decision. An American Embassy spokesman said
Gregg Nivala, the top American lawyer advising the tribunal, was traveling in
Europe, and an e-mailed request for comment by him went unanswered.

But American officials have said that Greg Kehoe, a former Tampa prosecutor who
was Mr. Nivala's predecessor at the tribunal, resisted heavy pressure last year
from Ayad Allawi, prime minister in the interim government replaced by Dr.
Jaafari's administration, for an early trial.

For Shiite and Kurdish politicians who dominate the new government, the new
timetable puts Mr. Hussein in the dock, in a case involving the mass murder of
Shiites and Kurds, ahead of elections for a full, five-year government scheduled
to be held by Dec. 15. But it also appears to mean that Iraqis will be denied
the kind of sweeping trial that Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav
president, has had in The Hague, where he has faced a panoply of charges
covering the wars in the 1990's in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo.

M. Cherif Bassiouni, a law professor at DePaul University and an authority on
Iraqi law, said in an interview on Sunday that the new approach of the
government in Baghdad was understandable but contained several pitfalls.
Professor Bassiouni, who has advised the United States government on how to
reshape the Iraqi criminal justice system and bring Mr. Hussein to trial, said
that using specific criminal acts would have the advantage of moving quickly. In
addition, using the specifics of a case like that of Dujail would reduce the
difficulties of trying Mr. Hussein on the more abstract issues of command
responsibility, he said.

But he said the haste could prove costly because the Iraqi government would have
to use the law put in place by the American occupation authorities. To proceed
without the Iraqis enacting their own law, he said, ''would lack credibility and
legitimacy in the eyes of the Iraqi people and other Arabs.''

Tribunal officials have said that Mr. Hussein will eventually face similar
trials for other atrocities, including the Anfal campaign of the late 1980's in
which dozens of Kurdish villages and towns, including Halabja, were attacked
with chemical weapons; the suppression of a Shiite rebellion that followed the
Persian Gulf war in 1991, in which 150,000 Shiites were killed; the summary
executions of more than 20 Baath party leaders Mr. Hussein accused of treason
after he seized the presidency in 1979; and the killings of more than 500
members of the family of Massoud Barzani, a Kurdish leader, and of several
Shiite religious leaders.

Still undecided, the tribunal official said Sunday, was whether Mr. Hussein
would ultimately face trial for his role in Iraq's eight-year war with Iran in
the 1980's, in which nearly a million Iraqis and Iranians died.

The Jaafari government, at its first high-level meeting with the Iranian
government in Baghdad last month, signed a joint communique accepting Mr.
Hussein's responsibility for starting the war, and for the loss of life
involved.

Although American officials wrote a provision for war-crimes investigations into
the statute establishing the tribunal last year, American officials in Baghdad
have cautioned that widening the cases against Mr. Hussein to include the
Iran-Iraq war would expose Iraq, already burdened with billions of dollars in
debt, to demands for heavy war reparations from Iran.

Mr. Hussein will join five defendants in the Dujail trial, including Barzan
al-Tikriti, Mr. Hussein's half brother, who led Iraqi's intelligence service at
the time; Taha Yassin Ramadan, 66, a former deputy prime minister and vice
president; and Awad Al-Sadoun, 60, the chief judge of the court that sentenced
143 of the Dujail men to death.

A tribunal official said the case against Mr. Hussein would be bolstered by
testimony from Mr. Tikriti and Mr. Ramadan implicating Mr. Hussein, and in the
destruction that followed, with the razing of most of the village's houses and
uprooting of date palm groves and fruit orchards that were its main livelihood.
But the official, speaking on a guarantee of anonymity, said the earliest
practical date for the Dujail trial would most likely be three months from now,
because prosecutors and defense lawyers needed time to prepare.

There were conflicting reports of the reaction of Mr. Hussein, who has been kept
in American military custody since his capture in a hole near his hometown,
Tikrit, on Dec. 13, 2003. A London-based Arab-language newspaper, Asharq Al
Awsat, said in its weekend editions that Raid Juhi, chief investigating judge of
the Iraqi tribunal, had told the newspaper in an interview that Mr. Hussein had
''suffered a collapse in morale because he understands the extent of the charges
against him.''

The Iraqi lawyer chosen to lead Mr. Hussein's defense, Khalil al-Duleimi,
disagreed. ''The last time I met Saddam was in late April and his spirits were
very high,'' Mr. Duleimi said, according to an Associated Press report on
Sunday. It was not clear whether Mr. Duleimei had met Mr. Hussein before or
after he was told that he was to face an early trial.

Since he was captured, much about Mr. Hussein's circumstances has been obscure.
American officials have said that he has been held in Camp Cropper, a special
detention center near Baghdad airport.

But a Jordanian lawyer, one of more than 30 foreign defense lawyers Mr.
Hussein's exiled family says it has hired, said last month that Mr. Hussein had
told Mr. Duleimi that he had spent long periods away from Camp Cropper. Much of
his detention has been spent at other locations, requiring flights aboard
American aircraft, that Mr. Hussein believed to be outside Iraq, said the
Jordanian lawyer, Ziad Najdawi.

Mr. Najdawi said Mr. Hussein had not told Mr. Duleimi where he had been held
between his meetings with Mr. Duleimi at Camp Cropper, sessions with the special
tribunal's prosecutors, and visits Mr. Hussein had from representatives of the
Swiss-based International Committee of the Red Cross. Mr. Hussein, Mr. Najdawi
said, behaved in his meetings with Mr. Duleimi as if he believed that their
discussions were being electronically monitored, and, Mr. Najdawi said, as
though Mr. Hussein might have been told by his American captors not to discuss
where he was being held.

But Mr. Najdawi said that from other indications, which he did not specify, Mr.
Hussein's defense team believed Mr. Hussein had been held in the Persian Gulf
state of Qatar, the Middle East base for the United States Central Command,
which is responsible for the war in Iraq, or possibly at the British-controlled
island of Diego Garcia in the southern Indian Ocean.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); LAWYERS (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); WAR CRIMES (75%); JUDGES (73%); CRIMINAL LAW (73%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (72%); ASSASSINATION (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (70%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (60%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Kurds; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Capital Punishment

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) John F Burns; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Dujail (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1180 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Biden Urges U.S. to Take Steps To Close Prison at Guantanamo

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 279 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


A leading Senate Democrat said Sunday that the United States needed to move
toward shutting down the military detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

''This has become the greatest propaganda tool that exists for recruiting of
terrorists around the world,'' said the senator, Joseph R. Biden Jr. of
Delaware, on the ABC News program ''This Week.''

''And it is unnecessary to be in that position.''

A Pentagon report released Friday cited cases in which American guards at
Guantanamo Bay mishandled the Koran, and last month, Amnesty International
called the detention center for terrorism suspects ''the gulag of our time,'' a
charge Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld dismissed as ''reprehensible.''

Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania and chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, is planning hearings this month on the treatment of detainees at the
camp.

Mr. Biden, the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, proposed
that an independent commission take a look at Guantanamo Bay and make
recommendations. ''But the end result is, I think we should end up shutting it
down, moving those prisoners,'' he said. ''Those that we have reason to keep,
keep. And those we don't, let go.''

He added, ''I think more Americans are in jeopardy as a consequence of the
perception that exists worldwide with its existence than if there were no
Gitmo.''

Guantanamo Bay has about 540 detainees. Some have been there more than three
years without being charged with a crime. Most were captured on battlefields in
Afghanistan and were sent to Guantanamo Bay in hope of extracting useful
intelligence about Al Qaeda.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY
BASES (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%); NAVIES (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); FOREIGN POLICY (71%); AMNESTY (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(70%) Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States Armament and
Defense

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: JOE BIDEN (79%); ARLEN SPECTER (58%) Joseph R Jr (Sen) Biden

STATE: DELAWARE, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1182 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 7, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court in Hague Is to Investigate Darfur Violence

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, June 6


Prosecutors for the International Criminal Court announced Monday that they had
begun an investigation into war crimes in Sudan, opening the door for
indictments and warrants for those considered most responsible for the ethnic
violence and starvation that has exterminated hundreds of villages in Darfur.

But the Sudanese government, blamed by a United Nations inquiry for much of the
violence, has said it will not accept the court's jurisdiction. It has already
begun to try to delay legal action by using some of the safeguards built into
the court's rules, like insisting that it is conducting its own investigations
and will hold its own trials.

The government has recently hired lawyers from Britain and Kenya to advise it
and to start domestic trials, according to diplomats and court officials.
''There are a number of things they can do,'' one lawyer at the court here said.
''Khartoum officials cannot stop the process, but they can stall and buy time,
even if eventually they will have to cooperate.''

The Security Council requested in March that the court take up the atrocities in
Darfur, where tens of thousands have been starved to death, raped and killed
over the past two years. Now that prosecutors have taken jurisdiction, they say,
they hope to move quickly.

The court's investigators have already worked in the region for the past two
months. They have interviewed diplomats and witnesses in refugee camps in Chad.
They also have aerial photography documenting destruction.

The chief prosecutor said Monday that his office had interviewed more than ''50
independent experts'' and collected ''thousands of documents.''

When the International Criminal Court, the world's first permanent criminal
tribunal for war crimes, was set up by the Rome Treaty of 1998, a number of
safeguards and restrictions were adopted, largely at the request of the United
States. One is that prosecutors can act only after a government shows itself
unwilling or unable to conduct credible trials in its own courts.

If Sudan goes through with its own trials, international prosecutors would be
forced to take time to show that those trials were not credible. Proceedings
would be delayed further if they have to prove a government cover-up or that
officials were shielding crucial suspects.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JURISDICTION (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); GENOCIDE (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); LITIGATION
(79%); LAWYERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(78%); STARVATION (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%);
REFUGEES (73%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) International Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); KENYA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1183 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Business Briefing  Americas: Chile: Pinochet Loses A Round And Wins One

BYLINE: By Pascale Bonnefoy (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 146 words


An appeals court in Santiago voted to strip Gen. Augusto Pinochet of immunity
from prosecution in the investigation of $17 million he is said to have
illegally obtained and deposited at scores of financial institutions in the
United States during his 17-year rule. The ruling may be appealed to the Supreme
Court. The former dictator won a round when another set of appeals judges
vacated his indictment on kidnapping and murder charges in a case dealing with
Operation Condor, a joint campaign by six South American military dictatorships
to kill exiled political opponents in the 1970's. The judges said General
Pinochet, 89, was mentally unfit to stand trial. Eduardo Contreras, a lawyer
representing victims' relatives, said, ''Apparently, the judges don't consider
it permissible that Pinochet be a thief, but they don't care if he is a
murderer.''   Pascale Bonnefoy (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); IMMUNITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY RULE (88%);
INDICTMENTS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
JUDGES (88%); VERDICTS (88%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (88%); LARCENY & THEFT
(87%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (87%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (86%); LAWYERS
(75%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); ETHICS (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); POLITICS
(68%); GENOCIDE (67%); MURDER (58%) Immunity From Prosecution; Frauds and
Swindling; Kidnapping; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Politics and Government; Decisions and Verdicts; Ethics

ORGANIZATION: Operation Condor

PERSON: Pascale Bonnefoy; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%)

REGION: Chile; Santiago (Chile); Chile

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1185 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senate Panel Votes to Widen Antiterror Law

BYLINE: By ERIC LIPTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 367 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


The Federal Bureau of Investigation would gain the right to demand a variety of
records in terror cases without a judge's approval, under an expanded version of
the law known as the USA Patriot Act that the Senate intelligence committee
approved late Tuesday after a closed-door debate.

The measure still needs to be considered by at least one more committee before
moving to a full Senate vote, and it must be acted on in the House as well.

Civil liberties groups are already protesting the proposal to expand provisions
in the antiterrorism law, adopted after the Sept. 11 attacks.

Lisa Graves, a senior counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union, said, ''It
is the wrong step in the wrong direction to give the F.B.I. unfettered power to
obtain records about people's health, their wealth and the transactions of their
daily life without evidence of criminal wrongdoing.''

The measure would make permanent eight provisions of the Patriot Act, which was
to expire this year.

The measure would also expand the government's investigative powers by allowing
the F.B.I., without a judge's approval, to demand that companies turn over
records related to terrorism suspects.

Investigators can obtain business records only if they believe the material they
are seeking is relevant to a foreign intelligence investigation. The revised
legislation would allow individuals from companies served with such an order to
challenge it.

A separate provision would allow investigators, while looking into foreign-based
terrorists suspects, to obtain orders for wiretaps, searches and records even if
the only purpose for obtaining the information was to pursue a criminal
prosecution. Under the current law, such privileges are generally granted only
if the information is related to a foreign intelligence investigation.

Senator John D. Rockefeller IV, a West Virginia Democrat who is the vice
chairman of the committee, voted for the legislation, saying that the Patriot
Act powers are critical tools in the fight against terrorism.

But he said in a statement issued Tuesday evening that he objected to some of
the proposed expansions of investigative powers and would continue to work to
try to revise the bill.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); US PATRIOT ACT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (78%);
APPROVALS (78%); ESPIONAGE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); WIRETAPPING
(73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); EVIDENCE (68%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation;
Search and Seizure

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (57%) Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: JAY ROCKEFELLER (57%) Eric Lipton

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1187 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Provisional Release For Kosovar

BYLINE: By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 122 words


Ramush Haradinaj, a former guerrilla fighter who until his surrender to the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in March as a war crimes suspect was the
prime minister of Kosovo, will be allowed to return to Kosovo immediately until
the start of his trial, expected in 2007. Mr. Haradinaj, 36, is a former Kosovo
Liberation Army chief and the most senior Kosovar to be indicted by the
tribunal. The judges who granted his release forbade him to participate in
politics or to make public appearances for the first 90 days after his return.
Prosecutors had tried to block his return, arguing that in recent trials held in
Kosovo involving former guerrillas, witnesses there have been intimidated, and
some killed.   Marlise Simons (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); POLITICS (88%); PRIME MINISTERS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts;
Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (58%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Ramush Haradinaj

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1188 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecuting Charles Taylor

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 315 words


Charles Taylor has done for West Africa what Slobodan Milosevic did for the
former Yugoslavia. Yet while Mr. Milosevic is on trial in The Hague on charges
including genocide, Mr. Taylor, Liberia's former president, is enjoying the lush
life in a Nigerian government guesthouse.

When Mr. Taylor was under siege by rebel forces in 2003, the United States,
Britain and Nigeria arranged for him to get asylum in Nigeria, figuring that his
quick exile would cut down on the bloodshed. So Nigeria gave Mr. Taylor a safe
harbor on the condition that he stop behaving as West Africa's warlord in chief.

It was not a perfect solution. The Nigerians interpreted the deal as preventing
them from turning Mr. Taylor over to a United Nations-backed war crimes court,
where Mr. Taylor is wanted on 17 counts of crimes against humanity.

A new report by the Coalition for International Justice, however, supports the
argument that Mr. Taylor can be prosecuted because his crimes are continuing. He
is using cellphones, computers and the visits of his many lieutenants to
destabilize Liberia, influence the coming elections there and build a regional
army. He is even accused of attempting to assassinate the president of Guinea.
Nigeria now must do what American troops should have done in 2003: turn him over
to the Special Court.

African leaders, mindful that their hands are less than clean, are nervous about
turning over a former fellow president to a serious tribunal. The United States
had also not pushed Nigeria until recently. Late last month, Washington endorsed
surrendering Mr. Taylor, based on the new information that he is still an active
threat. Washington has spent some $800 million on the Special Court and on
attempts to rebuild Liberia. Neither effort will fully succeed until Charles
Taylor is behind bars.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ARMIES
(77%); ASSASSINATION (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (71%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (71%); ARMED FORCES (66%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (52%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Charles Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFRICA (94%); LIBERIA (94%);
WESTERN AFRICA (93%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); GUINEA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1191 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: Washington Resuming Aid

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 119 words


The United States lifted a five-month-old freeze on a $10 million aid package.
The resumed aid follows the Serbian government's improved cooperation with the
international war crimes tribunal in The Hague. In recent months, the government
has helped send 12 suspects to the court. In announcing the aid resumption, R.
Nicholas Burns, the under secretary of state for political affairs, who is on a
visit to Belgrade, said he believed that Serbia was seriously working to track
down one of the tribunal's most wanted fugitives, Ratko Mladic. General Mladic,
the former Bosnian Serb military chief, is wanted on charges of genocide in the
killing of more than 7,000 Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995.   Nicholas Wood (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(88%); BUDGETS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); POLITICS (69%); RELIGION (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; Finances; Budgets and
Budgeting; Politics and Government  ; Foreign Aid; Assets, Frozen

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); SERBIA (94%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; United States

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1194 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why So Slow to Act?

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 107 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Uncover Your Eyes,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, June 7):

The unceasing efforts by Mr. Kristof and others to get President Bush to take
concrete steps to stop the genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan will succeed,
I hope, before thousands more are killed, raped or mutilated.

If and when this happens, and considering the Bush administration's slow,
reluctant or half-hearted responses to other humanitarian crises and disasters,
one question will sadly persist: Why does this administration have to be
consistently pushed, cajoled and, yes, shamed into doing the right thing?

Dorian de Wind
Austin, Tex., June 7, 2005

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%) Dorian De Wind; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1197 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2005 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

War on Terror Dominates Talks Given at Graduations

BYLINE: By SAM DILLON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Commencement Speeches; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 3443 words


Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton addressed an audience of graduates in New
Haven this spring as ''you who entered Yale as the twin towers fell.'' Many
other commencement speakers, including Tom Hanks, also emphasized that this
year's graduating class was the first whose entire university career unfolded in
the post 9-11 world.

''None of you were untouched by the events in September of your freshmen year,
none unaffected by the ideological movements of local and geopolitics since,''
Mr. Hanks told Vassar graduates.

The Sept. 11 attacks and the war on terrorism dominated speeches again on
hundreds of college campuses this spring as an estimated a million students who
were freshmen in 2001 received their diplomas.

At Texas A&M, Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, who until last summer served as the top
commander in Iraq, compared the challenges posed by the war on terror to those
that face corporate, judicial and academic leaders. Vice President Dick Cheney
drew cheers at the Air Force Academy when he said, ''This is a war we are
winning.''

Many other speakers warned of the erosion of civility, loss of political
liberties and outright threats to the rule of law that have emerged over the
last four years.

''I can never remember a time in my life when people were so afraid to speak
out,'' said James McBride, an author and jazz musician who addressed Pratt
University graduates. ''I can never remember a time when you were actually
afraid to ask someone what political party they belong to, or who they voted
for.''

The speakers this year included the usual eclectic lineup of politicians,
including media stars like Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, who spoke at several
commencements, and Senator John McCain, who spoke at the University of Oklahoma,
as well as dozens of obscure state representatives who spoke at remote community
colleges; poets like Edwin Hirsch; scientists like Jane Goodall; dozens of
clergy members; the former astronaut Neil Armstrong; and at least one cook,
Mario Batali. Foreign heads of state this year included President Ricardo Lagos
of Chile, who spoke at Duke, and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, who
addressed Boston University graduates under the watchful eyes of Secret Service
sharpshooters on nearby rooftops.

President Bush addressed two graduation ceremonies, offering significantly
different messages. At Calvin College, a Christian institution in Michigan, he
praised community groups across America that bring ''people together for the
common good'' and urged graduates to work in them to strengthen grass-roots
democracy. At the Naval Academy, he said that the Pentagon's extraordinary new
weapons systems were ''transforming war in our favor.'' He urged the graduating
midshipmen not only to fight the terrorists but also to help ''transform our
military for the 21st century, so we can deter and defeat the new adversaries
who may threaten our people in the decades ahead.''

Not all speakers, of course, dwelt on terrorism. Many speeches were feel-good
exercises dominated by homilies and truisms.

''The point of a commencement speech is to congratulate you, your parents, and
all those who have supported you,'' said Stephen G. Breyer, the Supreme Court
justice, in his address to New School University in New York City. ''A
graduation speaker also should tell a joke, give advice, make a prediction,
express a hope.''

Chris Matthews, the host of MSNBC's ''Hardball'' program, combined advice and
humor. He counseled students to travel widely before settling down, and he
recalled how he once heard Nelson Mandela ''tell a story of the first Christmas
eve, how St. Joseph begged the innkeeper for a room.''

''My wife is pregnant, really pregnant.''

''It's not my fault,'' barked the innkeeper.

St. Joseph answered, ''It's not my fault either.''

Here are other excerpts:

Samuel W. Bodman
Energy Secretary
Georgia Institute of Technology

 After so many years of American dominance in science and technology, the rest
of the world is clearly starting to catch up. Countries like China and India,
which have been sending their best and brightest students to study in America,
are now working to keep more of their young scholars at home. They are building
their own networks of fine research universities, and forging their own
partnerships with government and private industry, and establishing their own
high-tech communities.

And while fewer students from overseas are coming to study physics and computer
science and engineering at American schools, ever fewer U.S. students are
choosing to enter these critical areas of study as well. This should be a
serious concern for every member of this faculty, for every corporate executive
who needs a high-tech workforce, and for people like the secretary of energy,
who has to make sure that we have enough good engineers and scientists working
in our national laboratories, universities and other institutions. Clearly, one
of this nation's urgent challenges in the coming years is rekindling an interest
in math and science among our young people.

Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez
Former Top Commander in Iraq
Texas A&M University

 The great leader is one who is willing to ''lead under fire.'' Now you may
think, ''Hey I am not going to be a soldier, so I won't be on any battlefield.''
But wait a minute, every profession has its battlefields -- the courtroom, the
classroom, the boardroom -- and for the soldier it is the killing fields. You
will immediately find yourself in your chosen profession's battlefield facing
challenges that parallel what I face as a professional warrior -- leading units
and individual soldiers under very tough conditions to accomplish missions
critical to the survival of our institution under austere, expeditionary and
uncertain conditions. That is when a leader must step forward and lead -- our
ethics mandate it and our subordinates expect it.

Tom Hanks
Actor
Vassar College

 Smart folks concocted a computer simulation of gridlock to determine how many
cars should be taken off the road to turn a completely jammed and stilled
highway into a free-flowing one. The results were startling. Four cars needed to
be removed four cars out of each one hundred. Call it the Power of Four. If
merely four people out of a hundred can make gridlock go away by choosing not to
use their car, imagine the other changes that can be wrought just by four of us
out of a hundred. Take a hundred musicians in a depressed port city in Northern
England, choose John, Paul, George and Ringo and you have ''Hey Jude.'' Take a
hundred computer geeks in Redmond, Wash., send 96 of them home and the remainder
is called Microsoft. Take the Power of Four and apply it to any and every area
of your concern. Politics: Four votes swung from one hundred into another
hundred is the difference between gaining control and losing clout. Culture: two
ticket buyers out of fifty can make a small, odd film profitable.

George W. Bush
President
Annapolis Naval Academy

 Revolutionary advances in technology are transforming war in our favor. And in
the decades ahead, the changes will be even more dramatic. ... These
technological advances will put unprecedented agility, speed, precision, and
power in your hands, and you will use them to protect the American people in the
dangerous decades ahead. ... Technology changes the balance of war in another
important way: We can now strike our enemies with greater effectiveness, at
greater range, with fewer civilian casualties. In this new era of warfare, we
can target a regime, not a nation, and that means terrorists and tyrants can no
longer feel safe hiding behind innocent life. In the 21st century, we can target
the guilty and protect the innocent, and that makes it easier to keep the peace.


Eli Pariser
Executive Director, MoveOn.org
Simon's Rock College of Bard

 The case for the way we do business in the present is weak, and anyone who
tells you otherwise is trying to sell you something. Some of them are simply
folks who benefit from stasis. But then there are the powerful people. And
people who are in power seek to magnify their importance, and there's no greater
way to do that than to paint the present as an outstanding victory, the happy
ending to a long and harrowing story. And why does this matter? Because if
there's someone competent in the driver's seat, then we can sit back, relax and
watch the scenery go by. But if the world we're given is flawed, we've got to do
something about it. If we're in a car that's headed over a precipice and there's
no one at the wheel, someone had better grab the steering wheel before we go
over the edge.

Margaret H. Marshall
Chief Justice, Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
Brandeis University

 Seldom have I felt as concerned for the rule of law. Prominent elected
officials, and others, talk openly about the need to punish judges -- and that
is their word, ''punish'' -- for making unpopular decisions. Judges are
threatened with impeachment for ruling to uphold constitutional rights of
disfavored minorities, or for striking down laws of Congress. Proposals are
advanced to strip courts of jurisdiction to hear certain kinds of cases, to deny
courts the ability to review even constitutional claims. A prominent Congressman
endorses a campaign, in the word of its sponsors, to ''save America from the
judges.''  I worry when judicial independence is seen as a problem to be solved,
and not a value to be cherished.  Respect for the rule of law is deeply embedded
in our American experience. But it is not imbedded in our DNA. Each new
generation must decide, each of you must decide, whether to embrace, to protect
the rule of law or to repudiate it. And make no mistake, inaction and
indifference are acts of repudiation.

Mario Batali
Chef
Rutgers College

 Pay attention to the truth. It's not an intellectual thing. It's a gut thing.
My truth is that I love real, honest, passionate, intense experiences.
Experiences that don't apologize for themselves or claim to be something they
aren't. You want a recipe? Boil some spaghetti in well-salted water. While
you're doing that, heat up some good extra-virgin olive oil in a skillet and
throw in some thin slices of garlic and some red pepper flakes. When the pasta's
cooked, toss it in the skillet. Throw in some chopped parsley and a little of
the pasta water. Toss it around. Put it on a plate. Grate some Parmigiano
Reggiano on top. Congratulations, dude. You've just made spaghetti all'aglio e
olio. One of the greatest simple truths of humankind -- and a damn good
emergency dinner. That's a recipe. It's an idea. It's a dish. It's an icon. It's
an experience. It's not rules. And as you cook up your life, I hope you never
let anyone else's recipe for success intimidate you or get in your way. Rules
are overrated.

Dr. Jane Goodall
Primatologist, Founder Jane Goodall Institute
Rutgers University

 When I was about 10 years old I found the books about Tarzan and fell in love
madly with this glorious lord of the jungle. That was when my dream
crystallized. Everybody laughed at me but eventually I got to Africa. And over
the 45 years of study, the most striking thing is we now know how like us
chimpanzees are. We even share 99 percent of the composition of our DNA with
them. Their brain is more like ours than that of any other living creature. They
have intellectual capabilities that we used to think unique to us. Nonverbal
communication, kissing, embracing, holding hands, patting on the back,
swaggering, shaking the fist, throwing rocks. Family bonds that persist
throughout life, and life can be over 60 years. We realize there is no sharp
line dividing us from the rest of the animal kingdom, it's a very blurry line.
And it leads to a new respect, not only for these chimpanzees, but the other
amazing animals with whom we share this planet.

Amy Gutmann
President, University of Pennsylvania
Wesleyan University

 Mutual respect is the lifeblood of democracy. The signs of disrespect are all
around us. In the ferocious assault on the judiciary. In the shrill debate over
Terri Schiavo. And worst of all, in the hateful ad hominem attacks that issue
daily from the radio and TV talk shows. We are living in a smash-mouth culture
in which extremists dominate public debate to the point of hijacking it. You
cannot have a reasoned discussion about abortion when one side is slandered as
''baby-killers'' and the other side is smeared as ''religious wing nuts.'' It is
hard to pursue a reasoned debate about the Iraqi war when opponents of the war
are accused of treason and the president of the United States is compared to
Hitler. Reach across the aisle, pursue collaborative solutions, or explore the
shades of gray on any charged issue, and you are likely to be ignored or
dismissed as indecisive. That's if you're lucky. More likely, you will endure
crude and often malicious attacks on your intelligence, faith and patriotism.
You may even face death threats.

Barack Obama
United States Senator from Illinois
Knox College

 There are those who believe that the best idea is to give everyone one big
refund on their government -- divvy it up into individual portions, hand it out,
and encourage everyone to use their share to go buy their own health care, their
own retirement plan, their own child care, education and so forth. In
Washington, they call this the Ownership Society. But in our past there has been
another term for it -- Social Darwinism, every man and woman for him or herself.
This isn't us. This isn't how our story ends -- not in this country. America is
a land of big dreamers and big hopes.  So let's dream. Let's imagine what we can
do to give every American a fighting chance in the 21st century.  Every one of
us will have to work more, read more, train more, think more. We will have to
slough off bad habits -- like driving gas guzzlers that weaken our economy and
feed our enemies abroad. Our kids will have to turn off the TV sets and put away
the video games and start hitting the books. We will have to reform
institutions, like our public schools, that were designed for an earlier time.
Republicans will have to recognize our collective responsibilities, even as
Democrats recognize that we have to do more than just defend the old programs.

John Payton
Civil rights Lawyer
Pomona College

 It is now conventional to talk about how Sept. 11 changed everything. This is
often said with a tone of ''it is time to set aside foolish causes like human
rights and turn to serious causes like national security.'' I think that is the
wrong point. We all felt the sense of unity that first characterized the
response to September 11. We need that strength to make sure that the things
that define us as a society are not compromised and lost.

John Ashcroft
Former Attorney General
Northwest University

 Thank you. Thank you for standing up, and thank you for sitting back down. You
don't know how many times in politics a standing ovation is a cover for a mass
exodus. I want to thank each and every one of you who took time to pray for me.
I deeply appreciate your prayers. The Apostle Paul in writing to a friend of his
a couple thousand years ago -- aren't you glad that we didn't have the Internet
back then, it would have all been lost in deleted e-mail. But he said, ''I
exhort you therefore to pray one for another, for kings and for all who are in
authority that we might lead quiet and peaceful lives in all godliness and
honesty.'' What a tremendous exhortation to pray for each other and to pray for
those, especially those in authority!

Doris Haddock
''Granny D,'' Unsuccessful 2004 Candidate for Senate
Hampshire College

 Not long ago I read from the Declaration of Independence in the Capitol Rotunda
in Washington. I was arrested and jailed for doing so. As I thought that was a
violation of my free speech rights under the Constitution, I went back and read
from the Bill of Rights. That landed me in jail, too. I felt freer in that jail,
because I had spoken out as a free person, than I have ever felt in the open
air. And I am not finished being a free American, whatever happy costs await me.
I do not know what is in store for you. But I know that courage is freedom, and
freedom is joy.

James McBride
Writer, Composer
Pratt University

 If I were 21 I would walk the earth. I would go barefoot longer; I'd learn how
to throw a Frisbee, I'd go braless if I were a woman and I would wear no
underwear if I were a man. I'd play cards and wear the same pair of jeans until
they were so stiff they could get up and strut around the room by themselves. So
don't take the short road. Fool around. Have fun. You're not going to get this
time back. Don't panic and go to graduate school and law school. This nation has
enough frightened, dissatisfied yuppies living in gated communities, driving
S.U.V.'s and wondering where their youth went.

We need you to walk the earth, so that other nations can see the beauty of
American youth, rather than seeing our young in combat fatigues behind the
barrel of an M-16.

Marian Wright Edelman
Founder, Children's Defense Fund
Colgate University

 The new racism that is seeping up across our land is wrapped up in new
euphemisms, in budget technicalities, in judicial and criminal justice choices,
in racial disparities in health and in education. Frederick Douglass warned us
it is still the same old snake. I am deeply concerned that the black preschool
boy today, born in 2001, has a one-in-three chance of going to prison before he
reaches 30, that we've got 58,000 black males in prison and fewer of them --
40,000 -- who graduate from college each year. A cradle-to-prison pipeline
threatens decades of hard-earned civil rights progress for poor children,
especially poor males of color.

Rochelle B. Lazarus
Chief Executive, Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide
Smith College

 I never set out to be a role model, to get to the corner office, or to have a
big career -- or any career for that matter. After Smith, the only reason I went
on to get an M.B.A. from Columbia was because I needed a job and I heard that if
a woman had an M.B.A. they probably wouldn't make her type, which is what you
had to do starting out in the commercial world at the time if you were a woman.
By the way, this was only a hypothesis, not proven fact. There weren't enough
women M.B.A.'s to know if they would still make you type even if you had the
degree. I needed a job to make money so I could get married and George and I
could eat. Simple as that. And I didn't want to type.

Arnold Palmer
Golfer
Wake Forest University

 You must know that many adults of my generation despair of your generation. All
too often in my primary field of endeavor -- sports -- the headlines go to the
players who defy authority and misbehave on and off the field, players who
showboat and show up others. Instead, those who should be recognized more often
are the fine athletes who are also fine citizens and role models for the
youngsters following in their footsteps.

James Towey
Director, White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
Catholic University of America

 A scientist at Stanford University, a Nobel Prize winner no less, who
successfully placed human cells in mice, recently announced that he now wants to
create mice with entirely human brains. I am not making this up. This should
alarm us all. Sixty years ago, the essayist E.B. White once spoke of the dangers
that arise when man plays God. He described it as man ''stealing God's stuff.''
This morning we must ask ourselves: When we play creator and mix mice and men;
when we tamper with the institutions of marriage and family; when we calibrate
whose lives are worth living and whose are not; and when we discount the lives
of our poor, are we not playing God?

Bill Moyers
Journalist
Graduate Center, City University of New York

 The web of cooperation is under siege. A profound transformation is occurring
in America as the balance between wealth and the commonwealth is threatened by
that ''winner-take-all'' ideology. From public schools and universities to
public lands and other natural resources, from the media with their broadcast
and digital spectrums to scientific discovery and medical breakthroughs -- and
to politics itself -- a broad range of the American commons is undergoing a
powerful shift away from public responsibility and obligation to private control
and exploitation. This is no ordinary time. You are leaving here as the basic
constitutional principles of America are under assault -- an independent press
and judiciary, the separation of church and state, progressive taxation and the
social contract. You are going to be needed if we are to recover America as a
shared project.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 15, 2005



CORRECTION: A collection of excerpts on Sunday from this season's commencement
speeches misstated the name of the institution where the writer and composer
James McBride spoke. It is Pratt Institute, not Pratt University. The excerpt
from remarks by Marian Wright Edelman included an erroneous figure, from Colgate
University's text, for the number of black males in American prisons. In 2002,
it was 580,000, not 58,000.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Tom Hanks with Frances Daly Fergusson, president of Vassar
College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., during the procession into graduation ceremonies
there. Mr. Hanks gave the commencement speech to the graduating class, which
included his daughter, Elizabeth. (Photo by Kathy McLaughlin/Poughkeepsie
Journal, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (91%); TERRORISM (91%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
GRADUATION (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); COLLEGES
& UNIVERSITIES (90%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (78%); COMMUNITY COLLEGES (78%); AIR FORCES (75%); HIJACKING (75%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (74%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); US
PRESIDENTS (72%); POLITICS (72%); RULE OF LAW (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(72%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (70%); COMMUNITY ACTIVISM (67%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); POETRY (64%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (64%);
RELIGION (61%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%) Colleges and Universities; TERRORISM;
PENTAGON BUILDING; Colleges and Universities; WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC); AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES; HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: AIR FORCE ACADEMY (55%)

PERSON: TOM HANKS (91%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (74%);
ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON (74%); DICK CHENEY (54%); JOHN MCCAIN (51%); HAMAD KARZAI
(51%) Sam Dillon; GEORGE W (PRES) BUSH; Ricardo S (Lt Gen) Sanchez; Tom Hanks;
Barack (Sen) Obama; Jane Goodall; John Ashcroft; Bill Moyers

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (73%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);
CONNECTICUT, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1200 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Videotape of Serbian Police Killing 6 Muslims From Srebrenica Grips Balkans

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD; Marlise Simons contributed reporting from The Hague
for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: SPIONICA, Bosnia, June 9


Safeta Muhic is glued to her television set, feverishly flicking channels for
another chance to see Serbian gunmen killing her brother.

''That's my brother falling down there,'' she says, catching the tail end of a
short video clip played over some news headlines.

The grainy footage shows a thin teenager with hands tied behind his back
stepping in front of a gunman dressed in black. He walks forward in silence, and
then two bursts of automatic rifle fire hit his back and he flops to the ground.

Her brother, Safet Fejzic, went missing in July 1995, when he was 16 and in
Srebrenica. He was thought to be among about 7,000 Muslim men and boys massacred
by Bosnian Serb and Serbian forces at the tail end of the war in Bosnia.

But Ms. Muhic, a 23-year-old mother of two, did not know the full details of his
death until this month, after the emergence of a videotape showing the killing
of her brother and five other Muslim men. Initially stunned by what she saw, she
now says she cannot help but try to see his last few moments again and again.

For more than a week now, the video, filmed by a member of the Serbian police
unit that committed the killings, has been repeatedly shown on television in
countries throughout the Balkan region. It was first shown in court on June 1,
during the war crimes trial of former President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia. In
Bosnia, the tape has again brought the pain of that time to the surface for
families like Ms. Muhic's. But it may be having an equally profound effect in
Serbia, where the public has been reluctant to accept that their forces could
have been involved in war crimes.

Since then, reporting about the video has dominated mainstream news media.
Analysts say the cassette is the most significant piece of evidence to shape
Serbian public opinion since the end of the Balkan wars of the 1990's. Usually
only the country's more liberal news outlets carry reports about possible
Serbian war crimes, but state-run television and all the national newspapers
have carried pictures and articles about the killings.

One newspaper, Blic, published an article about the shock the videotape had
caused among families of the police unit. The report said one girl had seen the
tape on television and recognized her father among the killers. It quoted her
mother as saying, ''Since then, she has not spoken a single word. She has just
wept.''

''This tape has definitely had more exposure to the public than anything else I
can remember,'' said Svetlana Logar, a polling expert for Strategic Marketing
Research, based in Belgrade. Her company is conducting an opinion poll that will
be released next week on reaction to the videotape.

While most foreign observers regard Serbia and Bosnia's Serb leadership as the
main perpetrators of war crimes in that era, polls consistently show that most
Serbs regard themselves as the main victims of the war. Those accused of war
crimes are often presented as national heroes by the news media and the
government.

After the tape's emergence, President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav
Kostunica of Serbia swiftly condemned the killings. Serbian authorities say five
men shown on the videotape have been arrested, including the unit's commander,
Slobodan Medic, known as Boca, and the police are searching for four more.

Throughout the 12-minute section of videotape that features the six prisoners,
their captors joke and show no hesitation. The executions appear methodical. The
four youngest prisoners are lined up, then walk forward to be shot, one by one.
The two remaining prisoners, perhaps in their early 30's, are then ordered to
drag the bodies to a nearby building, where they, too, are shot. Only one of
them talks during the episode, to ask for some water. The cameraman takes care
to film the bullets as they enter the bodies, including final shots to the head
after they have fallen to the ground.

While watching the video, Ms. Muhic recognized her brother as he was ordered to
get down from a military truck at the start of the section showing the
prisoners. Why couldn't the cameraman have intervened to save someone? she
asked, not knowing that he was also a unit member.

''I would like them to pay for what they have done,'' she said. ''I would like
their families to feel the same pain that we have felt.''

Her brother's remains were recovered in 1999 and identified in 2003. But she
still had no idea how he had been killed.

Ms. Logar says the message is coming at a critical time, because people were not
talking about the war crimes and younger Serbians were not hearing about them.

''No one is talking here about the facts, whether or not you call them war
crimes or not. People are forgetting, and few people are aware,'' she said in an
interview. ''Instead, politicians talked about indicted persons and whether or
not they should be transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal.''

Ljiljana Smajlovic, a political commentator and writer for the weekly magazine
Nin in Belgrade, said the tape had brought a sincere sense of outrage in Serbia.
She also said the tape may provide momentum for the arrest of one of The Hague's
leading war crime suspects and the man suspected of orchestrating the Srebenica
massacre, General Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serb army at the
time.

Apart from the shock caused by the videotape, closer scrutiny of the unit behind
the killings has also undercut the popular image many Serbians have held of
their fighters, who have often been praised as valiant defenders of the
homeland.

That view is born out in the killing tape and in another tape of the unit that
is making the rounds on Serbian television. Both begin with a Serbian Orthodox
priest blessing the forces and saying, ''The Turks are rising again. They come
to take our sacred places,'' a reference to Serbia's former occupation by the
Muslim-dominated Ottoman Empire. After the video emerged, the Orthodox Church
condemned the killings.

The unit involved in the taped killings, called the Scorpions, was formed in
1991, at the start of Serbia's war with Croatia. Its official purpose was
guarding Slavonian oil centers. But in operation, said the chief Serbian war
crimes prosecutor, Vladimir Vukcevic, ''they were organized ad hoc to do dirty
work.''

Over the next decade, the group fought in Bosnia between 1992 and 1995 and in
Kosovo in 1999, by which time it had been incorporated into the Serbian police
service.

In addition to the men now being sought in the videotaped incident, another
former member is on trial in the killing of 14 people, including seven children
in Podujevo, a town in Kosovo, in 1999.

While the tape has brought outrage, it has also brought defensiveness. In Sid, a
town in northwestern Serbia that is the home of most of the men shown taking
part in the killing, many people expressed ambivalence. ''Maybe the tape was
doctored,'' said a betting shop worker, 29, who refused to give his name. ''You
don't know what those Muslims had done, either. It was war. You can't put all
the blame on one side.''

The tabloid Nacional echoed that sentiment, publishing a front-page picture on
Thursday of what it said was a Serbian soldier being executed by a Muslim. The
headline read, ''Here's a Serb.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Safeta Muhic, with a photomontage of her family, learned of the
death of her brother, top left, when she saw a video of the police killing him.
(Photo by Nicholas Wood for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (78%); MEN (74%); RELIGION (74%);
GENOCIDE (74%); LIBERAL MEDIA (73%); EVIDENCE (72%); NEWS BRIEFS (72%); POLICE
FORCES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); POLLS & SURVEYS (69%); MARKET
RESEARCH (62%); MARKET RESEARCH & ANALYSIS (62%); COMPANY STRATEGY (60%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Recordings (Video); Television

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%);
MONTENEGRO (79%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (58%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Srebrenica (Bosnia);
Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1203 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Women Defy Authority to Protest Sex Discrimination

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, June 12


Hundreds of women staged an unauthorized demonstration in Tehran on Sunday,
protesting sex discrimination under Iran's Islamic leadership just days before
the June 17 presidential election.

The protest was the first public display of dissent by women since the 1979
revolution, when the new leadership enforced obligatory veiling. ''We are women,
we are the children of this land, but we have no rights,'' they chanted. More
than 250 marched outside Tehran University, and about 200 others demonstrated
two blocks away after hundreds of riot police officers prevented them from
joining the main protest.

There were reports that the police had clubbed several women, though there were
no hospital reports of injuries. Demonstrators said they had seen some women
being detained and dragged away by officers. But the situation appeared to
stabilize, and after about an hour of demonstrating, the women disbanded without
further incident.

''We will continue such protests because it shows that women are aware of their
rights,'' said Roohi Afzal, 52, a translator who was at the protest. ''It seems
that our presence today really hurts the government, that it has deployed so
many forces. Maybe it will react and respond to our demands.''

The demonstrations were part of a recent push by women's rights advocates in
Iran to draw attention to their cause during a time of relative tolerance by the
government as it seeks to draw more voters to the polls.

Iranian women have turned out in great numbers in elections over the past two
decades, often strongly supporting candidates who have promised more rights. But
many advocates now say that they have given up hope that any president could
change their status under the current constitution. And women are signaling that
they are tired of being courted with promises of improved status that are
quickly forgotten once the election is over.

The hard-line Guardian Council, dominated by six unelected clerics and six
judges, last month rejected on the basis of their sex 89 women who had
registered to run for president. The move was greeted with outrage, leading to
at least one call for a boycott, though it was carefully worded. Zahra Eshraghi,
the granddaughter of the leader of the 1979 Islamic revolution, Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini, said in an interview that working on women's issues has been
very difficult because women did not feel safe to criticize the laws. ''There
are certain things that are considered as crimes although the situation is
gradually changing,'' she said.

However, the more tolerant conditions that have appeared as the election nears
have allowed women to express their criticism more than any time since the
revolution. The mood was reflected in a meeting with a reformist candidate,
Mostafa Moin, two weeks ago and another meeting last week.

At the first meetings, Ms. Eshraghi said that candidates who promised to improve
women's status must clarify how they could bring any changes as long as the
country was ruled by Islamic law, or Shariah. Iranian law stipulates that the
value of a woman's life or her testimony in court is half that of a man's.
Iranian men can marry up to four wives and have the right to divorce any of them
at will. A woman inherits half of the share of her brothers and needs her
husband's permission to work outside the home or to leave the country. Women are
rarely promoted to high positions, and despite their relatively high levels of
education, they make up only 14 percent of government employees.

Mahboobeh Abbasgholizadeh, a feminist who was jailed for a month last fall,
apparently for her activities though no formal charges were announced, said,
''Women's rights will be fulfilled only when the constitution changes.''

A group of women activists forced their way into the Azadi Stadium to watch a
soccer game between Iran and Bahrain on Wednesday for the first time since the
Islamic revolution banned women from watching games at stadiums. They carried
signs that read, ''My right is also human rights,'' and ''Freedom, justice and
gender equality.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iranian women waving placards calling for gender equality
gathered yesterday in front of Tehran University. (Photo by Newsha
Tavakolian/Polaris, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); RELIGION (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); VOTERS &
VOTING (78%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); RIOTS
(75%); GRANDCHILDREN (71%); INTERVIEWS (68%) Elections; Women; Demonstrations
and Riots; Discrimination; Discrimination

PERSON: Nazila Fathi

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAN (92%)

REGION: Iran; Tehran (Iran)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1204 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Serb's Violent Past Catches Up With Him on Television

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: VUKOVAR, Croatia, Monday, June 13


Fourteen years on from a conflict that raged as Yugoslavia began to fall apart,
taking more than 200,000 lives with it, the destruction in this once pretty
Croatian region is still visible.

New and restored houses stand alongside overgrown ruins of once grand
19th-century buildings. Gleaming new roads lead through scrubland marked with
red tape and signs that warn of minefields.

The Serbs and Croats who rose up against one another here are living in their
old homes again, but with new neighbors: silent memories that few forget and
fewer discuss, haunting culpabilities that often fester unclaimed. The former
combatants, brutal in war, now try to lead very ordinary lives.

Take Slobodan Davidovic, an ethnic Serb, former waiter and part-time
construction worker from a small village to the south of Vukovar, about three
miles from the Serbian border.

Mr. Davidovic's war caught up with him this month in the most public of ways --
he appeared in a video shown on television networks throughout the Balkans.
There he is, dressed in black, wearing a beret, ordering fellow soldiers around
at the execution of six Muslim men and boys in Bosnia, some of the 7,000 from
the town of Srebrenica killed by Serb forces in July 1995. He was identified by
name by the Serbian police and by former members of his military unit.

The image is hard to match with the man living in the little village of Sidski
Banovci. He has been here on and off since the end of war, staying with his
elderly mother and brother in a small house off the village high street.
Neighbors describe him as a good man, intelligent and hard working.

Officially, he has been described by the Serbian police as being in hiding, one
of two suspects being sought in connection with the taped killings. But the
Croatian police had said they had no knowledge of any war crimes suspects
related to the video in their area. Five others have been arrested.

Approached outside a church on Sunday by a reporter and an interpreter, he
admitted his membership in the Scorpions, the Serbian police in the tape.

Yes, he said, he had seen the video. ''How could anybody not feel bad about what
was on that tape?'' he said, in Serbian. Pressed on whether he felt bad about
it, he answered, in English, ''Yes.''

Mr. Davidovic was one of dozens of men -- many of them members of the same
families -- who joined the Scorpions in 1991, when the fighting in this part of
Croatia was at a height. But eventually, the unit went to fight in Bosnia.
Later, it was incorporated into the Serbian police, and was sent to Kosovo. The
unit has been accused of killing 14 ethnic Albanians there, seven of them
children. It is described by Serbia's chief war crimes prosecutor as doing the
Serbian police's ''dirty work,'' and acted on the orders of Serbian state
security.

Of course, many things could not go back to even a surface of normality after
the war. Many of the returning Scorpions left Croatia when it returned to
Croatian control in 1997, moving to Sid, a town across the border in Serbia. But
Mr. Davidovic came home.

In the video, he commands younger soldiers, and orders the six Muslim prisoners
around. ''Come on, get down,'' he barks as they clamber down from a truck. ''Sit
on that side, sit there. Quickly!''

They are lying facedown in the dirt when he shouts a curse at them and says,
''Pray like that!'' One tries to talk to him, perhaps protesting his innocence,
and he retorts: ''Innocent! Innocent like I am!''

Finally, he emerges from a building where two prisoners were taken to be shot.

In and around Vukovar, the video is beginning to reverberate through those muted
wartime memories and arouse spirits that suddenly seem to recall their burdens.
And here, on each side, few take the easy recourse of blaming one small group of
men for actions that many hundreds and thousands of others probably took,
unfilmed.

Many Croats here know the Serbs in the videotape. They say they were ordinary
people. ''Small fish,'' said Mijo Djuric, a Croatian hospital worker from
Deletovci who grew up with several of those on the cassette. He said the
politicians in Belgrade and more senior military commanders were to blame.

A former member of the Scorpions, who was in Bosnia with Mr. Davidovic, now
lives in Sid. ''In war, men became animals,'' he said. ''We all did.'' He spoke
on condition that his name be withheld, out of fear of retribution. He said he
grew used to the sight of the unarmed and helpless being shot in cold blood. He
also said Serbs and Croats behaved the same way, around Vukovar and later in the
war. But the drive to simply get along, after the years of brutal war, is
powerful.

''We don't talk about the war,'' said Mijo Vrkasevic, a member of the ruling
Croatian Democratic Union who lives in Deletovci, a town near Sidski Banovci,
used by the Scorpions during the conflict as their headquarters. ''It could make
new problems. We have worked very hard on reconciliation in this area. It could
be damaged by this tape.''

Why and how a man might become a ruthless killer was difficult to explain
simply, he said. ''It depends on his education, childhood and what kind of
family he came from,'' he said. For the Serbs, he said, this is a difficult
time. ''It is hard especially for elderly people to know what their sons did
during the war.''

Excavating the past, he said, disrupts the attempts to move on.

''I believe that there are people hiding around here who have problems from the
past,'' he said, adding, ''It's not our business.''

So, in the little village on Sunday, before church, Mr. Davidovic was there,
helping the disabled local priest out of his car and into a wheelchair. After he
answered the few questions about his past, he said he did not want to talk any
further, and went inside, to attend the service.

Less than 24 hours later, the Croatian police, acting in response to questions
from Croatian reporters about the man in the videotape, went to the village of
Sidski Banovci and detained a man. The police released no name.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Slobodan Davidovic, top, is wanted by the Serbian police in the
killing of Muslim men and boys in Bosnia in 1995. In an image from a video
recorded at the time, above, Mr. Davidovic appears alongside prisoners. (Photo
by Nicholas Wood for The New York Times)
 (Photo by International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia)Map of
Croatia highlighting Vukovar: The Vukovar region is recovering from war, but
still bears its scars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
HISTORIC DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY
(72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); HOMICIDE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (67%); ARMED FORCES (66%); ARRESTS (65%); POLICE FORCES
(65%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (59%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Slobodan Davidovic

COUNTRY: CROATIA (97%); SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (95%); ALBANIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1205 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Washington: Gay Rights Group Reports Military Discharges

BYLINE: By John Files (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 123 words


The military discharged nine linguists and seven biological and chemical warfare
specialists for being gay last year, a gay rights group said. The group, the
Servicemembers Legal Defense Network, said the armed forces also discharged 40
health care professionals, 30 sonar and radar specialists and 20 combat
engineers. Gay rights advocates argue that the dismissals run counter to the
goals of the war on terrorism. A spokeswoman for the Pentagon declined to
comment. Congress required for the first time this year that each service branch
report detailed information on the demographics and specialties of all their
involuntarily discharged members, including the 653 the Pentagon said it fired
last year for being gay.   John Files (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (93%); LGBT RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); SONAR SYSTEMS (86%); TERRORISM (84%) United
States Armament and Defense; Homosexuality; Discrimination; Terrorism; Language
and Languages; Biological and Chemical Warfare

ORGANIZATION: SERVICEMEMBERS LEGAL DEFENSE NETWORK (91%) Servicemembers Legal
Defense Network

PERSON: John Files

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1206 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: War Crimes Prosecutor Resigns

BYLINE: By Marc Lacey (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 68 words


A prosecutor at the international court that is trying Rwandan war crimes
suspects in Tanzania resigned after court authorities learned that he had been
charged in his native South Africa with attempted murder and robbery, officials
said. The prosecutor, Bongani Dyani, was hired by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda in 2003, two years after the charges against him were filed.
Marc Lacey (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); RESIGNATIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LARCENY & THEFT (87%); GENOCIDE (86%);
MURDER (58%) Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; Murders and Attempted
Murders; Robberies and Thefts

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%)

PERSON: Marc Lacey; Bongani Dyani

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (93%); AFRICA (71%)

REGION: Rwanda; Tanzania; South Africa

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1209 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Mexico: Ex-President Can Be Charged

BYLINE: By Antonio Betancourt (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 117 words


The Supreme Court opened the way for a lower court to consider an indictment
against former President Luis Echeverria on genocide charges in the killings of
more than 30 student protesters in 1971. Three of the court's five justices
voted to overturn a lower-court ruling, saying the 30-year statute of
limitations for genocide charges had not expired because Mr. Echeverria enjoyed
immunity from prosecution until he left office in 1976. The decision is a major
victory for the special prosecutor's office created by President Vicente Fox,
Mexico's first opposition president, to investigate the most egregious abuses by
the long-governing Institutional Revolutionary Party.   Antonio Betancourt (NYT)



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(90%); POLITICS (90%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); LITIGATION (88%); VERDICTS (88%); HOMICIDE (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%);
IMMUNITY (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Politics and Government; Demonstrations and Riots; Decisions and
Verdicts; Immunity From Prosecution

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (57%) Antonio Betancourt; Luis Echeverria

COUNTRY: MEXICO (94%)

REGION: Mexico

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1213 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Apology Demanded For Remark on U.S.

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


Leading Republicans demanded an apology from Senator Richard J. Durbin on
Thursday, two days after he compared abusive treatment of prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay to the war crimes of oppressive regimes like the Nazis and the
Khmer Rouge.

Senator John W. Warner, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said that
relating the treatment of detainees under United States control ''to the
genocidal acts of murder and repression, to the Nazis or the Soviet gulags or
Pol Pot, I think is insulting to our men and women in uniform who are fighting
for the safety of all of us here at home.''

Speaking on the Senate floor on Tuesday, Mr. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, cited
an account from an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who witnessed
prisoners at the naval base being chained to their cells, deprived of water and
subjected to extreme temperatures. Mr. Durbin said the treatment was the sort
that could have been expected from the Nazi or Khmer dictatorships but not the
United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (88%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (88%);
WAR & CONFLICT (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); NAVIES (88%); ARMED FORCES (87%);
TERRORISM (59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%)

PERSON: RICHARD DURBIN (91%); JOHN WARNER (58%) Richard J (Sen) Durbin

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1217 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who We Are

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 648 words


For more than three and a half years since the terrorist attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon, Congress has been derelict in its duty to assert
control over the prison camps created by President Bush in the shadows beyond
the Constitution, the rule of law and a half-century of international laws and
treaties. So it was a relief to watch the hearing this week by Senator Arlen
Specter's Judiciary Committee on the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and to
hear Mr. Specter declare that it was time for Congress to do its job and bring
the American chain of prison camps under the law.

While the hearing was too long in coming, its timing was useful -- one day after
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who should have been fired for bungling the
Iraq war and for the prison abuse scandal, offered the bizarre declaration that
''no detention facility in the history of warfare has been more transparent''
than Guantanamo.

Mr. Rumsfeld seems to be confusing transparency with invisibility.

At the hearing, four military and civilian officials overseeing the processing
of prisoners at Guantanamo could not, or would not, provide the most basic
information -- such as how many detainees there are and what countries they came
from. Lt. Cmdr. Charles Swift, a military lawyer, later courageously testified
that he was assigned to represent one of the prisoners at Guantanamo, for the
sole purpose of extracting a guilty plea. He provided a written order that
contradicted the denials of the man who made the assignment, Brig. Gen. Thomas
Hemingway, who oversees the military tribunals Mr. Bush created after 9/11 to
screen selected prisoners away from public and judicial scrutiny.

William Barr, who was attorney general for President George H.W. Bush,
arrogantly dismissed the entire debate as a waste of time. ''Rarely have I seen
a controversy that has less substance behind it,'' said Mr. Barr, who was sent
by the administration to dilute a panel of critics of the prison policy.

But the hearing only confirmed the urgency of subjecting the post-9/11 detention
system to the rule of law -- starting with the president's legally dubious
invention of ''unlawful enemy combatant.'' J. Michael Wiggins, a deputy
associate attorney general, said the administration believed it could hold
anyone given that label ''in perpetuity'' without even filing charges. Excuse
us, Mr. Barr, but that sounds like something of great substance, especially
given how bad the administration is at telling actual villains from taxi drivers
who happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.

The administration should, as a first step, shut down the Guantanamo prison.
Beyond that, Mr. Specter was exactly right when he said Congress must establish
legal definitions of detainees from antiterrorist operations, enact rules for
their internment and determine their rights under the Geneva Conventions and
American law, including what sorts of evidence can be used against them. Those
steps would help fix a system in which prisoners have been declared enemy
combatants on the basis of confessions extracted under torture by countries
working in behalf of American intelligence.

The Bush administration says 9/11 changed the rules and required the invention
of new kinds of jails and legal procedures. Even if we accept that flawed
premise, it is up to Congress to make new rules in a way that upholds American
standards. The current setup -- in which politically appointed ideologues make
the rules behind closed doors -- has done immense harm to the nation's image and
increased the risk to every American in uniform.

A trial ''says as much about the society that holds the trial as it does about
the individual before it,'' Commander Swift reminded the Senate. ''Our trials in
the United States reflect who we are.''

The detention camps should meet no less of a standard.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); PRISONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); RULE OF
LAW (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); MILITARY BASES (77%); GUILTY PLEAS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); MILITARY COURTS (75%); SCANDALS (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); WAR CRIMES (73%); NAVIES (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); GENOCIDE (64%) Editorials; Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE H W BUSH (79%); ARLEN SPECTER (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (69%) Arlen
(Sen) Specter; Donald H (Sec) Rumsfeld; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1219 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: 20-Year Term In Massacre

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 145 words


A Serbian court sentenced a former paramilitary police officer to 20 years in
prison on Friday for his part in the killing of 14 Albanians -- seven of them
children -- during the 1999 conflict in Kosovo. The officer, Sasa Svejtan, was
given the maximum sentence for the shootings, which happened at the beginning
with Serbia's conflict with NATO in the province. Dejan Demirovic, another
member of the unit, known as the Scorpions, was also accused along with Mr.
Svejtan. He is in prison in Canada and is fighting extradition to Serbia. The
trial was seen as test of Serbia's ability to try war crimes when it began last
year, and the court found Mr. Svejtan guilty. But that verdict was overturned
this year by Serbia's Supreme Court over procedural irregularities. The court
reconfirmed the original verdict on Friday before sentencing Mr. Svejtan.
Nicholas Wood (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SENTENCING (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (90%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); GENOCIDE (73%); SUPREME COURTS
(73%) Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Sasa Svejtan

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); ALBANIA (93%); KOSOVO (93%);
EUROPE (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%); CANADA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Albania

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1221 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 19, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Housing Group Sees Bias With a Smile

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk; IN BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 818 words


ALMOST four decades after the passage of the federal Fair Housing Act and about
20 years after a federal judge found segregation in the Yonkers schools, the
illegal real estate practice of steering minority groups away from nonminority
neighborhoods persists, according to a study issued by Westchester Residential
Opportunities, a nonprofit housing agency in White Plains.

The difference between then and now, housing specialists said last week, is one
of degree. Today, they say, steering is accomplished with such adroitness that
African-Americans and Hispanics may not realize it is taking place.

''Until we had the results of this study, a lot of people felt that
discrimination was occurring, but it was hard to prove because in many cases it
was so subtle,'' said Toni Downes, executive director of the housing agency.
''Agents would say to some customers that there was nothing available, but
they'd say it so politely.''

Adam Glantz, a spokesman for the federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development office in New York, echoed that assessment, saying, ''We call it
discrimination with a smile.''

This month the White Plains agency identified five county real estate offices as
having discriminated in their treatment of black and Hispanic testers who posed
as hunters of rental apartments. They were Tri Crest in Eastchester, Main Source
in Dobbs Ferry, ERA Insite in White Plains, Century 21 Haviland in Mount
Pleasant and Coldwell Banker Carlson Real Estate in Bronxville.

HUD has referred the complaints to the State Division of Human Rights.

After an inquiry, said Denise Ellison, a spokeswoman for the division,
recommendations will be made to the state's Department of State. These can
include a maximum of $10,000 in punitive damages or even revocation of an
agent's or agency's license. Ms. Ellison would not specify under what
circumstances the department would recommend revoking a license.

Beyond the five agencies, two others, as yet unidentified, have been referred
directly to the Civil Rights Bureau of state Attorney General Eliot Spitzer's
office, which has the power to prosecute housing cases. Penalties could include
fines and orders to stop discriminating, said Dennis D. Parker, chief of the
Civil Rights Bureau.

Owners and managers of all the cited agencies denied the accusations. ''We never
treat anyone differently,'' said Fay Kallina, an owner of Century 21 Haviland.
''I have no idea what they're talking about.'' Lisa Omboni, the manager of Main
Source Realty, said the company had not been informed about the complaint.

Winston Ross, a longtime civil rights leader in the county, says that minority
groups are often subject to housing discrimination in Westchester, and that
checking for it is essential.

''We'd like to believe that discrimination has been successfully eradicated,''
said Mr. Ross, executive director of the Westchester Community Opportunity
Program, based in Elmsford. ''But the reality is that's not the case. You really
need to do testing to prove that it still takes place.''

Mr. Ross, who is on the Westchester Residential Opportunities' board of
directors, added that he was glad the agency had gone public with its findings.
As he put it, ''You have to ask yourself, 'Why aren't there more
African-Americans living in certain areas?'''

Westchester Residential Opportunities said it conducted 58 tests of 25 real
estate offices between July 2004 and February 2005.

Twenty-seven of those tests, involving 12 offices, showed ''at least some
unequal treatment of African-American and Hispanic testers ostensibly seeking
rental housing,'' the agency said. It pursued complaints against 7 of those 12
offices.

The tests were paired --involving both minority and white testers, presenting
themselves as having the same incomes, family characteristics and housing needs.
The pairs approached real estate offices advertising rentals in Eastchester,
Mount Pleasant and the Hudson River towns.

''Any inferior treatment of the minority tester was assumed to be based on
racial or ethnic discrimination,'' the group said. The $23,000 study was
financed partly by the attorney general's office and by Citigroup Foundation;
Westchester Residential Opportunities covered the rest of the costs.

The most blatantly unequal treatment, according to the study, occurred when a
real estate agent informed an African-American tester that the agency had
nothing to show. That occurred in the presence of a white tester who had just
been shown four apartments in the area -- and despite the fact that the
African-American had indicated he could afford the rents.

In addition to being illegal, housing discrimination forces many minority
workers to live outside the county -- and therefore look elsewhere for
employment, said Ms. Downes.

That results in racially skewed public school populations in predominantly white
communities, she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Coldwell Banker Carlson Real Estate in Bronxville, left, and
Century 21 Haviland in Mount Pleasant, below, are among companies accused of
discriminating against minority rental clients. (Photographs by Chris Maynard
for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); REAL PROPERTY LAW
(90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HOUSING
ASSISTANCE (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); EXECUTIVES (88%); JUDGES (78%); REAL
ESTATE AGENTS (77%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (77%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
(73%); PUNITIVE DAMAGES (73%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (72%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); LICENSES & PERMITS (68%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (61%); CITIES
(52%); DAMAGES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: CARLSON REAL ESTATE CO (54%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT (73%)

INDUSTRY: SIC6512 OPERATORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (54%)

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (51%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1222 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 19, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Thinking Behind a Close Look at a C.I.A. Operation

BYLINE: By Byron Calame

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; THE PUBLIC EDITOR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1427 words


A STRIKING number of readers have denounced The New York Times for describing
the Central Intelligence Agency's covert air operations for transporting
suspected terrorists in a Page 1 article on May 31.

The 2,900-word article focused on a C.I.A.-affiliated company, Aero Contractors
Ltd., whose planes are often used when the agency wants to grab a suspected
member of Al Qaeda overseas and deliver him to interrogators in another country.
The legal term for this is rendition, and the practical result is interrogation
in a country with looser rules on what constitutes torture. Given the heated
public debate over the rendition program, the article's detailed look at the
C.I.A. air operations was especially controversial.

The generally strident e-mail messages demanded to know why The Times had
decided to publish information that the readers believe will aid terrorists and
make life in the United States less safe for everyone -- especially the people
carrying out the operation. Most of them didn't seem to be aware that the
once-secret air operations had been mentioned in earlier articles and broadcasts
elsewhere.

So it seems like an apt time to explore with readers The Times's process for
handling covert intelligence stories as the war on terrorism continues. We'll
start with a fairly typical reader complaint letter, and then consider a
response prepared by one of the reporters and sent by the public editor's office
to most of the readers who wrote to us about the article. Finally, I'll offer
some comments from Times editors and my thoughts about the process.

A ''disgusted'' Matthew Mooney of Washington wrote this to me:

''I am writing today to register my deep disgust with [the] May 31 article,
'C.I.A. Expanding Terror Battle Under Guise of Charter Flights,' by Scott Shane,
Stephen Grey and Margot Williams. I find it absolutely reprehensible to publish
in the 'newspaper of record' identifying characteristics, information and
operations regarding the C.I.A.'s alleged air transport activities in the war on
terror.

''Exactly how does this serve the greater good, other than to attempt to derail
our nation's intelligence apparatus from conducting the missions given to it by
our president? Journalists often seek to hide behind the conceit of serving the
public by unearthing secret or buried information -- in this case, all you've
done is weaken our country, and this citizen repudiates your motives and
tactics.''

Here is reporter Scott Shane's response, initially written in reply to a
complaint sent directly to him, that's now gone out to Mooney and other
concerned readers:

''Your criticism of our article on C.I.A. air operations is a thoughtful one.
Writing about secret intelligence operations is always a balancing act, and
reasonable people can draw the line in different places as to how much the
citizens who pay for the intelligence agencies should be told about what those
agencies are doing.

''The C.I.A.'s practice of rendition has come to light almost exclusively
through analysis of the agency's air operations, starting with plane-spotting
hobbyists who routinely post airplane tail numbers and photos on the Web. Media
coverage of those rendition cases in many countries has started an important
debate about the wisdom and competence of the agency in carrying them out. But
no such debate could take place if the press did not aggressively seek to find
out what the agency is doing and inform the public about it.

''Perhaps it's the result of my having worked as a correspondent in the Soviet
Union for a few years, but I think there's a strong case that excessive
government secrecy leads to waste and abuse, and that an aggressive press
improves the effectiveness of intelligence agencies in the long run. In this
case, if reporters using public information can penetrate these air operations,
I suspect foreign intelligence services, or Al Qaeda operatives, would have
little difficulty doing so. Our story was based on information from public
F.A.A. and corporate records and F.A.A. flight plan data available to all from
commercial vendors. Before our story was published, the tail numbers, and
photographs, of several of the rendition planes could be found easily via a
Google search on the Web.

''In addition, a summary of the planned story was provided to the C.I.A. several
days prior to publication, and no request was made to withhold any of its
contents.

''Thank you for taking the time to write.''

Shane saved the best for last, it seems to me. The penultimate paragraph
reflects a crucial effort by The Times to give the C.I.A. a chance to alert the
paper to dangers the article could pose for intelligence sources or methods.

Shane told the C.I.A. public affairs department in several conversations over
the course of a month that The Times was pursuing the story, he told me in an
e-mail message. ''On the afternoon of Thursday, May 26, I sent them an e-mail of
several hundred words that included virtually all the facts we were planning to
print (all corporate names, details on the history of Aero Contractors, details
of arrests of Al Qaeda figures coinciding with flights, criticism of their 'bad
tradecraft'). On Friday afternoon, May 27, the chief spokeswoman, Jennifer
Millerwise, gave me a no comment, while assuring me that the information had
been seen by all the relevant officials.''

SENDING a detailed written summary of an article is a slightly unusual step.
Usually, the subject of a major investigative effort is provided a list of final
questions and a chance to answer them. Did providing the summary go too far? I
don't think so, given the possibility that two details that appear unrelated
could endanger the life of some intelligence agent. And it didn't give the
C.I.A. any veto power over the story.

Since the article was not published until five days after the summary was sent
to the agency, the C.I.A. had ample time to protest to the reporting team or to
top editors at The Times. But Jill Abramson, a managing editor who was among the
top editors who approved of pursuing the project and who later cleared it for
publication, said the C.I.A. never made even a ''request to discuss'' the
article before it was published. Nor have there been complaints from the agency
since the article was published, she said.

Why not? Without detracting at all from the value of the article, I think it's
fair to say it did not contain major revelations about previously unknown C.I.A.
programs or intelligence efforts. The article, noted Rebecca Corbett, a
Washington-based editor on the project, ''provided context for piecemeal reports
in The Times and elsewhere'' and was in some ways ''more explanatory than
investigative.''

The C.I.A. and other national security operations are not particularly bashful
about approaching The Times with concerns, according to Abramson, who was the
Washington bureau chief of The Times before she became a managing editor in
2003. Since 9/11, ''deep concerns'' about Times story projects have been raised
by intelligence agencies about a dozen times, she estimated. Often, she said,
officials argue that ''too much detail'' about sources and methods is something
that can endanger lives. Times editors are willing to ''reconsider and
re-evaluate'' whether details in stories serve a ''compelling public need'' or
are ''just details for detail's sake,'' she said. These pre-publication
discussions have led to some changes in some of the articles since 9/11, she
said, declining to be more specific.

One other point in Shane's letter that resonated with me is that if reporters
can get information, it's likely that any halfway competent enemy or opponent
can find it, too. That happens to be especially true in this case, where so much
of the tail-number information -- although not absolutely all -- is recorded in
public places.

Most of all, though, I think the worst fears of the Times readers who complained
about the Aero Contractors article should be eased by the assurance that the
C.I.A. had ample opportunity to challenge the publication and didn't do so. The
Times had solid reasons to believe it could give readers a broad picture of the
growing C.I.A. air operation supporting the rendition program -- without
hampering the war against terrorism. More broadly, I hope the glimpse into how
reporters and editors go about trying to balance the public's right to know and
the country's national security needs can offer all Times readers a better basis
on which to evaluate future stories of this kind.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); AIR
CHARTER SERVICES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); WAR &
CONFLICT (72%); JOURNALISM (71%); WRITERS (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%)
Terrorism; Torture; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; News and News Media

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); AL-QAEDA (83%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%) New York Times; Central Intelligence Agency; Al Qaeda (Terrorist
Group); New York Times

PERSON: Byron Calame; Scott Shane

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1223 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Basque Group Offers Partial Truce

BYLINE: By RENWICK McLEAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 299 words

DATELINE: MADRID, June 19


The militant Basque separatist group ETA announced a partial cease-fire on
Sunday, saying it would refrain from attacking elected politicians.

The announcement, published in the Basque newspaper Gara, appears to be a
response to Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero's recent offer to open
talks with the group if it agrees to give up violence.

Government officials, however, said the statement fell far short of meeting
their condition of renouncing violence.

''The only statement that we are waiting for is the one that says the violence
is over,'' said Jose Blanco, the secretary of the governing Socialist Party.

ETA's statement said the group had decided ''to cease armed activities'' against
elected politicians in Spain as of June 1. It suggested that the cease-fire was
temporary, and that its duration would depend on the government's response.

A spokeswoman for the Basque regional government, Miren Azkarate, said that the
announcement was a positive and hopeful step, but added that it did not go
nearly far enough. Besides politicians, ''groups such as businesspeople,
university professors, security forces, police and journalists continue to live
under threat,'' she said.

''Human rights,'' she added, ''are not things that someone can give you one day
and then take away the next day.''

ETA, which is considered a terrorist group by the United States and the European
Union, has killed more than 800 people since 1968 in its campaign for an
independent Basque state. It has not carried out a fatal attack in more than two
years, and is widely believed to be weaker than at any point in its history.

Mr. Zapatero's offer of dialogue, which was endorsed by Parliament a month ago,
has drawn sharp criticism from several victims' groups and from conservative
politicians.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BASQUE HOMELAND & FREEDOM (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); WRITERS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (77%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (76%); TERRORISM (73%); CONSERVATISM
(73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (52%) Basques  ;
Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Violence

ORGANIZATION: EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%) Eta
(Basque Separatist Group)

PERSON: JOSE LUIS RODRIGUEZ ZAPATERO (78%) Renwick Mclean

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

STATE: BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (97%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (55%)

REGION: Spain

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1224 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japan and South Korea Brace for a Tense Summit Meeting

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, June 19


After months of strained relations over disputed territory and Japan's
militaristic past, President Roh Moo Hyun of South Korea and Prime Minister
Junichiro Koizumi of Japan will hold what is likely to be a tense summit meeting
here on Monday.

Mr. Roh is expected to state his objections to Mr. Koizumi's visits to the
Yasukuni Shrine, where 14 war criminals are deified, and to urge Tokyo to build
a separate war memorial. That would intensify pressure on Mr. Koizumi, whose
pledge to keep praying at the shrine has also brought Japan's relations with
China to their lowest state in years.

Tensions between Japan and South Korea, America's closest Asian allies, have
complicated efforts to tackle wider regional problems, including the stalled
talks over North Korea's nuclear program. Disputes over Japan's efforts to
minimize its wartime aggression have sharpened the different approaches toward
North Korea taken by the United States, South Korea and Japan.

''At this critical point, when we might be facing our last chance to have a
nonnuclear North Korea, shaky relations between South Korea and Japan are
hurting the three-country alliance,'' said Yoon Duk Min, a regional security
specialist at the government-affiliated Institute for Foreign Affairs and
National Security here. ''The three allies should be speaking with a unified
voice on North Korea, but they're not. This is something that North Korea is
trying to exploit.''

Government officials, diplomats and academics were pessimistic that the meeting
would significantly improve relations. Indeed, the expectations of South Koreans
here -- being tough on Mr. Koizumi and getting tangible results -- could be hard
to satisfy. As recently as Tuesday, Mr. Roh told political leaders here that he
was ''in anguish'' over whether to go ahead with the summit meeting and that its
agenda had not been set.

Mr. Koizumi faces risks as well. In the last two weeks, he has come under
increasing pressure inside Japan, including pressure from his own Liberal
Democratic Party, to stop visiting the Yasukuni Shrine. Since Wu Yi, a Chinese
vice premier, abruptly canceled a meeting with Mr. Koizumi last month because of
the visits, more Japanese politicians have expressed worries that the visits are
hurting ties with China.

Worsening tensions with South Korea over the same issue could embolden domestic
critics of Mr. Koizumi, who will retire in 2006.

''If Koizumi's successor will be more flexible, then we may have better
cooperation between Japan, China and Korea,'' said Kim Woo Sang, a political
scientist at Yonsei University here. ''But the future leadership may be even
less flexible. There are people like Shinzo Abe, who may become prime minister.
He will be even tougher.''

Mr. Abe, the party's acting secretary general and the leader of a generation of
young hawks, recently said the next prime minister had a duty to keep visiting
the Yasukuni Shrine.

South Korea's foreign minister, Ban Ki Moon, said Seoul would urge Tokyo to set
up a secular war memorial to replace the Yasukuni Shrine. Leaders of the shrine,
a symbol of militarism to Asians and many Japanese, have long pushed the
right-wing view that Japan attacked the United States in self-defense and
advanced into Asia to liberate it from Western occupiers.

In 2002, a Japanese government advisory panel recommended building a secular
memorial to replace Yasukuni, but the idea was quickly quashed by hawks inside
the Liberal Democratic Party. On Friday, Mr. Koizumi rejected the idea.

''Looking into building a facility where people can mourn without reservation
may be good,'' Mr. Koizumi said. ''But no matter what facility is built, it's
impossible that any facility will replace Yasukuni Shrine.''

The territorial dispute involves a set of islets called Takeshima in Japan and
Tokdo in South Korea. They were incorporated into Japan in 1905, the year it
defeated Russia in a fight over the Korean Peninsula and began effective rule
over Korea. After World War II, the islets fell under South Korea's control. In
February, a Japanese prefectural government created a Takeshima Day, a move
South Korea regarded as an attempt to justify Japan's colonial rule.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); POLITICS (78%);
WORLD WAR II (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); POLITICAL
SCIENCE (66%) World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Monuments and Memorials

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (79%); WU YI (58%) Norimitsu Onishi; Roh Moo Hyun (Pres);
Junichiro (Prime Min) Koizumi

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); TOKYO, JAPAN (73%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (98%); JAPAN (97%); CHINA (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); ASIA (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%)

REGION: South Korea

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1230 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japan's Leader Under Pressure On War Shrine

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, June 20


President Roh Moo Hyun increased the pressure on Prime Minister Junichiro
Koizumi of Japan on Monday to stop visiting the Yasukuni Shrine to Japan's war
dead, urging Mr. Koizumi to build an alternative facility.

During a meeting here between the two men, Mr. Roh said Mr. Koizumi's visits to
the shrine, which deifies 14 top war criminals and tries to justify Japan's wars
in Asia, were the ''core'' of the history-related problems between the
countries.

The meeting made little progress in resolving Yasukuni and other historical
issues that have caused Japan's relations with South Korea, and with China, to
deteriorate sharply in recent months.

''We had a very candid and serious dialogue and made efforts to understand each
other,'' Mr. Roh said. ''But this failed to yield any agreements.''

In what was supposed to be the South Korea-Japan friendship year, in
commemoration of 40 years of normalized relations, all but 10 minutes of the
two-hour meeting was spent addressing history-related disputes, Mr. Roh said.

During a joint news conference at the presidential Blue House here, Mr. Roh said
he had pressed Mr. Koizumi about the idea of a new war memorial, which had been
first raised during a summit meeting in 2001.

''Prime Minister Koizumi promised in response that he will consider a new peace
memorial, taking into account the public opinion in Japan,'' Mr. Roh said. But
he immediately corrected himself, saying that he should not have used the word
''promise,'' which they had not agreed would be part of their official
statements.

Mr. Koizumi did not directly mention the shrine. His predecessors, current party
members and the general public have recently also begun lobbying him to stop
praying at the shrine for fear that the visits would further undermine Japan's
relations with its neighbors.

''We take seriously the feelings of the Korean people about the past,'' Mr.
Koizumi said. ''Japan will reflect what needs to be reflected upon, and I
believe that maintaining sincere dialogue toward the future would be extremely
important to promote and strengthen trust and friendship between the two
countries.''

In their meeting, Mr. Koizumi told Mr. Roh that he saw his visits to the shrine
as a vow never to wage war, said Akira Chiba, a spokesman for Japan's Foreign
Ministry.

On Friday, Mr. Koizumi said in Tokyo that the Yasukuni was irreplaceable.
''Looking into building a facility where people can mourn without reservation
may be good,'' he said. ''But no matter what facility is built, it's impossible
that any facility will replace Yasukuni Shrine.''

South Korea, like China, was also angered by Japan's approval of junior high
school textbooks that gloss over Japan's militaristic past.

Under one of the few agreements on Monday, a joint team of researchers will be
formed to try to find common ground on historical issues and textbooks.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); WORLD WAR II
(78%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
FOREIGN POLICY (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (66%); TEXTBOOKS (60%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR
HIGH SCHOOLS (60%); APPROVALS (60%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%) World War II
(1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Monuments and
Memorials

PERSON: Norimitsu Onishi; Roh Moo Hyun (Pres); Junichiro (Prime Min) Koizumi

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); TOKYO, JAPAN (58%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (97%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%); CHINA (92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: South Korea

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1232 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 22, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Social Security Opened Its Files For 9/11 Inquiry

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


The Social Security Administration has relaxed its privacy restrictions and
searched thousands of its files at the request of the F.B.I. as part of
terrorism investigations since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, newly disclosed
records and interviews show.

The privacy policy typically bans the sharing of such confidential information,
which includes home addresses, medical information and other personal data. But
senior officials at the Social Security agency agreed to an ''ad hoc'' policy
that authorized the release of information to the bureau for investigations
related to Sept. 11 because officials saw a ''life-threatening'' emergency,
internal memorandums say.

The Internal Revenue Service also worked with the bureau and the Social Security
agency to provide income and taxpayer information in terror inquiries, law
enforcement officials said. Officials said the I.R.S. information was limited
because legal restrictions prevented the sharing of taxpayer information except
by court order or in cases of ''imminent danger'' or other exemptions. The tax
agency refused to comment.

The Social Security memorandums were obtained through a Freedom of Information
Act request by the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a civil liberties
group here. Copies were provided to The New York Times.

Social Security and law enforcement officials said that they were sensitive to
privacy concerns and had put safeguards in place, but that they believed that
the information gave investigators a valuable tool.

''We ran thousands of Social Security numbers,'' said a former senior F.B.I.
official who insisted on anonymity because the files involved internal cases.

''We got very useful information, that's for sure,'' the former official said.
''We recognized the value of having that information to track leads, and, to
their credit, so did the Social Security Administration.''

Some privacy advocates and members of Congress, although sympathetic to the
extraordinary demands posed by the Sept. 11 investigation, said they were
troubled by what they saw as a significant shift in privacy policies.

Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a New York Democrat who has sought
information from the Social Security agency on the issue, said the new policy
had ''real civil liberties implications for abuse.'' Ms. Maloney questioned
whether Congress was adequately informed.

''If we don't know when the Social Security Administration decides to change its
rules to disclose personal information,'' she said, ''I think Americans have a
right to be skeptical about their privacy.''

The director of the Open Government Project at the Electronic Privacy
Information Center, Marcia Hofmann, acknowledged the need for investigators to
have access to vital information.

''But an ad hoc policy like this is so broad that it allows law enforcement to
obtain really sensitive information by merely claiming that the information is
relevant to the 9/11 investigation,'' Ms. Hofmann said. ''There appears to be
very little oversight.''

In addition to easing its rules, the Social Security agency agreed to waive
normal privacy restrictions for information related to the F.B.I. investigation
of the sniper shootings in the Washington region in 2002, the internal
memorandums show. It does not appear that any information was ultimately turned
over.

The agency agreed two days after the Sept. 11 attacks to give the F.B.I. access
to material from its files to obtain information on the hijackers, anyone with
''relevant information'' on the attacks and victims' relatives.

Under Social Security Administration policy, which goes beyond federal privacy
law, such information cannot typically be shared with law enforcement officials
unless the subject has been indicted or convicted of a crime. The loosening of
the policy was updated and reauthorized last year, the internal documents show,
and Social Security officials said Tuesday that it remained in place.

Social Security officials said they were not aware of recent F.B.I. requests for
information from their files in the inquiry.

It appears that there was a flood of requests for at least a year after the
attacks and perhaps longer, as bureau agents sought personal and financial
information on illegal immigrants and other suspects who might be using
fraudulent Social Security information. Some of the hijackers used fake Social
Security numbers.

Officials at the Social Security Administration said the policy directives since
Sept. 11 identified 11 offices -- 10 in the inspector general's office and one
in the privacy office -- authorized to approve the F.B.I. requests.

''Thankfully, these requests don't come up that often,'' Jonathan Cantor, the
privacy officer at the agency, said. ''You just have to look at each situation
as it comes in, and it's my job to balance the privacy of the records against
legitimate requests for that information.''

Mr. Cantor said that the bureau had made requests for financial and employment
information from Social Security files, but that the agency had referred them to
the I.R.S. because it was not legally allowed to release taxpayer information.

James Huse, who was the inspector general at the Social Security agency until
March 2004, said his agency provided relevant identifying information to the
bureau on possible terror suspects but relied on the tax agency to determine
what information it would turn over on a suspect's income and employment.

The F.B.I. requests ''came in by the thousands,'' Mr. Huse said in an interview.
''They would give us the names of people suspected of being terrorists for
whatever reason, and we'd match them against Social Security indices to see if
these people were real, did they have Social Security numbers, things like
that.''

He said that most of the names and numbers run by the bureau did not match up to
Social Security records, and that he was unaware of cases of governmental abuse
in the requests. Mr. Huse added that ''on a big-volume name check like that you
wouldn't really know if you had a frivolous name thrown in or not.''

A major debate is under way on access for the F.B.I. and other law enforcement
agencies in national security investigations to confidential information like
library checkout lists, hospital records or airline manifests. Bush
administration officials say it is imperative for investigators to have broad
tools to track terror suspects.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TAXES & TAXATION (91%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (91%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); TAX AUTHORITIES (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); INFORMATION
SECURITY & PRIVACY (90%); TAX LAW (90%); SOCIAL SECURITY (90%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); INTERNET PRIVACY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US
SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
(78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (67%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (66%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%); SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION (93%); INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (83%) Social Security
Administration; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Internal Revenue Service;
Electronic Privacy Information Center

PERSON: CAROLYN MALONEY (58%) Eric Lichtblau

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1233 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 22, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A War Shrine, for a Japan Seeking a Not Guilty Verdict

BYLINE: By Norimitsu Onishi

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; LETTER FROM ASIA; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


One recent rainy morning, a couple of dozen vehicles belonging to the Patriotic
Youth League and other Japanese right-wing groups gathered inside the grounds of
Yasukuni Shrine, the Shinto memorial to Japan's war dead. ''Revere the
Emperor,'' read a slogan on one truck. Others alluded to enemies unnamed: ''Love
and Protect our Motherland'' and ''Kill one, one at a time.''

At 12:30 p.m., the caravan spilled out onto Tokyo's streets, destination
unclear. But the targets are usually the same: the Chinese Embassy, the liberal
media, anybody daring to challenge the argument that Japan's wars were
legitimate and that their leaders were not criminals. Yasukuni Shrine is the
symbolic center of Japan's efforts to revise its militaristic past, and lies at
the heart of worsening relations between Japan and its neighbors. Not only
right-wing extremists, but now also mainstream politicians and the news media
are more openly arguing that the 14 war criminals enshrined in Yasukuni were not
guilty -- and, because they were not, Japan's wars could not have been that bad.

In a face-to-face meeting on June 20, for example, Prime Minister Junichiro
Koizumi steadfastly resisted the entreaties of President Roh Moo Hyun of South
Korea that he stop visiting the shrine and build an alternate one that would be
more acceptable to China and the Koreas, all of them victims of a brutal
Japanese colonization.

While the Japanese have received the bulk of the criticism for the shrine, they
are not, however, the only ones to have manipulated the meaning of Yasukuni and
its war criminals. So have the Chinese, the Taiwanese and the Americans, each
according to their own interests.

During America's six-year occupation of Japan after World War II, Americans
spent the first half democratizing the country and prosecuting war criminals. In
the second half, with Communists controlling China and the cold war bearing
down, Washington reversed course: wartime leaders were rehabilitated overnight
in an effort to make Japan strong. Some Class A war criminal suspects, after
barely escaping the noose, became postwar Japan's political and business
leaders; one, Nobusuke Kishi, even became prime minister.

The mixed messages from America -- as well as the highly politicized Tokyo
Trials that tried the Japanese leaders but avoided mentioning Emperor Hirohito,
whom America had decided not to depose -- laid the seeds of confusion here. They
also left open the door for the Japanese to argue that the overall verdict --
that Japan had led a war of aggression -- was also false.

''It was a war of self-defense,'' Yuko Tojo, the granddaughter of the wartime
prime minister who was executed as a Class A war criminal and is enshrined in
Yasukuni, said in a telephone interview. ''China claims it is unforgivable that
the head of state visits Yasukuni, where those responsible for causing trouble
by conducting a war of aggression are enshrined. But if we agree with China, it
would mean that we recognize it as a war of aggression. So we can't.''

Visits to Yasukuni have long been regarded as coded endorsements of conservative
nationalist views like hers. Indeed, when Mr. Koizumi said two weeks ago that he
actually recognized the validity of the Tokyo Trials, the nation's
largest-selling newspaper, Yomiuri Shimbun, which does not, was flabbergasted.
''With what view of history has Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi visited
Yasukuni Shrine in the past?'' it asked in an editorial, adding that if Mr.
Koizumi accepted the trials' rulings, ''then Koizumi should not visit Yasukuni
Shrine.''

Yasukuni Shrine was built in 1869, as part of Japan's drive to create a
nationalistic state religion centered around a divine emperor. By the end of
World War II, almost 2.5 million soldiers would be enshrined here for giving
their lives for the emperor. Except for two civil conflicts, the other nine wars
in which the soldiers died all revolved around Japan's advance into China, the
Korean Peninsula, Taiwan and, ultimately, its attack on the United States.

Yasukuni's war museum argues that America forced Japan into attacking Pearl
Harbor as a way of shaking off the Depression, saying that ''the U.S. economy
made a complete recovery once the Americans entered the war.'' A video shown at
the museum, called ''We Won't Forget,'' describes America's postwar occupation
of Japan as ''pitiless.'' But the museum makes no mention of Japan's own
occupation of Asia. As for the Rape of Nanjing, the museum blames the Chinese
commander and adds that, thanks to Japanese actions, ''inside the city,
residents were once again able to live their lives in peace.''

In a written statement, Yasukuni officials said, ''The exhibition is not based
on any special historical viewpoint, but is based on clear evidence.''

Yasukuni's view of history is one that few Asians or Americans would accept. But
like Japanese politicians, foreigners also appear to recognize the shrine's
political value.

Shu Ching Chiang, a Taiwanese lawmaker who is pro-independence and anti-China,
visited Yasukuni in April. Taiwanese soldiers who served Japan's Imperial Army
during the Japanese occupation of Taiwan are also enshrined in Yasukuni.

''Every country has the right to pay respect to its war dead in the way it
chooses,'' Mr. Shu said in a recent interview in Taipei. Like many Japanese, he
compared Yasukuni to Arlington National Cemetery.

Arthur Ding, an international relations expert at National Chengchi University
in Taipei, decoded Mr. Shu's trip: ''He delivered a message to Japan that his
party wants a close relationship with Japan and to China that they are for
Taiwanese independence.''

While the Chinese and the South Koreans have legitimate reasons to oppose the
shrine, they have been accused of using it to shore up domestic support by
appealing to nationalist sentiments.

Noticeable in its silence on Yasukuni and the verdict on the Class A war
criminals is the United States. As the nation that defeated Japan, occupied it
and still has 50,000 troops deployed here, America is the one country that Japan
may still listen to on these subjects. America is hardly a disinterested
observer, after all, because Yasukuni deifies Japanese who ordered the attack on
Pearl Harbor.

American officials raise an eyebrow at Japanese comparisons of Yasukuni to
Arlington National Cemetery. But they tend to defend, albeit somewhat
uncomfortably, Japanese visits to Yasukuni, or maintain a studied silence. The
cold war may be over, but China's rise alarms America just as much as did the
rise of Communism in the 1940's. So better a strong, remilitarized Japan, no
matter what the Japanese say about Yasukuni or war criminals.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Yasukuni Shrine, visitors watch a video on the
Russo-Japanese War. War criminals like Tojo are honored there. (Photo by Ko
Sasaki for The New York Times)
 A right-wing rally at the shrine. Nationalist slogans are painted on the
vehicles. (Photo by Norimitsu Onishi/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); WORLD WAR II (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
PRIME MINISTERS (89%); VERDICTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
ACQUITTAL (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); LIBERAL MEDIA (78%); RELIGION
(77%); COLD WAR (77%); RIOTS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(72%); POLITICS (72%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); GENOCIDE (60%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (60%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (55%); GRANDCHILDREN (50%) Monuments and
Memorials; Yasukuni Shrine (Tokyo); Public Opinion; World War II (1939-45); War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Demonstrations and Riots; History

PERSON: Norimitsu Onishi

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (90%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (92%); TAIWAN (79%); NORTHERN
ASIA (79%)

REGION: Japan

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1235 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prison Changes Milosevic, but Not His Version of Events

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Four years behind bars have inevitably changed Slobodan Milosevic. His white
hair has receded, his stomach is bulkier, his English has improved. Since he
arrived, handcuffed, at the United Nations jail in The Hague on June 28, 2001,
he has also become less blustery, perhaps the result of blood-pressure
medication or the sheer drudgery of his long trial on an array of war crimes
charges.

Once given to bursting into tirades and dismissing his indictment as a fake and
his trial as a farce, Mr. Milosevic, the former Serbian president, has now
become steeped in the case's 200,000 pages. These days, he sits in the dock
flanked by carts full of binders, which he frequently consults. He addresses his
three judges sitting high on the dais, rather than turning to the public
gallery, which has been mostly empty.

But Mr. Milosevic's old mind-set remains intact.

Day after day, he has tenaciously stuck to his own version of what happened
during his 13 years in power, which led to three wars and killed more than
250,000. Serbs were not responsible for the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo,
he contends, but were forced to defend themselves from aggression.

Contrary to charges in his indictment, Mr. Milosevic says there was no plan to
create a larger country for all Serbs and no atrocities were committed. Yes,
people died, but they were fighting, or were bombed by NATO. This view of
history has been much on display in the months since Mr. Milosevic began calling
his own witnesses to defend not just himself, but also the Serbian national
cause. The prosecution rested its case last year after bringing 114 witnesses to
the court and presenting written testimony from 240 additional witnesses to
buttress its lengthy charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.

The trial, which began in February 2002, has already set a record for longevity
in international law and the end is not in sight.

So far, Mr. Milosevic, who acts as his own lawyer, has presented close to 30
witnesses, among them former aides, old Communist Party friends, historians and
a forensic specialist, as well as outsiders including a French Army colonel and
several senior Russian politicians. He has used almost 40 percent of the 150
days allotted to him, but his lawyers say he plans to call dozens more
witnesses. ''You can expect I will be asking for a prolongation,'' Mr. Milosevic
told the judges at a recent hearing. ''My aim is to present the truth, and that
takes time.''

The judges apparently believe he is stalling. They often instruct Mr. Milosevic
to stop asking leading questions, and not to waste time with repetitive and
irrelevant evidence. ''I'm disgusted with your performance,'' Patrick Robinson,
the presiding judge, said at one point, abruptly cutting off the microphone.

Fearing that it will take months before Mr. Milosevic addresses the war in
Bosnia, a crucial part of the case, judges have also suggested sitting for
longer hours or four times a week, rather than the current three. But that drew
quick objections from Mr. Milosevic, who argued that his chronic heart disease
would not allow it. If his condition improved, he said, ''then this place should
be advertised as a kind of spa for treating health problems.''

The trial's current focus is the 1999 war in the Serbian province Kosovo. Mr.
Milosevic has devoted much time and effort to that conflict because, as
president of Serbia at the time, he can be held directly accountable for any
proven atrocities by its security forces.

''We want to show that yes, there were crimes, but it was not our policy and the
authorities reacted and punished them,'' said Branko Rakic, a legal adviser to
Mr. Milosevic.

Gen. Obrad Stevanovic, the deputy interior minister in charge of the police and
the highest ranking Serb official to appear, has testified for the past month
without shedding much light except on his loyalty to his former boss. He gave
lengthy accounts of police rules, weaponry and ammunition, and said repeatedly
that the police could not have committed any crimes because their role was to
uphold the law.

His constant denials that the police killed civilians in Kosovo infuriated the
lead prosecutor, Geoffrey Nice. Explain to this court, Mr. Nice said, how bodies
of Kosovar families came to be buried in a police compound and were then moved
to another police compound. The general said he had no knowledge of that.

Mr. Nice quoted from a letter from a Serbian Army general, Nebojsa Pavkovic,
complaining that the Serbian police were committing ''murder, rape, plunder,
robbery,'' while attributing the crimes to the army. General Stevanovic: ''These
are serious allegations by the army against the police which I was not aware
of.''

The routine of examination and cross-examination was suddenly upset on June 1
after General Stevanovic acknowledged that the Serbian police had been on duty
in Bosnia and Croatia, but performed only common tasks, such as ''traffic
control and crime prevention.'' Mr. Nice then showed a videotape depicting the
execution of six Muslim men by a Serbian paramilitary police unit as part of the
Srebrenica massacre of 1995. He asked General Stevanovic if he recognized anyone
in the unit, known as the Scorpions. No, the general said, they were not part of
the regular Serbian police force. Prosecutors say that in 1995, the Scorpions
were part of the secret police.

Since the videotape was shown, the Serbian authorities say, six men appearing in
it have been arrested.

Many commentators have called the videotaped executions ''the smoking gun,'' but
any link to Mr. Milosevic, as head of the police forces, has yet to be
established. Prosecutors obtained the videotape only recently and they cannot
enter it into evidence until they reopen their case and show the provenance and
authenticity of the images. Mr. Milosevic said the film had been tampered with.

The day the film of the executions was shown in court, Mr. Milosevic returned to
the jail looking dejected. Rather than socializing with fellow inmates, as he
usually did, he withdrew into his cell and did not reappear that night, lawyers
visiting the jail said.

Asked why Mr. Milosevic was disturbed, Mr. Rakic, his lawyer, offered this
explanation: ''This is clearly part of a media campaign. We think this film was
designed to shock the public, not to prove something.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Video shown at the trial of Slobodan Milosevic was said to
depict executions of six men in 1995 by a Serbian paramilitary police unit.
(Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WITNESSES (89%); JUDGES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); HAIR LOSS (78%); FORENSICS (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(77%); HISTORY (76%); LAWYERS (76%); TESTIMONY (76%); CARDIOVASCULAR DRUGS
(57%); POLITICAL PARTIES (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Recordings (Video)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic; Geoffrey Nice

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%);
KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); CROATIA (79%); FRANCE (69%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia);
Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1238 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: 11 Arrested In Srebrenica Massacre

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wood (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 81 words


The Bosnian Serb police arrested 11 people this week, some of them active police
officers, in connection with the 1995 massacre of more than 7,000 unarmed Muslim
men and boys by Bosnian Serb and Serbian forces in the eastern Bosnian town of
Srebrenica, a police official said. It is the first time the Bosnian Serb
authorities have moved to prosecute people regarding Srebrenica. Neither the
reasons for the arrests nor the identities of those detained were released.
Nicholas Wood (NYT)


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%); RELIGION (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%) Islam; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA (93%);
EUROPE (89%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1249 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 29, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Canada: Court Orders Rwandan Deported

BYLINE: By Colin Campbell (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 90 words


The Supreme Court ruled that a Rwandan accused of inciting genocide in his
country should be deported. The Rwandan, Leon Mugesera, fled to Canada in 1992
after delivering a speech calling on Hutu to exterminate Tutsi. The court sided
with the Canadian government, which argued that the speech, in which he called
Tutsi cockroaches and which was videotaped, directly influenced the violence
that killed an estimated 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu in 1994 and that his
actions could be considered a crime against humanity.   Colin Campbell (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
VERDICTS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe;
Deportation

PERSON: Colin Campbell; Leon Mugesera

COUNTRY: CANADA (96%); RWANDA (95%)

REGION: Rwanda; Canada

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1252 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Banned, Then Bootlegged, Saddam Hussein the Literary Lion Roars Again

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Suha Maayeh contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE PRISONER;
Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, June 29


The unpublished novel ''Get Out, You Damned One'' will not win any literary
awards. A forgettable piece of pulp, it features a scheming traitor, an invading
army of Zionist-Christian infidels and an Arab liberator. The only thing that
sets the novel apart from numerous others like it in Arab bookstores is its
author: Saddam Hussein.

When Raghad Saddam Hussein, Mr. Hussein's exiled daughter, announced plans to
publish the 186-page novel in Amman earlier this week, she set off a fierce
debate over Mr. Hussein's legacy. Jordan's press and publications department
quickly banned the book. Bootleg copies then sold out.

Experts said Mr. Hussein, long held in high esteem by many Jordanians, retained
his popularity even as evidence against him was being gathered for a trial in
Iraq.

''A lot of people still like him, and he still commands popularity,'' said
Suleiman al-Horani, owner of the tiny Horani Kiosk in downtown Amman. Within
hours of the ban on the book, Mr. Horani says, he sold 50 bootleg copies. ''His
popularity is increasing because of the success the resistance is now having in
Iraq.''

The continued turbulence in Iraq has served to justify his tight grip over the
country during his 30-year rule, experts here contend. American missteps, prison
scandals and growing corruption have added to his support.

''People are comparing the old regime and the new, and the sense is that things
have simply gotten much worse,'' said Muhammad Abu Hdeib, a member of Jordan's
Parliament and chairman of its Arab and international affairs committee. ''All
this has made people see American propaganda as a flat-out lie.''

The novel, which Mr. Hussein is said to have completed on the eve of the
American invasion in 2003, is seen as a prescient picture of the occupation of
Iraq.

It opens with a narrator who appears to be modeled on the story of Abraham
warning his grandsons of Satan's hold over Babylon.

The story tells of Ezekiel, a greedy schemer who plots to overthrow the sheik of
a tribe with the help of a powerful enemy aiming to conquer and annihilate all
Arabs but is ultimately defeated by the sheik's daughter with the help of an
Arab warrior. This is viewed as a metaphor for a Zionist-Christian plot against
Arabs and Muslims.

''Only those who refuse his nation and are faithful to God can be victorious,''
the narrator warns of Satan, the superpower.

Soon after its completion, the book went into circulation underground without
the author's name. In 2004, the pan-Arab daily Al Sharq al Awsat published the
book in serial form, and numerous copies were printed in Beirut and elsewhere,
selling for the equivalent of $5 with a picture of Mr. Hussein on the cover. The
first page of the manuscript, the paper reported, was signed and dated March 18,
2003, when the American invasion began.

Many see Ms. Hussein's announcement of her publishing plans as part of an
orchestrated campaign timed to coincide with the one-year anniversary of the
handover of sovereignty and the acceleration of a special tribunal that is to
try Mr. Hussein in connection with war crimes. Ms. Hussein is said to have taken
an active part in designing the book's cover and in the editing, and she added a
note in the book in praise of her father.

''The goal was to return Saddam to the public eye,'' said Mousa Barhouma,
executive managing editor of Al Ghad, an independent Jordanian daily, who writes
about culture. ''He had become a thing of the past, and this may have been an
attempt at raising nationalist sentiment and bringing him back on the stage.''

Strides made by the Iraqi insurgency added to the momentum, she said, and the
banning of the book added to its cachet.

The government was made nervous by it.

''We found that publishing the book would hamper Jordanian-Iraqi ties that
Jordan is seeking to build,'' said Ahmad al-Qadah, head of the press and
publications department, the local censor. ''Jordan rejects having the story
published here, and there is no need to raise such issues.''

The novel is Mr. Hussein's fourth. His first, ''Zabiba and the King,'' published
in 2001, concerns a heroic Hussein-like king, a woman named Zabiba who
symbolizes the Iraqi people, and a tyrannical man who represents America -- and
rapes Zabiba.

The second, ''Walled Fortress,'' published not long after, describes a hero who
defends Iraq against enemy attackers. And in 2002, he published ''Men and the
City,'' an autobiographical work that seeks to burnish Mr. Hussein's
nationalistic credentials by describing how his grandfather supposedly fought
the Turks during the Ottoman Empire. One Amman book distributor noted that the
books all sold well, but not on the scale of bootlegs of Mr. Hussein's latest
novel.

It has never been established whether Mr. Hussein is in fact the author of the
books, or whether he secured a ghostwriter. But in the Arab world, where
education and the ability to write prose are highly valued, the novels were
meant to add to Mr. Hussein's image as a grand Arab leader and thinker. Now that
he is in prison, the book appears to be an attempt to burnish that image.

Reaction to the book, as well as to recent images of Mr. Hussein in court and to
photographs of him in his prison cell speak to the divergent perceptions of the
former Iraqi leader in the West and the Arab world.

While Mr. Hussein may have been seen as tired and faded in the West, many here
seized on his defiance in the face of substantial international pressure. That
an Arab leader would be caught doing his own laundry in prison, meanwhile, only
spoke to his carefully crafted image as an everyman.

''They see him as a strong man who intends to return,'' said Mr. Barhouma, the
newspaper editor. ''Saddam was presented as a sacrifice at a time when no one
could say no to America.''

Not all Jordanians see it that way.

''Some people find a cause and stick to it,'' said Yacoub al-Khateeb, 25, an
accountant, who says Mr. Hussein's support largely emanates from older
Jordanians who embraced the cause of Arab nationalism. ''Go to a university,
speak to some educated people, and you'll find Saddam doesn't play much of a
role in their lives.''

With the fall of his government, and his incarceration, Mr. Hussein lost some
visibility here, even among supporters. That may be changing.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The cover of a 2003 novel by Saddam Hussein, ''Get Out, You
Damned One.'' It depicts Satan's hold over Babylon, and an Arab liberator.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITERATURE (92%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WRITERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); CENSORSHIP (78%); PUBLISHING (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ENTERTAINMENT &
ARTS AWARDS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); RELIGION (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); COUPS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); BOOKSTORES (73%); GRANDCHILDREN (71%);
CORRUPTION (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (63%) Books
and Literature; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Hassan M Fattah; Saddam Hussein

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (90%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (73%)

COUNTRY: JORDAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Jordan

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company


                             1255 of 1255 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Belgium: 2 Guilty In Rwanda Genocide Case

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 66 words


A Brussels court sentenced two Rwandan half-brothers, Etienne Nzabonimana and
Samuel Ndashyikirwa, both wealthy businessmen living in Belgium, to 10 and 12
years in prison for helping Hutu militias massacre 50,000 people during the 1994
genocide in their country. They were tried under a law that allows Belgium to
prosecute suspected war crimes, even if committed by foreigners in other
countries.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
WEALTHY PEOPLE (85%) Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Hutu Tribe; Tutsi Tribe

PERSON: Etienne Nzabonimana; Samuel Ndashyikirwa

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (88%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BELGIUM (94%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Rwanda; Brussels (Belgium)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2005


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
